START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 2 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 2 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Union Dues 
 
 
This bill authorizes a subtraction modification against Maryland income tax for the amount 
of union dues paid by an individual during the taxable year that were allowed as a deduction 
under the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) prior to January 1, 2018, as specified. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2023, and applies to tax year 2023 and beyond. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $9.88 million in FY 2024. Future years 
reflect projected growth in eligible subtractions. General fund expenditures increase by 
$50,000 in FY 2024 only. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
($9.88) 
($10.28) 
($10.69) 
($11.11) 
($11.56) 
GF Expenditure 
$0.05 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($9.93) 
($10.28) 
($10.69) 
($11.11) 
($11.56)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by $6.45 million in FY 2024 and $7.54 million in 
FY 2028. Local expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 2/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Miscellaneous Itemized Deductions and Federal Tax Treatment of Union Dues 
 
To determine federal taxable income, a taxpayer may subtract from federal adjusted gross 
income either the standard deduction or itemized allowable deductions. In tax years prior 
to tax year 2018 and after tax year 2025, a taxpayer who elects to itemize deductions may 
deduct specified “miscellaneous itemized deductions.” 
 
Authorized Deductions for Union Dues and Expenses:  Authorized miscellaneous itemized 
deductions include, among other things, unreimbursed employee expenses (§ 162 of the 
IRC), such as union dues and expenses. Deductible union dues and expenses include 
membership dues and initiation fees and assessments for benefit payments to unemployed 
union members. Nondeductible expenses include assessments or contributions that provide 
funds for the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits; contributions to a pension fund; 
or amounts related to certain lobbying and political activities.  
 
Two Percent Floor:  As specified in § 67 of the IRC, miscellaneous itemized deductions 
are subject to a 2% floor; thus, a taxpayer may deduct qualifying expenses only to the 
extent that the aggregate of such deductions exceeds 2% of the taxpayer’s federal adjusted 
gross income. 
 
Suspension of Miscellaneous Itemized Deductions for Tax Years 2018 through 2025:  The 
federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA), which made significant changes to the 
personal income tax, disallowed miscellaneous itemized deductions for tax years 2018 
through 2025, regardless of the 2% floor. Thus, individuals may not deduct union dues and 
expenses on their federal income tax returns in these years but may claim the deduction in 
tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
Under the bill, a taxpayer may claim a subtraction modification against Maryland income 
tax for the amount of union dues that were allowed as a federal miscellaneous itemized 
deduction prior to January 1, 2018, regardless of the 2% floor and suspension of 
miscellaneous itemized deductions through tax year 2025. 
 
Overall Limitation on Federal Itemized Deductions 
 
In tax years prior to tax year 2018 and after tax year 2025, allowable itemized deductions 
(with specified exceptions) are reduced for certain high-income taxpayers whose adjusted 
gross income exceeds specified inflation-adjusted thresholds. For tax year 2017, the 
limitation applied to taxpayers with adjusted gross income in excess of $261,500 (for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 2/ Page 3 
single filers), $287,650 (for heads of household), and $313,800 (for joint filers and 
surviving spouses). The TCJA suspended the limitation on itemized deductions for 
high-income taxpayers for tax years 2018 through 2025. 
 
Maryland Itemized Deductions 
 
An individual may itemize deductions for purposes of determining Maryland taxable 
income only if the individual itemizes deductions on the individual’s federal income tax 
return for purposes of determining federal taxable income. An individual who elects to 
itemize deductions for State income tax purposes is allowed as a deduction the sum of the 
individual’s federal itemized deductions, limited and reduced as required under the Internal 
Revenue Code and further reduced by: 
 
 
any amount deducted under § 170 of the IRC for contributions of a preservation or 
conservation easement for which a State tax credit is claimed; and  
 
the amount claimed as taxes on income paid to a state or political subdivision of a 
state, after subtracting a pro rata portion of the reduction to itemized deductions as 
required under § 68 of the IRC. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill allows a taxpayer to subtract specified 
union dues from federal adjusted gross income for purposes of determining Maryland 
adjusted gross income. Thus, State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2024 as a result of additional subtraction modifications 
claimed against Maryland income tax. 
 
Exhibit 1 displays the bill’s estimated effect on State and local revenues in fiscal 2024 
through 2028. As shown in the exhibit, in fiscal 2024, State general fund revenues decrease 
by an estimated $9.88 million, and local revenues decrease by an estimated $6.45 million. 
Future years reflect projected growth in eligible subtractions. This estimate is based on data 
published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics on (1) union affiliation of Maryland 
employed wage and salary workers and (2) median weekly earnings of full-time union 
wage and salary workers. This estimate assumes that a taxpayer may claim the State 
subtraction modification regardless of whether the taxpayer itemizes federal deductions. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 2/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2024-2028 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
State Effect 
($9.88) 
($10.28) 
($10.69) 
($11.11) 
($11.56) 
Local Effect 
(6.45) 
(6.71) 
(6.97) 
(7.25) 
(7.54) 
Total Effect 
($16.33) 
($16.98) 
($17.66) 
($18.37) 
($19.10) 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2024 only 
for one-time changes to the Comptroller’s tax systems. 
 
Additional Comments:  The General Assembly passed similar legislation in the 
2022 session (House Bill 172); the Governor subsequently vetoed the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 172 of 2022 and HB 179 of 2021.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Internal 
Revenue Service; CCH AnswerConnect; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 27, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2023 
Enrolled - May 8, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2023 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4