START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 6 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 6 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of General Services - Energy-Conserving Standards (Maryland 
Sustainable Buildings Act of 2023) 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of General Services (DGS) to (1) establish standards for 
State buildings to conserve energy and minimize adverse impacts on birds, as specified and 
(2) update the standards every five years. The Secretary of General Services must adopt 
regulations to carry out the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s effect on construction and maintenance costs (all funds) cannot be 
reliably estimated, as discussed below; however, State utility costs may decrease over time. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill applies only to State buildings. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to buildings that are not leased by the State and are 
otherwise:   
 
 
acquired through any means by the State for use by a State agency or department; 
 
constructed or renovated by or for the State for occupancy by a State agency or 
department; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 6/ Page 2 
 
acquired, constructed, or renovated for which more than 50% of the money for the 
acquisition, construction, or renovation came from State funds. 
 
The bill does not apply to (1) a public work contract valued at less than $500,000; (2) a 
public work contract for which 50% or less of the funds used are State funds; (3) a project 
for which funding is provided in the capital budget as a grant to a nonprofit organization; 
or (4) a public school construction project. 
 
The standards developed by DGS must be consistent with the U.S. Green Building 
Council’s (USGBC) Innovation Credit for reducing bird collisions and with the American 
Bird Conservancy’s bird-friendly design recommendations; however, they may not include 
a requirement for bird collision monitoring. DGS must consider the physical and mental 
health of building occupants when developing or updating the standards. The Maryland 
Green Building Council (MGBC) must include the standards in requirements that it 
establishes for State buildings under the Maryland High Performance Green Building 
Program. 
 
Except where full operation of building lighting is documented as necessary, including for 
public safety or other purposes, the standards must specify that interior and exterior lighting 
must be appropriately shielded and minimized from midnight to dawn during specified 
times of the year. Affected State buildings must meet the standards to the extent practicable 
and within budgetary constraints. DGS must reduce the lighting of existing State buildings 
to the extent practicable, and within budgetary constraints, by using automatic control 
technologies such as timers, photosensors, infrared detectors, and motion detectors. 
 
Current Law:  There are no provisions in State law to minimize the adverse impacts of 
State buildings on birds. 
 
However, Chapter 124 of 2008 requires most new or renovated State buildings to be 
constructed as high-performance buildings, subject to waiver processes established by the 
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and DGS. 
 
Chapter 124 defines a high-performance building as one that:   
 
 
meets or exceeds the USGBC Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
(LEED) certification criteria for a silver rating; or 
 
achieves a comparable numeric rating according to a nationally recognized, 
accepted, and appropriate standard approved by DBM and DGS. Based on a 
unanimous recommendation from MGBC, in 2017, DGS and DBM approved the 
use of the Green Globes rating system developed by the Green Building Initiative 
as an alternative to LEED silver. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 6/ Page 3 
Only new or renovated State buildings that are at least 7,500 square feet and are built or 
renovated entirely with State funds are subject to the high-performance requirement. 
Additionally, building renovations must include the replacement of heating, ventilation, 
air conditioning, electrical, and plumbing systems and must retain the building shell. 
Unoccupied buildings are exempt from the high-performance mandate, including 
warehouses, garages, maintenance facilities, transmitter buildings, and pumping stations. 
Under the bill, the standards developed by DGS must apply to State-owned 
high-performance buildings. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Glass in State Buildings 
 
DGS manages about two-thirds of State-owned buildings, with the University System of 
Maryland, the Maryland Department of Transportation, and other independent entities 
responsible for the remaining buildings. DGS constructs, substantially alters, or acquires 
between one and three buildings each year. Given the specificity of the USGBC Innovation 
Credit for bird collision deterrence and American Bird Conservancy bird-safe building 
standards, DGS can likely implement the bill’s standard-setting requirements with existing 
resources. 
 
The effect of those standards on building construction and maintenance costs is less clear. 
The standards likely require replacing transparent structural glass with other materials that 
enhance energy efficiency and reduce adverse effects on birds. Replacing glass with other 
materials (concrete, etc.) likely has little to no effect on construction costs (except for 
reducing the market value of the building) and may reduce life-cycle costs (depending on 
building design and other environmental factors). However, replacing transparent glass with 
frosted or etched glass (to reduce bird collisions) can add substantially to the construction 
cost of a building. Similarly, adding netting, shutters, or other mitigating features can also 
add to construction and maintenance costs. Thus, reducing the amount of transparent glass 
allowed on a building’s exterior may have minimal or substantial effects on construction 
costs, depending on how it is done. Similarly, it likely has positive effects on life-cycle costs 
but can also reduce the use of natural light and diminish the market value of a building. 
 
Lighting in State Buildings 
 
DGS has previously advised that the bill’s requirement to lower lighting levels in State 
buildings applies to about 4,000 current State buildings, only about 23 of which, by its 
estimation, have the automatic control technologies mentioned in the bill. As DGS is supposed 
to reduce the lighting “to the extent practicable and within budgetary constraints,” a reliable 
estimate of the cost of this provision is not feasible. If DGS determines it can only reduce 
lighting in buildings that currently have the technology, there is no fiscal effect (except 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 6/ Page 4 
potential reductions in State utility bills). However, if DGS determines that many more 
buildings require the technology, the cost of installing it in a large number of buildings could 
be significant; some projects to install lighting controls in more State buildings are already 
underway. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 43 of 2022; HB 236 of 2021; and HB 192 and SB 299 of 2020. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 92 (Senator Lam) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2023 
Third Reader - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 6, 2023 
Enrolled - April 20, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 20, 2023 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4