START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1 
(Delegate Wilson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Civil Actions - Child Sexual Abuse - Definition, Damages, and Statute of 
Limitations (The Child Victims Act of 2023) 
 
   
This bill establishes that an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or 
incidents of “sexual abuse,” as defined under the bill, that occurred while the victim was a 
minor may be filed at any time. However, no action for damages that would have been 
barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023, may be brought if the alleged victim of 
abuse is deceased at the commencement of the action. The bill must be construed to apply 
retroactively to revive any action that was barred by the statutory period of limitations 
applicable before October 1, 2023.   
 
The bill repeals existing provisions addressing the filing of actions for damages arising out 
of incidents of child sexual abuse under § 5-117 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article and also repeals provisions from Chapters 12 and 656 of 2017 establishing that the 
statute of repose in existing statute must be construed to apply both prospectively and 
retroactively to provide repose to defendants regarding actions that were barred by the 
application of the period of limitations applicable before October 1, 2017. The bill’s 
provisions are severable. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase if the bill results in litigation and 
payments of claims against the State that would not be allowed to proceed under existing 
statute. Reimbursable fund expenditures for the State Treasurer’s Office increase by 
$70,700 in FY 2024. Future years reflect annualization and inflation. Potential increase in 
general fund expenditures for impacted State agencies, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not materially affected. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase for insurance-related expenses and if the bill 
results in increased litigation and payments of claims against local government entities, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful impact on small business law firms that can 
litigate or proceed with cases as a result of the bill. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Sexual abuse” means any act that involves an adult allowing or 
encouraging a child to engage in:  
 
 
obscene photography, films, poses, or similar activity; pornographic photography, 
films, poses, or similar activity; or prostitution;  
 
incest;  
 
rape;   
 
sexual offense in any degree; or 
 
any other sexual conduct that is a crime. 
 
Notwithstanding any time limitation under a statute of limitations, a statute of repose, the 
Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA), the Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA), or 
any other law, an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual 
abuse, as defined under the bill, that occurred while the victim was a minor may be filed at 
any time. However, no action for damages that would have been barred by a time limitation 
before October 1, 2023, may be brought if the alleged victim of abuse is deceased at the 
commencement of the action. 
 
A party may appeal from an interlocutory order entered by a circuit court in a civil case 
denying a motion to dismiss a claim filed under the bill (i.e., an action for damages arising 
out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse that occurred while the victim was 
a minor) if the motion is based on a defense that the applicable statute of limitations or 
statute of repose bars the claim and any legislative action reviving the claim is 
unconstitutional.  
 
Except as provided under the MTCA, LGTCA, and specified provisions pertaining to 
county boards of education, the total amount of noneconomic damages that may be 
awarded to a single claimant in an action against a single defendant for injuries arising 
from an incident or occurrence that would have been barred by a time limitation before 
October 1, 2023, may not exceed $1.5 million. If the liability of a local government, a 
county board of education, the State, or the State’s units arises under a claim of sexual 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1/ Page 3 
abuse, the liability may not exceed $890,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising from 
an incident or occurrence.  
 
The bill increases the minimum comprehensive liability coverage county boards of 
education must carry under statute to reflect this $890,000 liability limit with respect to 
sexual abuse claims. Consistent with existing statute, a county board of education may raise 
the defense of sovereign immunity to any amount above the limit of its insurance policy. 
If a county board of education is self-insured or a member of a public entity self-insurance 
pool, the board may raise the defense of sovereign immunity to any amount above 
$890,000 to a single claimant for claims arising from each incident or occurrence if the 
liability of the board arises from a claim of sexual abuse. 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to Chapters 12 and 656, under § 5-117 of the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article, an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents 
of sexual abuse, as defined in § 5-701 of the Family Law Article, that occurred while the 
victim was a minor must be filed at any time before the victim reaches the age of majority. 
Alternatively, such an action must be filed within the later of 20 years after the date on 
which the victim reaches the age of majority, or 3 years after the date that the defendant is 
convicted of a crime relating to the alleged incident or incidents under § 3-602 of the 
Criminal Law Article (sexual abuse of a minor) or the laws of another state or the 
United States that would be a crime under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
In an action brought more than seven years after the victim reaches the age of majority, 
damages may be awarded against a person or governmental entity that is not the alleged 
perpetrator of the sexual abuse only if (1) the person or governmental entity owed a duty 
of care to the victim; (2) the person or governmental entity employed or exercised some 
degree of responsibility or control over the alleged perpetrator; and (3) there is a finding of 
gross negligence on the part of the person or governmental entity. “Alleged perpetrator” 
means the individual alleged to have committed the specific incident or incidents of sexual 
abuse that serve as the basis of an action arising from alleged sexual abuse under § 5-117 
of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. 
 
Chapters 12 and 656 also include a “statute of repose,” which prohibits a person from filing 
an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse that 
occurred while the victim was a minor against a person or governmental entity that is not 
the alleged perpetrator more than 20 years after the date on which the victim reaches the 
age of majority. 
 
Causes of action filed under the Acts’ provisions are exempt from the notice of claim 
requirement under LGTCA and the submission of a written claim requirement, denial of 
claim requirement, and the statute of limitations under MTCA. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1/ Page 4 
Chapters 12 and 656 may not be construed to apply retroactively to revive any action that 
was barred by the statutory period of limitations applicable before October 1, 2017. The 
statute of repose created by the Acts must be construed to apply both prospectively and 
retroactively to provide repose to defendants regarding actions that were barred by the 
statutory period of limitations applicable before October 1, 2017. 
 
Statute of Limitations – In General 
 
In general, the statute of limitations for a civil action requires that a civil action must be 
filed within three years from the date it accrues unless another statutory provision permits 
a different period of time within which an action can be commenced. The “discovery rule” 
is applicable generally in all actions, and the cause of action accrues when the claimant in 
fact knew or reasonably should have known of the wrong. Poffenberger v. Risser, 
290 Md. 631 (1981). 
 
If a cause of action accrues to a minor, the general three-year statute of limitations is tolled 
until the child reaches the age of majority. Thus, on becoming an adult at age 18, a child 
victim of a tort other than one involving sexual abuse is required to file the suit before the 
victim reaches age 21. 
 
Interlocutory Orders 
 
In general, an interlocutory order is a temporary order issued during litigation. Because 
interlocutory orders are not final, they cannot be immediately appealed. Section 12-303 of 
the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article authorizes a party to appeal from specified 
types of interlocutory orders entered by a circuit court in a civil case. 
 
Noneconomic Damages  
 
There is no cap on economic damages or punitive damages in Maryland. However, there 
are caps on noneconomic damages. For personal injury actions, “noneconomic damages” 
means pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, disfigurement, loss of 
consortium, or other nonpecuniary injury. “Noneconomic damages” does not include 
punitive damages. 
 
In any action for damages for personal injury (excluding medical malpractice) in which the 
cause of action arises on or after October 1, 1994, an award for noneconomic damages may 
not exceed $500,000. This limitation increases by $15,000 on October 1 of each year 
beginning on October 1, 1995. The increased amount must apply to causes of action arising 
between October 1 of that year and September 30 of the following year, inclusive. (As of 
October 1, 2023, this cap will be $935,000.) This limitation applies in a personal injury 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1/ Page 5 
action to each direct victim of tortious conduct and all persons who claim injury by or 
through that victim. 
 
In a jury trial, the jury may not be informed of this limitation on damages. If the jury awards 
an amount for noneconomic damages that exceeds the applicable limitation, the court must 
reduce the amount to conform to the limitation.  
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act  
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own 
common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or 
omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel performed in the course 
of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made without malice or gross 
negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign or governmental 
immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the state employee 
committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004).  
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable.  
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. 
 
The State does not waive its immunity for punitive damages. Attorney’s fees are included 
in the liability cap under MTCA. Under MTCA, attorneys may not charge or receive a fee 
that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 25% of a judgment. 
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act  
 
LGTCA defines local government to include counties, municipal corporations, 
Baltimore City, and various agencies and authorities of local governments such as 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1/ Page 6 
community colleges, county public libraries, special taxing districts, nonprofit community 
service corporations, sanitary districts, housing authorities, and commercial district 
management authorities.  
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). However, for 
claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if the liability of a local government arises from 
intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a constitutional right committed by 
a law enforcement officer, the following limits on liability apply:  (1) the combined award 
for both economic and noneconomic damages may not exceed a total of $890,000 for all 
claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, regardless of the number of claimants 
or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a wrongful death action in which there 
are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not 
exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the 
award. 
 
A local government must provide its employees a legal defense in any action that alleges 
damages resulting from tortious acts or omissions committed by an employee within the 
scope of employment with the local government. LGTCA further establishes that the local 
government is liable for tortious acts or omissions of its employees acting within the scope 
of employment, so long as the employee did not act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA 
prevents local governments from asserting a common law claim of governmental immunity 
from liability for such acts or omissions of its employees. A person may not execute against 
an employee on a judgment rendered for tortious acts or omissions committed by the 
employee within the scope of employment with a local government. However, an employee 
is fully liable for all damages awarded in an action in which it is found that the employee 
acted with actual malice. In circumstances involving actual malice, the judgment may be 
executed against the employee and the local government may seek indemnification for any 
sums it is required to pay under LGTCA. 
 
A local government is not liable for punitive damages. However, a local government, 
subject to the liability limits, may indemnify an employee for a judgment for punitive 
damages entered against the employee. A local government may not enter into an 
agreement that requires indemnification for an act or omission of an employee that may 
result in liability for punitive damages.  
 
Limits on Liability for County Boards of Education  
 
County boards of education are not covered under LGTCA. However, a county board of 
education may raise the defense of sovereign immunity to any amount claimed above the 
limit of its insurance policy or, if self-insured or a member of an insurance pool, above 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1/ Page 7 
$400,000. A county board of education may not raise the defense of sovereign immunity 
to any claim of $400,000 or less. Each county board of education must carry 
comprehensive liability insurance to protect the board and its agents and employees. The 
purchase of this insurance is a valid educational expense. The State Board of Education 
(SBE) must establish standards for these insurance policies, including a minimum liability 
coverage of not less than $400,000 for each occurrence. The policies purchased must meet 
the standards established by SBE. A county board complies with this requirement if it (1) is 
individually self-insured for at least $400,000 for each occurrence under the rules and 
regulations adopted by the Insurance Commissioner or (2) pools with other public entities 
for the purpose of self-insuring property or casualty risks. 
 
A county board of education must be joined as a party to an action against a county board 
employee, county board member, or volunteer that alleges damages resulting from a 
tortious act or omission committed by the employee in the scope of employment, by the 
county board member within the scope of the member’s authority, or by the volunteer 
within the scope of the volunteer’s services or duties. 
 
A county board employee acting within the scope of employment, without malice and gross 
negligence, is not personally liable for damages resulting from a tortious act or omission 
for which a limitation of liability is provided for the county board, including damages that 
exceed the limitation on the county board’s liability. Similar provisions apply to a county 
board member. In addition, a county board member is immune as an individual from civil 
liability for any act or omission if the member is acting within the scope of the member’s 
authority; without malice; and in a discretionary capacity. 
 
A volunteer who acts within the scope of the volunteer’s services or duties is not personally 
liable for damages resulting from a tortious act or omission beyond the limits of any 
personal insurance the volunteer may have unless the damages were the result of the 
volunteer’s negligent operation of a motor vehicle or the damages were the result of the 
volunteer’s willful, wanton, malicious, reckless, or grossly negligent act or omission. 
 
A judgment in tort for damages against a county board employee acting within the scope 
of employment, a county board member acting within the scope of the member’s authority, 
or a volunteer acting within the scope of the volunteer’s services or duties must be levied 
against the county board only and may not be executed against the county board employee, 
the county board member, or the volunteer personally. 
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures for the State Insurance Trust Fund (SITF) 
increase if the bill results in litigation and payments in cases against the State from 
prospective claims that would be barred under existing statute and retroactive claims that 
are revived. General fund expenditures increase for State agencies subject to higher 
SITF premiums/assessments if SITF incurs losses from MTCA payments as a result of the 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1/ Page 8 
bill. The extent of any such increase cannot be reliably estimated at this time. The bill 
(1) allows an action for damages arising out of child sexual abuse to be filed at any time 
and (2) establishes a higher liability limit under MTCA for cases arising from child sexual 
abuse.  
 
State Treasurer’s Office 
 
The Treasurer’s Office advises that the bill has a substantial impact on SITF based on (1) an 
increase in claims and lawsuits, particularly older claims; (2) a diminished ability to 
investigate claims, preserve evidence, and defend against lawsuits; (3) increased litigation 
expenses, settlement costs, and higher verdicts; (4) the inability to properly reserve against 
future losses; and (5) potential additional liability for the State. 
 
MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising from a 
single incident. The bill increases this limit to $850,000 in claims arising from sexual 
abuse. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the scope of 
the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the State’s 
color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
Agencies pay premiums to SITF that are comprised of an assessment for each employee 
covered and SITF payments for torts committed by the agency’s employees. The portion 
of the assessment attributable to losses is allocated over five years. The Treasurer is 
charged with setting premiums “so as to produce funds that approximate the payments from 
the fund.” (See Md. State Fin. & Proc. Code Ann. § 9-106(b).) The actuary assesses SITF’s 
reserves and each agency’s loss experience for the various risk categories, which include 
tort claims and constitutional claims. An agency’s loss history, consisting of settlements 
and judgments incurred since the last budget cycle, comprises part of the agency’s annual 
premium. That amount is electronically transferred to SITF from the appropriations in an 
agency’s budget.  
 
The Treasurer’s Office has historically advised that while an employee who committed 
child sexual abuse is likely not covered under MTCA, the State may still face liability 
through other causes of action (e.g., negligent hiring, retention, etc.). The Treasurer’s 
Office has received multiple sexual abuse cases; none of the current cases have occurred 
outside of the three-year limitations period. While these cases are not typical, they usually 
involve numerous minors or claimants. According to the Treasurer’s Office, claims filed 
pursuant to the bill may be so old that the office will likely experience extreme difficulties 
in conducting a proper investigation and defense of the claim. Other potential effects 
include litigation costs and an inability to reserve against future losses. The Treasurer’s 
Office advises that on average, a case with higher value claims results in approximate 
expenses of $100,000 per case, including the use of a sexual abuse expert in litigation, 
which can cost $50,000 per case.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1/ Page 9 
The Treasurer’s Office further advises that its staff is currently working at full capacity and 
that the volume and complexity of cases expected under the bill require an additional 
adjuster to investigate claims, at a cost of $70,749 in fiscal 2024 and increasing to 
$96,096 by fiscal 2028. Additional general fund expenditures may be incurred should the 
Office of the Attorney General require additional staff to accommodate the increased 
complexity and volume of new suits filed against the State.  
 
Judiciary 
 
The bill has an operational impact on the courts, the extent of which depends on the volume 
of previously time-barred cases filed under the bill. The Judiciary advises that because the 
number of new cases is speculative, it cannot estimate the amount of time or other judicial 
resources would be needed to adjudicate the potential new cases. Regardless, general fund 
expenditures for the Judiciary may increase to the extent additional resources are needed 
to process additional cases. 
 
For context, the number of new cases filed in other states during limited revival of claims 
“windows” has varied. According to Child USA, approximately 11,000 cases were filed in 
New York during the state’s two-year window for revival of child sexual abuse claims, 
which closed in August 2021; approximately 1,200 cases were filed under New Jersey’s 
two-year revival window (closed November 2021).  
 
Maryland State Department of Education  
 
The Maryland State Department of Education advises that it can establish new standards 
for local board of education insurance policies that reflect the increase in the required 
minimum liability coverage with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures increase if the bill results in litigation and 
payments in cases brought under the bill’s provisions that would otherwise not occur under 
existing statute. The extent of any such increase cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
Insurance-related expenditures also increase because of the bill’s alteration of liability 
limits, increased insurance requirements for local boards of education, and the elimination 
of the statute of limitations.  
 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) advises that it cannot quantify the fiscal 
impact of the bill due to uncertainty regarding the potential increase in claims. However, 
AACPS does advise that the bill increases the school district’s exposure to claims for 
damages by repealing the statute of limitations and conditions that must be met before 
damage claims can proceed against government entities who were not the perpetrator of 
the sexual abuse. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1/ Page 10 
As noted above, local boards of education are not covered under LGTCA. Some local 
governments covered under LGTCA obtain insurance coverage through the Local 
Government Insurance Trust (LGIT), a self-insurer that is wholly owned by its member 
local governments. LGIT’s main purpose is to provide joint self-insurance programs or 
pools for towns, cities, and counties in the State. (LGIT’s current membership includes 
148 towns and cities, 17 counties, and 24 sponsored entities.) LGIT assesses annual 
premiums based on the projected claims and historical losses of its members. Any local 
governments that are not members of LGIT either self-insure or purchase insurance 
coverage from a private carrier.  
 
LGIT has historically advised that (1) the types of causes of action affected by the bill are 
rarely filed against a local government employee or official and (2) while an employee who 
committed child sexual abuse is likely not covered under LGTCA, LGIT would still defend 
the local government in related actions. LGIT advises that given the complexity of cases 
affected by the bill, LGIT would likely retain outside counsel to represent the defendant(s), 
at a cost of at least $200,000 per case. In addition to attorneys’ fees, the litigation costs in 
these types of cases include thousands of dollars for independent medical evaluations and 
tens of thousands of dollars each for expert witnesses and depositions. Older claims may 
involve significant investigative costs, including the costs associated with locating and 
interviewing potential witnesses.   
 
LGIT further advises that an increase in the number of claims alleging sexual abuse by 
employees of local governments increases insurance premiums for all of its members, even 
those without a negative claims’ history. Furthermore, the increase in the statutory cap and 
the expansion of the limitations period also expose LGIT to previously unanticipated 
losses, based upon actuarial studies, and will erode the accumulated surplus maintained to 
satisfy existing claims and those future claims that can be reasonably anticipated. Given 
the uncertainty on the number of potential cases, LGIT cannot reliably predict the premium 
increases and risk to member equity at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 134 and HB 263 of 2021 and HB 974 of 2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 686 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State Treasurer’s 
Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of 
Education; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Child USA; Local Government 
Insurance Trust; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1/ Page 11 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2023 
Third Reader - April 5, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2023 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11