START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 11 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 11 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Private Well Safety Act of 2023 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), by 
December 31, 2026, to adopt regulations to identify a list of additional standards for water 
quality testing that MDE deems necessary for each county or a specific area within a 
county. Additionally, subject to the availability of funding, and in consultation with the 
Department of Information Technology (DoIT), MDE must utilize an online portal to 
receive specified water quality testing results, upload certificates of potability and other 
water quality testing results, and provide public access to that information. MDE must also 
conduct a study on long-term funding options for the detailed monitoring and analysis of 
groundwater resources in the State, submit a related report, and assist in identifying a 
funding source for a private well grant fund. The bill also establishes water quality testing 
requirements for contracts for the sale of real property that has a private or domestic water 
supply well. The bill takes effect October 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $186,800 in FY 2025; future 
years reflect annualization, inflation, and minimum ongoing costs. Funding related to the 
establishment of the online portal – which has been requested even in the absence of the 
bill – is discussed below. State revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
186,800 
217,400 
227,200 
239,300 
250,700 
Net Effect 
($186,800) 
($217,400) 
($227,200) 
($239,300) 
($250,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments may be affected by the additional water quality testing 
standards developed under the bill. However, any such impact ultimately depends on the 
standards that are developed and cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 11/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Private well” is defined to mean a private or domestic water supply well 
that is a source of potable water. The bill makes conforming changes to existing 
§ 9-4A-01 of the Environment Article, which is renumbered as § 9-4A-04 by the bill.  
 
Water Quality Testing Standards and Online Portal 
 
By December 31, 2026, MDE must adopt regulations to identify a list of additional water 
quality testing standards that it deems necessary for each county or any specific area within 
a county. The regulations may require, as appropriate, testing for (1) manganese;  
(2) arsenic; (3) radon; (4) mercury; and (5) other volatile organic compounds for which 
there is a maximum contaminant level. 
 
Subject to the availability of funding for the planning and implementation of an online 
portal, and in consultation with DoIT, MDE must use an online portal to (1) receive water 
quality testing results, as specified; (2) upload certificates of potability (which are required 
under related State regulations), results of water quality testing, and other relevant 
information submitted to MDE related to private wells (on at least a quarterly basis); and 
(3) provide public access to the information in a manner that is easy to use and categorized 
by county. On implementation of the online portal, a county may submit to MDE records 
of required certificates of potability and any results of water quality testing received 
voluntarily from residents. A State-certified laboratory that conducts water quality testing 
of private wells must submit testing results to MDE in a manner determined by MDE. 
MDE must (1) consistently share the information that is collected under these provisions 
with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and local health departments (LHDs) and 
(2) encourage MDH and LHDs to share relevant information to the online portal. 
 
Water Testing as a Condition of Sale of Real Property and State-certified Laboratory 
Responsibilities 
 
The bill requires that as a condition of sale, a contract for the sale of real property on which 
a private or domestic water supply well is located must include a provision requiring that 
the purchaser ensure that the well undergo water quality testing. Settlement on the contract 
may not occur until the vendor and purchaser have both received and reviewed the results 
of the water quality testing. At settlement, the vendor and purchaser must each certify in 
writing that they have received and reviewed the results. Testing results are valid for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 11/ Page 3 
three years. However, a purchaser may waive the water quality testing requirements in 
writing. 
 
The bill establishes several reporting requirements for a State-certified laboratory that 
conducts water quality tests pursuant to the bill. Among other things, a State-certified 
laboratory must submit the results of the water quality testing to MDE within five business 
days of completing the testing, along with (1) a statement that the water quality testing is 
for the purpose of complying with the bill and (2) the location of the real property, as 
specified. The bill specifies who is entitled to receive water quality testing results. 
 
Study on Long-term Funding Options for Groundwater Monitoring and Analysis 
 
MDE must conduct a study on long-term funding options for the detailed monitoring and 
analysis of groundwater resources in the State. MDE must submit a report of its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2025. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Private and Public Water Systems Water Quality Standards 
 
MDE is responsible for primary enforcement of the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 
which, among other things, ensures that public water systems meet strict safe drinking 
water standards. These standards generally do not apply to private drinking water wells. 
Rather, private well owners are responsible for the safety of their own wells after initial 
construction and certification is completed. However, Chapter 622 of 2021 requires the 
owner of residential rental property that is served by a private water supply well to provide 
for water quality testing every three years and to disclose the results to current and 
prospective tenants. When a water quality test reveals that a private water supply well is 
contaminated, the owner must notify MDE and the local health department (LHD) and 
resolve the issue. As of the writing of this fiscal and policy note, MDE has not promulgated 
regulations to implement Chapter 622. 
 
Water Well Construction in the State, Generally 
 
MDE’s water well construction program regulates the permitting and installation of water 
wells in the State, including for potable and nonpotable supply wells. Wells must be 
installed by a Maryland-licensed well driller, and the licensed well driller must obtain a 
well construction permit prior to drilling. MDE delegates authority to enforce the State’s 
water well construction regulations to LHDs and other local permitting agencies, which are 
referred to as approving authorities. Licensed well drillers apply to the local approving 
authority to obtain a well construction permit prior to drilling. After obtaining a permit to 
drill, the well driller must also submit a completion report to the approving authority. If the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 11/ Page 4 
well is to be used as a potable water supply, a Certificate of Potability is required before 
the well is put into service. 
 
Mandatory Notices and Disclosures for a Contract of Sale of Real Property 
 
Statutory provisions set forth numerous requirements regarding statements, disclosures, 
and notices in contracts for the sale of property, including provisions relating to:   
 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges; 
 
notice of costs of recordation or transfer taxes; 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays; 
 
notice of specified development impact fees; 
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund; 
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence. 
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located. Generally, 
unless otherwise specifically established, a contract of sale is not rendered invalid by the 
omission of any statement, disclosure, or notice. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment – Administrative Costs 
 
General fund administrative expenditures for MDE increase by $186,766 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring three regular employees (one administrative specialist, one geologist, and 
one environmental health specialist) to (1) develop and adopt the required standards 
(through regulation) for water quality testing deemed necessary for each county (or 
specified areas within a county); (2) conduct customer service needs associated with the 
standards and the online portal; (3) assist counties in implementing the standards and 
utilizing the portal; (4) generally implement the standards (by conducting any necessary 
monitoring and/or remediation assessments); (5) administer and maintain the portal and 
share the information collected; (6) conduct the study on long-term funding options for the 
detailed monitoring and analysis of groundwater resources in the State and submit the 
related report; and (7) assist in identifying a funding source for a private well grant fund. 
It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 11/ Page 5 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$164,539 
Operating Expenses 
   22,227 
Total FY 2025 MDE Admin. Expenditures 
$186,766 
 
Future year administrative expenditures, which range from $217,405 in fiscal 2026 to 
$250,655 in fiscal 2029, reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that to the extent that MDE does not obtain 
sufficient funding for the planning and implementation of the online portal (as discussed 
below), necessary staffing levels for MDE – and associated administrative costs – may be 
lower. 
 
Private Well Water Quality Online Portal 
 
MDE advises that – even in the absence of the bill – it is planning to develop a portal-type 
permitting database that will track well and septic system permits (as well as other MDE 
permits). It is anticipated that this database, if established, will meet the bill’s requirements 
relating to the online portal. Although MDE has requested initial funding for the 
development of the database, MDE advises that funding has not yet been secured. Based 
on preliminary estimates, contractual costs to develop the database (which includes 
outreach to counties to gather relevant available information) are estimated to total 
approximately $3.4 million over a two-year period.  
 
Because the bill’s requirements regarding the online portal are subject to the availability of 
funding, this analysis assumes that if MDE does not receive the funding it has already 
requested for the database (as discussed above), MDE does not otherwise need to establish 
an online portal under the bill. To the extent it must do so, however, general fund 
expenditures increase.  
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
The Maryland Department of Health’s (MDH) Laboratories Administration provides 
analytical support services for State agencies and program offices throughout the State and 
is the primary laboratory in the State that conducts water testing for MDE and LHDs. As 
such, the Laboratories Administration may need to conduct additional testing pursuant to 
the additional standards for water quality testing developed under the bill. Although any 
such impact ultimately depends on the standards that are developed and cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time, given the large number of private wells in the State, and the fact that 
the State laboratories are fully subscribed, to the extent that the Laboratories 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 11/ Page 6 
Administration must conduct additional testing as a result of the bill, MDH likely needs to 
hire additional staff, and general fund expenditures increase accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 483 (Senator Lewis Young, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Association 
of 
County 
Health 
Officers; 
Baltimore 
City; 
Caroline, 
Howard, 
and 
Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland 
Association 
of 
Counties; 
Office 
of 
the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2023 
Third Reader - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 3, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2023 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 26, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6