START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 3 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 3 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland State Police Gun Center – Firearms Surrendered Under Final 
Protective Orders 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose of the Maryland State Police Gun Center to include the 
tracking, screening, and vetting of all firearms surrendered under final protective orders in 
the State. The bill requires (1) the center to create and maintain a statewide database to 
track information on firearms surrendered under final protective orders in the State and  
(2) each law enforcement agency to report to the center specified information on firearms 
surrendered under final protective orders issued in the jurisdiction of the law enforcement 
agency. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local law enforcement agencies can handle the bill’s requirements with 
existing resources. Local revenues are not affected.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland State Police Gun Center:  Chapter 142 of 2022 established the Maryland State 
Police Gun Center within the Department of State Police (DSP) as a statewide firearms 
enforcement center for the tracking, screening, and vetting of all firearm crimes committed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 3/ Page 2 
in the State. The center must (1) create and maintain a statewide database to track 
information on crimes committed with “crime firearms”; (2) coordinate with DSP and law 
enforcement agencies to screen and vet all firearm crimes committed in the State, as 
specified; and (3) assist DSP and law enforcement agencies with firearm enforcement and 
firearm violation reduction efforts. Each law enforcement agency must report to the center 
specified information regarding crimes committed with crime firearms in the law 
enforcement agency’s jurisdiction. The center (1) must designate how often law 
enforcement agencies must report the required information and (2) may require a law 
enforcement agency to report other information relating to firearm crimes committed in the 
law enforcement agency’s jurisdiction to assist the center in the tracking of firearm crimes 
committed in the State. 
 
Beginning in 2023, and annually thereafter, the Governor must include in the annual State 
budget an appropriation sufficient to fund the operations of the center. The fiscal 2023 
budget provided for a transfer of $3.4 million in general funds from the Dedicated Purpose 
Account to establish the center, and the Governor’s proposed fiscal 2024 budget includes 
approximately $3.3 million in general funds for the center, including funding for several 
positions to staff the center.  
 
“Crime firearm” means a firearm that is used in the commission of a crime of violence, as 
defined under § 5-101 of the Public Safety Article, or recovered by a law enforcement 
agency in connection with illegal firearm possession, transportation, or transfer.  
 
Domestic Violence Protective Orders:  Individuals who meet specified relationship 
requirements with the respondent (the alleged abuser) – including spouses, cohabitants, 
individuals with a child in common, and individuals alleging that the respondent committed 
specified sexual offenses within the prior six months – may seek relief from abuse by filing 
a petition for a domestic violence protective order. If granted, a protective order may 
include various types of relief for the petitioner, including provisions requiring a 
respondent to refrain from abusing or contacting the petitioner and to stay away from the 
petitioner’s home, school, or place of employment. Issues of custody, visitation, emergency 
family maintenance, and use and possession of the family home may also be addressed. If 
a final protective order is issued, it must order the respondent to surrender any firearms in 
the respondent’s possession for the duration of the order.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 185 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 3/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Charles, and Howard counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; City of Laurel; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3