START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 13 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 13 
(Delegate Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Hate Crimes – Civil Remedy 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person who is the victim of an act that would constitute a violation 
of the State’s hate crime laws to bring a civil action against the person or persons who 
committed the act and authorizes a court to award a variety of specified remedies. The bill 
applies prospectively to causes of action arising on or after the bill’s October 1, 2023 
effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any increase in District Court proceedings as a result of the bill can be 
handled with existing resources. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Local Effect:  Any increase in circuit court proceedings as a result of the bill can be 
handled with existing resources. Local revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The court may issue an injunction to prevent or restrain an act that would 
constitute a violation of the State’s hate crime laws and award the following to a prevailing 
plaintiff:  (1) economic damages and any other pecuniary loss sustained by the plaintiff 
that was proximately caused by the hate crimes violation; (2) noneconomic damages, as 
specified; and (3) reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs. Damages awarded by a court 
may be equal to three times the amount of actual damages. Noneconomic damages deriving 
from emotional distress and mental anguish may not include emotional distress or mental 
anguish caused solely by the need to replace or repair personal or real property. The 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 13/ Page 2 
availability of a civil remedy does not affect any legal or equitable right or remedy 
otherwise provided by law.  
 
Current Law:  The State’s hate crimes statutes are contained in Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the 
Criminal Law Article, specifically §§ 10-302 (damaging property of a religious entity), 
10-303 (obstructing exercise of religious beliefs), 10-304 (harassment or destruction of 
property), 10-305 (damage to an associated building), and 10-305.1 (prohibition on use of 
an item or symbol to threaten or intimidate).          
 
Section 10-302 (Damaging Property of a Religious Entity)  
 
A person may not deface, damage, or destroy, or attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or 
destroy, personal or real property that is owned, leased, or used by a religious entity or for 
any religious purpose. 
 
Section 10-303 (Obstructing Exercise of Religious Beliefs)  
 
A person may not, by force or threat of force, obstruct or attempt to obstruct another in the 
free exercise of that person’s religious beliefs. 
 
Section 10-304 (Harassment or Destruction of Property)  
 
A person may not engage in the following acts motivated either in whole or in substantial 
part because another person or group is homeless or because of another person’s or group’s 
race, color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, or 
national origin: 
 
 
commit a crime or attempt or threaten to commit a crime against that person or 
group;  
 
deface, damage, or destroy, or attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or destroy, the 
real or personal property of that person or group;  
 
burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on the real or personal property of that 
person or group;   
 
make or cause to be made a false statement, report, or complaint that the person 
knows to be false as a whole or in material part to a specified law enforcement 
officer, about that person or group with the intent to deceive and to cause an 
investigation or other action to be taken as a result of the statement, report, or 
complaint, in violation of § 9-501 of the Criminal Law Article; or  
 
commit any of these acts when the act involves a separate crime that is a felony or 
that results in the death of a victim. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 13/ Page 3 
Section 10-305 (Damage to an Associated Building)  
 
A person may not deface, damage, or destroy; attempt or threaten to deface, damage, or 
destroy; burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on; or damage the real or personal 
property connected to a building that is publicly or privately owned, leased, or used 
(1) because a person or group of a particular race, color, religious belief, sexual orientation, 
gender, gender identity, disability, or national origin, or because a person or group that is 
homeless, has contacts or is associated with the building or (2) if there is evidence that 
exhibits animosity against a person or group because of the race, color, religious beliefs, 
sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, or national origin of that person or 
group or because that person or group is homeless. 
 
Section 10-305.1 (Prohibition on Use of an Item or Symbol to Threaten or Intimidate)  
 
A person may not place or inscribe an item or a symbol, including an actual or depicted 
noose or swastika, whether temporary or permanent, on any real or personal property, 
public or private, without the express permission of the owner or specific persons, with the 
intent to threaten or intimidate any person or group of persons. 
 
Penalties  
 
In general, a person who violates these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable 
by imprisonment for up to 3 years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000. However, if a 
violation of § 10-304 involves a separate felony, the violator is guilty of a felony and is 
subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up to $10,000. If a violation of 
§ 10-304 results in the death of the victim, the violator is guilty of a felony and is subject 
to imprisonment for up to 20 years and/or a fine of up to $20,000. 
 
In addition to any other penalties imposed, the court may require a person to complete an 
antibias education program. 
 
First Amendment Rights  
 
Nothing in the hate crimes statutes may be construed to infringe on the speech of a religious 
leader or other individual during peaceable activity intended to express the leader’s or 
individual’s religious beliefs or convictions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 71 and HB 290 of 2022 and SB 128 and HB 452 of 2021.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 13/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 5 (Senator Kramer) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Brandon Stouffer 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4