START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 9 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 9 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Equity in Transportation Sector - Guidelines and Analyses 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) beginning 
July 1, 2024, in collaboration with the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), to conduct 
two transit equity analyses, perform a cost-benefit analysis, consult with members and 
leaders of affected communities, and take specified actions based on the results of these 
activities before announcing (1) any service change that would constitute a major service 
change under specified federal guidelines or (2) any reduction or cancellation of a capital 
expansion project in the construction program of the Consolidated Transportation 
Program (CTP) that exceeds transit equity thresholds developed by MTA pursuant to the 
bill. The bill also expands existing transportation plans, reports, and committees to include 
transportation equity issues. Specified provisions take effect June 1, 2023, and specified 
provisions take effect July1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2023 or 2024. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures 
increase by $602,600 in FY 2025; future years reflect inflation and ongoing costs. 
Revenues are not directly affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
0 
0 
602,600 
544,700 
557,100 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($602,600) 
($544,700) 
($557,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not directly affected; 
however, local governments may be affected depending on how the State’s transportation 
system and processes are altered under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 9/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Transit Equity Policies, Guidelines, and Analyses 
 
The following provisions related to MTA service changes, the reduction or cancellation of 
a capital expansion project in the CTP, and required analyses and reports, take effect 
July 1, 2024.  
 
Before announcing any service change that would constitute a major service change under 
the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA’s) Title VI Requirements and Guidelines for 
FTA Recipients, and before announcing any reduction or cancellation of a capital 
expansion project in the construction program of the CTP that exceeds the thresholds 
developed by MTA, MDOT, in collaboration with MTA, must:  
 
 
conduct a transit equity analysis in accordance with the federal Americans with 
Disabilities Act Amendments Act and the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as 
amended to determine whether the change will create a disparate impact on persons 
with disabilities; 
 
conduct a transit equity analysis in accordance with FTA guidelines and, if 
applicable, the guidelines developed by MTA, to determine whether the change or 
reduction/cancellation will create a disparate impact or disproportionate burden; 
 
perform a cost-benefit analysis, including an analysis of impacts on economic 
development, employment, education, health, and environmental justice; and 
 
consult with members and leaders of affected communities, including through 
community outreach, to racial minority communities, low-income communities, 
disabled riders, limited English proficiency riders, transit-reliant riders, and senior 
riders. 
 
Major Service Change:  For a major service change, if a transit equity analysis reveals 
disparate impact or disproportionate burden, MTA must develop alternatives that would 
meet the goals of the proposed service change and conduct a transit equity analysis of those 
alternatives. If a disparate impact can be avoided through use of one of the alternatives 
analyzed, MTA must proceed with that alternative as the primary proposed service change. 
If there is no alternative that would avoid a disparate impact or disproportionate burden, 
MTA (1) may not implement the proposed service change unless a substantial justification 
exists that necessitates the change and (2) must implement the alternative that causes the 
least disparate impact or disproportionate burden.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 9/ Page 3 
Before holding a public hearing on a proposed service change, MTA must publish on its 
website, for the routes or lines impacted by the service change, an evaluation of the 
demographics of the riders of the routes or lines and the service area. After completing the 
public hearings, MTA must publish the transportation equity analysis and cost-benefit 
analysis on its website and compile a report on the impacts of the proposed service change. 
The report must include the various analyses conducted, a community outreach report, any 
alternatives analyzed, and, if applicable, the final alternative selected with any substantial 
justification statements. The report must be made available to the public, as specified, and 
distributed to specified entities, including the members of the Board of Public Works 
(BPW), specified elected officials, community leaders, and legislative committees.  
 
Reduction or Cancellation of a Capital Expansion Project:  For a reduction or cancellation 
of a capital expansion project, after completing the required transit equity analysis and 
cost-benefit analysis, MTA must compile a report on the impacts of the proposed reduction 
or cancellation that includes (1) the transit equity analysis; (2) the cost-benefit analysis; 
and (3) a community outreach report. The repot must be made available to the public, as 
specified, and distributed to specified entities, including the members of BPW, specified 
elected officials, community leaders, and legislative committees.  
 
Expansion of Existing Plans, Reports, and Committees 
 
Effective June 1, 2023, the bill makes the following changes to existing transportation 
plans, reports, and committees:   
 
 
MTA must develop transit equity analysis policies and guidelines, including 
thresholds for when a reduction or cancellation of a capital expansion project in the 
construction program of the CTP requires analysis. 
 
Beginning with the 2045 Metropolitan Transportation Plan (MTP), MDOT must 
consider ways to achieve equity in the transportation sector when developing the 
State transportation goals.  
 
The advisory committee that advises MDOT on the State transportation goals, 
benchmarks, and indicators is expanded to include a representative of (1) the 
Maryland State Conference of the NAACP and (2) a transportation labor 
organization, designated by the Maryland State and District of Columbia AFL-CIO. 
 
The responsibilities of the committee are expanded to include the consideration of 
the impact of transportation investment on racial equity and persons with 
disabilities, including service accessibility. 
 
Beginning with the 2024 Attainment Report on Transportation System 
Performance, the committee must recommend measurable transportation indicators 
that can be evaluated for racial, disability, ethnic, and low-income disparities based 
on available sources or information. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 9/ Page 4 
 
MDOT must evaluate these indicators to identify any racial, disability, ethnic, or 
low-income disparities. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Transit Services 
 
MTA is a modal unit within MDOT, and it operates a comprehensive transit system 
throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus 
lines in Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, 
commuter buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. With the exception of 
the District of Columbia transit system, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies 
responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
Long-term Transportation Planning – Generally  
 
Long-term transportation planning in the State is a collaborative process designed to 
consider input from the public, local jurisdictions, metropolitan planning organizations, 
and elected officials. Among the numerous reports, meetings, and discussions that take 
place, two important documents are developed to guide transportation planning in the State:  
the CTP and the MTP.  
 
The CTP, which is issued annually to the General Assembly, local elected officials, and 
interested citizens, provides a description of projects proposed by MDOT for development 
and evaluation or construction over the next 6-year period. The MTP is a 20-year forecast 
of State transportation needs based on MDOT’s anticipated financial resources during that 
20-year period. It must be revised every 5 years through an inclusive public participation 
process. Furthermore, it must be expressed in terms of goals and objectives and include a 
summary of the types of projects and programs that are proposed to accomplish the goals 
and objectives, using a multimodal approach when feasible. The MTP was last updated 
in 2019. 
 
Transportation Planning Report and Advisory Committee   
 
Before the General Assembly considers the proposed MTP and CTP, MDOT must submit 
an annual report on the attainment of the State transportation goals and benchmarks for the 
approved and proposed MTP and the approved and proposed CTP. The report must include 
specified information, including the degree to which the projects and programs contained 
in the CTP and the MTP attain the goals and benchmarks as measured by performance 
indicators or benchmarks.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 9/ Page 5 
An advisory committee must advise MDOT on the State transportation goals, benchmarks, 
and indicators discussed in the report. The committee includes representatives from State 
and local organizations, private sector organizations, transportation experts, and the 
community (including a representative of the disabled citizens community). In developing 
and reviewing the transportation goals and benchmarks, MDOT and the committee must 
consider specified information, including population trends, the full range of unmet 
transportation needs in priority funding areas, and the impact of transportation investment 
on the environment, environmental justice, communities, and economic development. 
 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964  
 
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 states:  “No person in the United States shall, on 
the grounds of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied 
the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving 
Federal financial assistance.” Pursuant to Title VI’s requirements, MTA has established 
the Title VI Implementation Program for 2020 through 2023. Among other things, the 
program has implemented complaint and investigation procedures, a public participation 
plan, a language assistance plan, and a disparate impact evaluation process for fare 
changes.   
 
State Expenditures:  The bill establishes new research, analysis, outreach, and 
coordination requirements for MTA and modifications to existing transportation planning 
activities and documents to include a greater focus on transportation equity and racial 
disparities in transit service. MDOT and MTA are not able to absorb these new duties with 
existing staff and resources. Therefore, TTF expenditures increase by $602,601 in 
fiscal 2025, which assumes that no costs are incurred in fiscal 2023 or 2024. This estimate 
reflects costs for new staff, consultants, and required analyses beginning July 1, 2024. It 
includes one-time start-up costs and ongoing operating expenses. A more extensive 
discussion of the anticipated costs is provided below. 
 
Positions  
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits  
$264,547 
Contractual Costs  
182,500 
Cost-Benefit and Equity Analyses 
132,500 
Other Operating Expenses 
   23,054 
Total FY 2025 MDOT and MTA Expenditures 
$602,601 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
ongoing contractual services, and annual increases in other ongoing operating costs.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 9/ Page 6 
Maryland Department of Transportation – Staff and Consultant Costs 
 
The bill expands the Maryland Transportation Plan, the Attainment Report on 
Transportation System Performance, and the responsibilities of the advisory committee 
that advises MDOT regarding State transportation goals to include transportation equity 
issues. To assist with the additional research and evaluation necessary to include these 
items into the planning documents and activities, MDOT anticipates needing to (1) hire 
one permanent full-time planning analyst and (2) engage contractual assistance at an 
estimated cost of $100,000 in fiscal 2025 and $50,000 annually thereafter.  
 
Maryland Transit Administration – Staff and Consultant Costs 
 
MTA requires one additional full-time administrative staff in its Office of Service 
Development and one additional compliance officer in its Office of Equal Compliance to 
handle the increase in scheduling, planning, coordination, and communication duties for 
MDOT and MTA under the bill. In addition, MTA incurs additional contractual consultant 
costs of $82,500 annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to assist with capital project analysis 
and quality assurance and quality control. 
 
Cost-benefit and Transit Equity Analyses  
 
Before announcing any service change that would constitute a major service change under 
specified federal guidelines, and before announcing any reduction or cancellation of a 
capital expansion project in the construction program of the CTP that exceeds the 
thresholds developed by MTA, MDOT and MTA must conduct two transit equity analyses 
and a cost-benefit analysis related to the proposal. MTA advises that these types of analyses 
are generally conducted by consultants. MTA further estimates a cost of $55,000 for each 
cost-benefit analysis, $27,500 for each FTA-focused transit equity analysis, and 
$50,000 for each transit equity analysis focused on disparate impacts for persons with 
disabilities conducted under the bill. 
 
For the purposes of this fiscal and policy note, it is assumed that one of each type of analysis 
is conducted each year beginning in fiscal 2025, for a total estimated cost of 
$132,500 annually; however, costs may be significantly higher if additional transit equity 
analyses and cost-benefit analyses must be conducted in any given year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Given the bill’s extensive and ongoing requirements for data 
analysis, cost-benefit analyses, and community outreach, small businesses that contract and 
consult with MDOT and MTA to provide those services are likely to experience increased 
business. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 9/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 23 and HB 141 of 2022 and HB 1204 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 19 (Senator Carter) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2023 
Third Reader - March 24, 2023 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2023 
Enrolled - April 26, 2023 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7