START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 4 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 4 
(Delegate Crutchfield, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Sexual Crimes - Repeal of Spousal Defense 
 
 
This bill repeals an exemption from prosecution for specified sexual crimes if, at the time 
of the alleged rape or sexual offense, the person was the victim’s legal spouse. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s expanded 
application of existing penalty provisions. The bill does not materially affect State 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in incarceration expenditures due to the bill’s expanded 
application of existing penalty provisions. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a person may not be prosecuted under § 3-303 (rape in the 
first degree), § 3-304 (rape in the second degree), § 3-307 (sexual offense in the 
third degree), or § 3-308 (sexual offense in the fourth degree) of the Criminal Law Article 
for a crime against a victim who was the person’s legal spouse at the time of the alleged 
rape or sexual offense. 
 
However, a person may be prosecuted under § 3-303 (a) (rape in the first degree – in 
general), § 3-304 (a)(1) (rape in the second degree – vaginal intercourse or sexual act with 
another by force or threat of force without the consent of the other), or 
§ 3-307 (a)(1) (sexual offense in the third degree – engaging in nonconsensual sexual 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 4/ Page 2 
contact while meeting other specified criteria related to weapons, infliction of serious 
physical injury, threats, and being aided or abetted by another) if:   
 
 
at the time of the alleged crime, the person and the person’s legal spouse have lived 
apart, without cohabitation and without interruption (1) under a written separation 
agreement executed by the person and the spouse or (2) for at least three months 
immediately before the alleged rape or sexual offense; or 
 
the person, in committing the crime, uses force or threat of force, and the act is 
without the consent of the spouse. 
 
A person may be prosecuted for the commission of first-degree rape, second-degree rape, 
third-degree sexual offense, or fourth-degree sexual offense against the person’s legal 
spouse if at the time of the alleged crime the person and the spouse lived apart, without 
cohabitation and without interruption, under a decree of limited divorce. 
 
The applicable penalties for the sexual crimes mentioned above are:   
 
 
§ 3-303 (rape in the first degree):  felony, imprisonment not exceeding life 
(imprisonment for life without the possibility of parole applies to violations 
involving a child younger than age 16 and subsequent offenders); 
 
§ 3-304 (rape in the second degree):  felony, imprisonment for up to 20 years; 
 
§ 3-307 (sexual offense in the third degree):  felony, imprisonment for up to 
10 years; and  
 
§ 3-308 (sexual offense in the fourth degree):  misdemeanor, imprisonment for up 
to 1 year and/or $1,000 maximum fine (3 years and/or $1,000 for subsequent 
offenders). 
 
State Expenditures:  Information is not available on the number of cases that were not 
prosecuted as a result of the provisions repealed by the bill. Assuming that the spousal 
exemption under § 3-318 of the Criminal Law Article applies to a small number of cases, 
general fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded application 
of existing incarceration penalties due to more people being committed to State 
correctional facilities. The number of people convicted as a result of the bill is expected to 
be minimal. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$4,970 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 4/ Page 3 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill’s repeal of the spousal 
defense may result in the need for one attorney, at a cost of $110,101 in fiscal 2024 and 
increasing to $153,791 in fiscal 2028. The Department of Legislative Services anticipates 
a minimal increase in cases under the bill that can likely be absorbed within existing 
resources. To the extent that the bill generates more cases than anticipated, expenditures 
may increase for OPD to hire staff. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded 
application of existing incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration 
for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs 
of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in 
recent years. 
 
The Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association advises that the bill has no fiscal or 
operational effect on prosecutors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See SB 33 and HB 153 of 2022; SB 250 and HB 147 of 2021; and SB 230 and HB 590 of 
2020.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 129 (Senators Kelly and Beidle) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ 
Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 4/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2023 
Third Reader - March 3, 2023 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 24, 2023 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4