START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 10 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2023 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 10 
(Delegate Adams) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System – Talbot County 
 
 
This bill makes Talbot County detention center officers members of the Correctional 
Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a condition of employment, subject to 
Talbot County beginning participation in CORS. Past eligibility and creditable service with 
Talbot County transfers to CORS for the affected officers, and they are not subject to 
specified credit transfer provisions in current law. The bill takes effect June 1, 2023. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only Talbot County.  
  
Local Effect:  Assuming Talbot County elects to participate in CORS and based on an 
actuarial analysis as of June 30, 2021, its pension liabilities increase by $918,300, resulting 
in an annual increase of $94,000 in Talbot County’s employer pension contribution. No 
discernible effect on pension liabilities or employer contribution rates for other 
participating governmental units (PGUs) in CORS. No effect on local revenues.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In general, when a PGU withdraws or transfers from a State 
pension plan, assets and liabilities credited to the withdrawing members are calculated in 
a manner specified by statute. If there is a net withdrawal liability, the withdrawing PGU 
must make regular payments to the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) until the 
liability is paid off. In the case of transfers to another plan, the assets and liabilities from 
the original plan are transferred to the members’ “new” plan, but they are still subject to 
the same withdrawal asset/liability calculation. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 10/ Page 2 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs transfers from the Employees’ 
Pension System (EPS) to another contributory pension system (like CORS). Under 
Title 37, a “new system” means the system into which the member is transferring service 
credit, and “previous system” means the system from which the individual is transferring. 
Members transferring creditable service from EPS to another contributory system must pay 
the difference in the member contribution rates in effect for the period of service covered 
by the transferred service credit, plus interest. They are also refunded any accumulated 
contributions in the previous system that are in excess of the member contributions required 
by the new system. 
 
Talbot County is currently a PGU in EPS, but the county seeks to transfer its 38 detention 
center officers from EPS to CORS. Exhibit 1 shows the benefit structures for both plans. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Provisions 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System 
 
 
Hired Before July 1, 2011 
Hired After June 30, 2011 
CORS 
Normal Retirement Age 
621 
652 
553 
 
 
 
 
Years of Service for 
 Normal Retirement 
30 
Age and service add to 90 
20 
 
 
 
 
Employee Contribution 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006) 
3.0% in 2007 
4.0% in 2008 
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% after June 30, 2011 
7.0% 
5.0% 
 
 
 
 
Benefit Multiplier 
1.8% (after 1998) 
1.2% (before 1998) 
1.5% 
1.82% of 
AFC 
 
AFC:  average final compensation 
CORS:  Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
1 Retiree must have at least 5 years of service. 
2 Retiree must have at least 10 years of service. 
3 Retiree must have 5 years of service if hired before July 1, 2011; otherwise, retiree must have 10 years of 
service if hired on or after July 1, 2011. 
 
Source:  Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 10/ Page 3 
As Exhibit 1 shows, the member contribution rate for EPS was less than the CORS rate of 
5% prior to fiscal 2009. Thus, under Title 37, an employee of the Talbot County detention 
center would have to pay the difference in contribution rates for any prior service credit in 
EPS before fiscal 2009, with interest. However, the bill exempts them from that 
requirement. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Typically, when a PGU is considering transferring personnel from 
one State plan to another State plan, it requests that the State Retirement Agency (SRA) 
conduct an actuarial valuation to determine the costs or benefits associated with the 
transfer. For a prior version of this bill, Talbot County requested an actuarial valuation of 
the cost of transferring its detention center officers from EPS to CORS. That analysis was 
conducted as of June 30, 2021, but the legislation did not pass. However, Talbot County 
has not requested, and SRA has not conducted, an updated valuation, which would be based 
on data from June 30, 2022; therefore, this analysis relies on the earlier analysis as of 
June 30, 2021. To the extent that circumstances (e.g., the demographics of the affected 
employees or underlying economic conditions) have changed in the intervening year, the 
fiscal effect may differ from this analysis. 
 
As transferring members are not required to pay the difference in member contribution 
rates, Talbot County assumes any additional liability from the lack of payment. Assuming 
Talbot County elects to participate in CORS and based on the withdrawal and new entrant 
liability calculations by the SRPS actuary as noted above, Talbot County pension liabilities 
increase by $918,324, resulting in an annual withdrawal and new entrant liability payment 
of $94,000 for 25 years. 
 
The CORS municipal pool is small, so the addition of Talbot County’s 38 detention officers 
increases the size of the pool by 28%, which alters the demographic composition of the 
group. As a result, unfunded liabilities for the pool actually shrink by $81,000. This 
decrease is negligible and has no discernible effect on pension contribution rates for other 
members of the CORS municipal pool. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last three years. 
See HB 1476 and SB 997 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 82 (Senator Mautz) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Bolton; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 10/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2023 
Third Reader - March 20, 2023 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4