START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 74 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 74 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Construction and Services - Contract Modification 
 
   
This bill requires that State procurement contracts for construction and security services 
valued at more than $2,000,000 and lasting three years or longer include a clause that 
requires a contract modification – subject to approval by the Chief Procurement Officer 
(CPO) – for the equitable adjustment of a contract as a result of statutory changes that 
increase required compensation or benefits. For security service contracts meeting the same 
thresholds, the requirement for a contract modification also applies when increased 
compensation or benefit costs result from collective bargaining. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in procurement costs (all funds) beginning in 
FY 2027 due to contract modifications for higher labor costs resulting from changes in law 
or collective bargaining, but a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. 
Procurement units may require additional staff to process more contract modifications, but 
a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local governmental finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 74/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Contract Modifications 
 
A contract modification is defined as a written alteration that (1) affects specifications, 
delivery point, date of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions 
of a procurement contract, and (2) is accomplished by mutual action of the parties to a 
procurement contract. “Equitable adjustment” refers to a change to a contract price or 
provision to compensate a contractor for additional costs.  
 
State law requires that any contract modification for an emergency contract that, by itself 
or in combination with prior modifications, exceeds the small procurement amount, must 
be reported to the Board of Public Works (BPW) and any appropriate control agency within 
15 days of the award being made. Apart from this provision, State law does not regulate 
contract modifications. However, the Code of Maryland Regulations requires approval 
from BPW for any modifications with a value of $50,000 or more.  
 
Required Clauses 
 
Every State procurement contract must have clauses covering: 
 
 
termination for default; 
 
termination wholly or partly by the State for its convenience if the head of the 
primary procurement unit determines that termination is appropriate; 
 
variations that occur between estimated and actual quantities of work in a 
procurement contract; 
 
liquidated damages, as appropriate; 
 
specified excuses for nonperformance; 
 
except for real property leases, the unilateral right of the State to order in  
writing:  (1) changes in the work, if the changes are within the scope of the 
procurement contract and (2) a temporary stop or delay in performance; 
 
the obligation of the contractor to comply with the political contribution reporting 
requirements under State election law to which the contractor may be subject; and  
 
nonvisual access for information technology. 
 
Additionally, procurement contracts for construction must include (1) a clause providing 
for contract modification if the condition of a site differs from the condition described in 
the specifications and (2) a clause covering the requirements for notice of contract claims, 
submission of contract claims and resolution of contract claims.    

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 74/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, the bill transfers risks associated with 
applicable State contracts for construction and security services entirely to the State, 
making the State solely responsible, without recourse or negotiation, for compensating a 
contractor for additional costs that the contractor incurs resulting from (1) a change in law 
regarding required compensation or benefits or (2) when specified, collective bargaining. 
As the definition of contract modification suggests, it is usually executed by mutual 
agreement of the State and a contractor. By requiring the State to approve a contract 
modification for specified costs incurred by a contractor, the bill removes any discretion or 
autonomy on the State’s part and makes it liable for costs for which it may not be 
responsible (the bill is not limited to legislation enacted by the State, and the State is not a 
party to collective bargaining negotiations affecting its contractors). 
 
Thus, the bill likely results in an increase in contract modifications that increase the cost 
of contracts resulting from a change in law or, when applicable, collective bargaining. As 
a result, the cost of contracting for applicable construction and security services likely 
increases beginning in fiscal 2027, but these costs cannot be quantified, as the State cannot 
accurately predict the results of future legislative initiatives or collective bargaining 
negotiations. 
  
Beginning in fiscal 2027, the bill likely results in an increase in the number of contract 
modifications that procurement units must develop and present to the CPO and BPW for 
approval, when specified. The requirement for approval from the CPO, along with existing 
oversight authority by BPW, would likely increase project timelines and delay contract 
execution, which could in turn increase project costs. It cannot be known how many 
contracts meet the bill’s criteria in future years, or how many may require contract 
modifications based on statutory changes or collective bargaining. However, if the increase 
in the number of contract modifications is significant, procurement units (especially the 
Department of General Services and the Maryland Department of Transportation) may 
require additional staff to process those modifications beginning in fiscal 2027, but a 
reliable estimate is not feasible. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that enter into contracts with the State for 
construction or security services lasting three years or longer and valued at more than 
$2.0 million could receive increased compensation for existing and future contracts that 
experience cost increases due to legislation or, for security services contracts, collective 
bargaining.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 403 and HB 1499 of 2025. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 74/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 63 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public 
Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4