START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 61 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 61 
(Delegate Lopez) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Financial Institutions – Definition of Student Financing Companies – Alteration 
 
   
This bill excludes an “institution of postsecondary education” from the definition of a 
“student financing company”, exempting an institution from registration and reporting 
requirements under current law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.      
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Student financing” means an extension of credit to a consumer, contractual or otherwise, 
contingent or absolute, that is:   
 
 
not made, insured, or guaranteed under Title IV of the federal Higher Education Act 
of 1965; 
 
extended to a consumer expressly, in whole or in part, for postsecondary educational 
expenses, regardless of whether the extension of credit is provided by the institution 
of postsecondary education the consumer attends; and 
 
not a loan secured by real property or a dwelling. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 61/ Page 2 
“Student financing” also includes (1) an extension of credit used to refinance or repay 
existing student financing or federal student loan debt and (2) financial obligations in which 
the repayment amount is equal to a predetermined percentage of a consumer’s future 
income. 
 
A “student financing company” means an entity engaged in the business of securing, 
making, or extending student financing products, or any purchaser, assignee, or holder of 
student financing products. However, it does not include (to the extent that State regulation 
is preempted by federal law):   
 
 
a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit union; 
 
a wholly owned subsidiary of a bank or credit union; or 
 
an operating subsidiary where each owner is wholly owned by the same bank or 
credit union. 
 
An “institution of postsecondary education” means a school or other institution that offers 
an education program in the State for individuals who are at least 16 years old and who 
have graduated from or left elementary or secondary school. Institutions of postsecondary 
education include nonaccredited institutions or institutions not authorized to operate in the 
State. They do not include any adult education, evening high school, or high school 
equivalency program conducted by a public school system in the State or any 
apprenticeship or on-the-job training program subject to the approval of the Apprenticeship 
and Training Council. 
 
Required Registration  
 
A student financing company must register with the Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) 
in the Maryland Department of Labor before providing services in the State; the registration 
must be renewed annually, as specified. An application must include specified information. 
OFR may adopt and enforce: 
 
 
registration procedures for student financing companies, which may include the use 
of the Nationwide Multistate Licensing System (NMLS); 
 
registration fees for student financing companies, which may include fees for the 
use of NMLS, to be paid directly by the student financing company; 
 
procedures and fees for renewing a registration, which may include fees for the 
renewed use of NMLS, to be paid directly by the student financing company; and 
 
alternate registration procedures and fees for institutions of postsecondary education 
that offer student financing products. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 61/ Page 3 
Annual Reporting Requirement  
 
A student financing company that secures, makes, or extends student financing in the State 
must report specified information to OFR. For example, a student financing company must 
report (among other things): 
 
 
a list of all schools attended by consumers who received student financing from the 
company and resided in Maryland at the time of the transaction and whose debt is 
outstanding (including student financing used to refinance an existing debt); 
 
the total outstanding dollar amount owed by consumers residing in the State who 
received student financing; and 
 
the rate of default for consumers residing in Maryland who obtained student 
financing, if applicable. 
 
Similar requirements exist for a student financing company that acquires or assumes 
student financing products in the State. If a student financing company is required to report 
the required information under another provision of State or federal law, then OFR may 
establish a process to avoid duplicative reporting. 
 
By June 15 of each year, OFR must make specified information and documents reported 
by the student financing companies available on a publicly accessible website developed 
and maintained by OFR.  
 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System 
 
Maryland uses the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry, universally 
known as “NMLS,” for licensing and renewal of money transmitters. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; University System of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and 
University Association; Baltimore City Community College; Morgan State University;  
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 61/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4