START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 65

N2 6lr1294
HB 310/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED) CF SB 131

By: Delegate Cardin
Requested: October 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Estates and Trusts – Fiduciaries – Attorney–Client Privilege

3 FOR the purpose of clarifying that a communication between an attorney and a client that
4 acts as a fiduciary is subject to the attorney–client privilege even if fiduciary funds
5 are used to compensate the attorney for services rendered to the client; and generally
6 relating to fiduciaries and the attorney–client privilege.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Estates and Trusts
9 Section 15–117
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Estates and Trusts

15 15–117.

16 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “FIDUCIARY” INCLUDES AN AGENT, AS DEFINED IN §
17 17–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

18 (B) (1) UNLESS WAIVED BY THE CLIENT, A COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
19 AN ATTORNEY AND A CLIENT THAT ACTS AS A FIDUCIARY IS SUBJECT TO THE
20 ATTORNEY–CLIENT PRIVILEGE EVEN IF FIDUCIARY FUNDS ARE USED TO
21 COMPENSATE THE ATTORNEY FOR LEGAL SERVICES RENDERED TO THE CLIENT.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0065*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 65

1 (2) THE EXISTENCE OF A FIDUCIARY RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN A
2 FIDUCIARY AND A BENEFICIARY DOES NOT CONSTITUTE OR GIVE RISE TO A WAIVER
3 OF THE ATTORNEY–CLIENT PRIVILEGE FOR COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN THE
4 ATTORNEY AND THE FIDUCIARY.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
6 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2