START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 23 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 23 
(Delegate Woods) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration - Identification Cards - Issuance to Minors 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) from requiring a parent or 
legal guardian of a minor 15 years of age or older to cosign or be present at the time of 
submission of the minor’s application for an identification (ID) card. MVA must adopt 
regulations establishing acceptable forms of identification that establish proof of residency 
for such a minor, including specified documents. If the minor is unable to provide 
documentation that satisfies requirements of the federal REAL ID Act, MVA may issue an 
ID card that is noncompliant with the Act. The bill’s requirements may not be construed to 
limit MVA’s authority to require documentation necessary to comply with the 
requirements of the REAL ID Act, including documentation establishing proof of 
residency.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. MVA can 
implement the bill with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  On application, MVA must issue an ID card to any applicant who:  
 
 
is a resident of the State; 
 
does not have a driver’s license; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 23/ Page 2 
 
presents a birth certificate or other acceptable proof of age and identity; 
 
provides satisfactory documentary evidence that the applicant has lawful status; 
 
provides satisfactory documentary evidence that (1) the applicant has a valid 
Social Security number by presenting the Social Security card (or specified 
documents if the card is not available) or (2) the applicant is not eligible for a 
Social Security number; and 
 
presents a completed application for an ID card on the appropriate form.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1539 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2