START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 7 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 7 
(Delegate Guzzone) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-
Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists - Authority to Issue Limited 
Licenses to Practice Music Therapy 
 
   
This bill authorizes the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid 
Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists to issue a limited license 
to practice music therapy. The purpose of the limited license is to allow an individual to 
practice music therapy while completing the requirements for full licensure. A limited 
licensee must practice under the supervision of a fully licensed music therapist. A limited 
license is valid for one year but can be renewed for one additional year if the holder  
(1) meets the requirements for limited licensure, (2) applies for renewal, and (3) pays the 
renewal fee. If the holder of a limited license fails to receive a full license within two years 
of receiving a limited license, the individual must wait at least one year before reapplying 
for another limited license.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The board can issue limited licenses using existing budgeted resources. 
License and renewal fees are not anticipated to meaningfully impact board special fund 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 7/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board must issue a limited license to practice music therapy to an 
applicant who (1) meets all full licensure requirements except for the examination; 
(2) demonstrates to the board that the applicant will only practice under the supervision of 
a fully licensed music therapist for the term of the limited license; (3) submits an 
application to the board; and (4) pays the application fee.  
 
Current Law:  “Board certified music therapist” means an individual who (1) has 
completed the education and clinical training requirements established by the American 
Music Therapy Association (AMTA), and (2) holds current board certification from the 
Certification Board for Music Therapists (CBMT). 
 
“Practice of music therapy” means the clinical and evidence-based use of music therapy to 
accomplish individualized goals for individuals of all ages and ability levels within a 
therapeutic relationship. The term does not include the screening, diagnosis, or assessment 
of any physical, mental, or communication disorder.  
 
To qualify for a full license in music therapy, an applicant must be at least 18 years old and 
of good moral character. The applicant must:  
 
 
be a board-certified music therapist and provide proof that the applicant has either 
passed the examination for board certification offered by CBMT (or any successor 
organization), or is being transitioned into board certification, as well as proof that 
the applicant is currently a board-certified music therapist; 
 
hold a bachelor’s degree or higher in music therapy, or its equivalent, including 
clinical training, from an educational program that is approved by AMTA (or any 
successor organization) and within an accredited college or university; 
 
be in good standing based on a review of the applicant’s licensure, certification, or 
registration history in other jurisdictions; and 
 
meet any other requirements established by the board.  
 
To apply for a license, an applicant must (1) submit an application to the board; (2) pay the 
application fee set by the board; and (3) submit to a criminal history records check. 
 
The board currently issues limited licenses to audiologists, hearing aid dispensers, 
speech‑language pathologists, and speech-language pathology assistants under similar 
conditions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 7/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 88 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3