START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 24 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 24 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Volunteer Aides - School Chaplain 
 
 
This bill authorizes local boards of education to use a chaplain as a volunteer aide in schools 
to provide support services to students. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. This bill only affects operations of local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can develop policies to allow chaplains to serve as 
volunteer aides with existing resources. Any effect on workers’ compensation or 
comprehensive liability claims is assumed to be minimal. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each local board of education is authorized to use volunteer aides in school 
activities. However, a volunteer aide may not be used to supplant educational personnel 
and must be used to assist regular employees in their assignments. Each county school 
superintendent must establish guidelines for the use of volunteer aides in each school 
system. A volunteer aide is considered an agent of the county board for the limited purposes 
of comprehensive liability insurance coverage and workers’ compensation coverage under 
the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 24/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1395 of 2025 and SB 612 and HB 1234 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
gj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2