START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 27

J1, C2 6lr1106
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1806

By: Delegate Wims
Requested: October 7, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Long COVID Innovation
3 Grant and Loan Program

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Technology Development Corporation to
5 establish a grant and loan program to provide grants and loans for Long COVID
6 innovation; requiring the Corporation to contract with an independent review
7 committee composed of scientific experts in the field of Long COVID; establishing
8 the Maryland Long COVID Research Fund under the administration of the
9 Corporation as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring that the interest earnings of the
10 Fund be credited to the Fund; and generally relating to a Long COVID grant and
11 loan program.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Economic Development
14 Section 10–401(a) and (c)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY adding to
18 Article – Economic Development
19 Section 10–4E–01 through 10–4E–07 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4E. Long
20 COVID Innovation Grant and Loan Program”
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
24 Article – State Finance and Procurement
25 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0027*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 27

1 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
2 Article – State Finance and Procurement
3 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

6 BY adding to
7 Article – State Finance and Procurement
8 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Economic Development

14 10–401.

15 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

17 SUBTITLE 4E. LONG COVID INNOVATION GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAM.

18 10–4E–01.

19 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (B) “COMMITTEE” MEANS THE INDEPENDENT SCIENTIFIC PEER REVIEW
22 COMMITTEE WITH WHICH THE CORPORATION CONTRACTS UNDER § 10–4E–04 OF
23 THIS SUBTITLE.

24 (C) “CORPORATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–401 OF THIS TITLE.

25 (D) “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND LONG COVID RESEARCH FUND.

26 (E) “LONG COVID” HAS THE MEANING:

27 (1) ESTABLISHED BY THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES IN “A
28 LONG COVID DEFINITION: A CHRONIC, SYSTEMIC DISEASE STATE WITH
29 PROFOUND CONSEQUENCES” PUBLISHED IN 2024; OR
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 27 3

1 (2) IF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES SUBSEQUENTLY
2 AMENDS THE DEFINITION, THE MEANING MOST RECENTLY ESTABLISHED AND
3 PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.

4 (F) “LONG COVID INNOVATION” MEANS RESEARCH, PRODUCT
5 DEVELOPMENT, AND MANUFACTURING IN THE STATE RELATED TO TREATMENT OF
6 LONG COVID AND CONDUCTED WITH MONEY FROM THE FUND.

7 (G) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAM ESTABLISHED BY
8 THE CORPORATION UNDER § 10–4E–02 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

9 10–4E–02.

10 THE CORPORATION SHALL ESTABLISH A GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAM TO
11 PROVIDE GRANTS AND LOANS FOR STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID INNOVATION.

12 10–4E–03.

13 (A) THE CORPORATION SHALL:

14 (1) DEVELOP CRITERIA, STANDARDS, AND REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
15 REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR A PROGRAM GRANT OR LOAN;

16 (2) REVIEW, EVALUATE, RANK, AND RATE RESEARCH PROPOSALS FOR
17 STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID INNOVATION GRANTS AND LOANS BASED ON THE
18 PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED BY THE CORPORATION;

19 (3) BASED ON RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE, AWARD AND
20 DISBURSE GRANTS AND LOANS FROM THE FUND;

21 (4) ESTABLISH STANDARDS FOR THE OVERSIGHT AND USE OF GRANTS
22 AND LOANS AWARDED UNDER THE PROGRAM;

23 (5) CONDUCT PROGRESS OVERSIGHT REVIEWS OF GRANT AND LOAN
24 RECIPIENTS AND RESCIND FUNDS IF THE CORPORATION DETERMINES THAT A
25 GRANT RECIPIENT IS FAILING TO MEET THE ESTABLISHED GOALS FOR THE FUNDED
26 PROJECT; AND

27 (6) DEVELOP POLICIES AND PROCEDURES GOVERNING CONFLICTS
28 OF INTEREST BY COMMITTEE MEMBERS, INCLUDING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
29 FOR DISCLOSURE AND RECUSAL.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 27

1 (B) THE CORPORATION MAY CONSULT WITH EXPERTS IN PERFORMING ITS
2 DUTIES.

3 10–4E–04.

4 (A) THE CORPORATION SHALL CONTRACT WITH AN INDEPENDENT REVIEW
5 COMMITTEE COMPOSED OF SCIENTIFIC EXPERTS IN THE FIELD OF LONG COVID
6 INNOVATION.

7 (B) THE COMMITTEE SHALL:

8 (1) REVIEW, EVALUATE, RANK, AND RATE RESEARCH PROPOSALS FOR
9 STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID INNOVATION:

10 (I) BASED ON THE PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES
11 ESTABLISHED BY THE CORPORATION; AND

12 (II) IN A MANNER THAT GIVES DUE CONSIDERATION TO THE
13 SCIENTIFIC, MEDICAL, AND ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH; AND

14 (2) BASED ON THE RANKINGS AND RATINGS AWARDED TO THE
15 RESEARCH PROPOSALS, MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE CORPORATION FOR THE
16 AWARD AND DISBURSEMENT OF GRANTS AND LOANS.

17 (C) A MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE:

18 (1) IS NOT ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A GRANT OR LOAN FOR
19 STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID INNOVATION FROM THE FUND; AND

20 (2) SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
21 GOVERNING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST ESTABLISHED BY THE CORPORATION UNDER
22 § 10–4E–03(A)(6) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

23 10–4E–05.

24 (A) THERE IS A MARYLAND LONG COVID RESEARCH FUND.

25 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROMOTE STATE–FUNDED LIFE
26 SCIENCES RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, COMMERCIALIZATION, AND
27 MANUFACTURING IN THE STATE RELATED TO LONG COVID THROUGH GRANTS AND
28 LOANS TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTITIES IN THE STATE.

29 (C) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 27 5

1 (D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
2 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

3 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
4 AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

5 (E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

6 (1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

7 (2) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

8 (3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
9 THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

10 (F) MONEY IN THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO:

11 (1) AWARD GRANTS AND LOANS FOR STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID
12 INNOVATION; AND

13 (2) PAY THE COSTS NECESSARY TO ADMINISTER THE FUND.

14 (G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY IN THE FUND
15 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

16 (2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
17 THE FUND.

18 (H) (1) EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE
19 ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND.

20 (2) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
21 ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

22 10–4E–06.

23 THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO:

24 (1) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR AWARDING AND MAKING THE
25 DISBURSEMENT OF A GRANT OR LOAN UNDER THE PROGRAM;
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 27

1 (2) ESTABLISH POLICIES ADDRESSING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST FOR
2 MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE; AND

3 (3) CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

4 10–4E–07.

5 (A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE CORPORATION SHALL
6 REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
7 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE PROGRESS OF THE
8 LONG COVID INNOVATION CONDUCTED WITH GRANTS OR LOANS AWARDED UNDER
9 THE PROGRAM.

10 (B) THE REPORT SHALL IDENTIFY:

11 (1) EACH RECIPIENT OF A GRANT OR LOAN AWARDED UNDER THE
12 PROGRAM;

13 (2) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING AWARDED TO EACH RECIPIENT;

14 (3) A DESCRIPTION OF THE TYPE OF STATE–FUNDED LONG COVID
15 INNOVATION CONDUCTED BY THE RECIPIENT;

16 (4) INDICATORS OF THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF GRANTS AND LOANS
17 MADE FROM THE FUND; AND

18 (5) ANY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVING THE OVERALL
19 EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PROGRAM.

20 Article – State Finance and Procurement

21 6–226.

22 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.

23 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
24 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
25 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
26 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
27 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
28 Fund of the State.

29 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
30 apply to the following funds:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 27 7

1 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
2 Fund; [and]

3 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

4 214. THE MARYLAND LONG COVID RESEARCH FUND.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
6 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7