START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 11

D2 6lr1607
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1605

By: Delegate Simmons
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Sheriff – Appointment of Majors

3 FOR the purpose of requiring that the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County appoint a certain
4 number of majors at a salary determined by the County Council of Anne Arundel
5 County; and generally relating to the Office of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
8 Section 2–315(a)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
13 Section 2–315(c)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

19 2–315.

20 (a) This section applies only in Anne Arundel County.

21 (c) (1) The Sheriff shall appoint deputies at a salary as provided by the County
22 Council of Anne Arundel County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0011*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 11

1 (2) The Sheriff may appoint a chief deputy who shall serve at the pleasure
2 of the Sheriff.

3 (3) THE SHERIFF SHALL APPOINT THREE MAJORS AT A SALARY AS
4 PROVIDED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
6 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2