START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 25 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 25 
(Delegate Addison) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Grandparent Visitation 
 
 
This bill alters the circumstances under which an equity court may grant visitation rights 
to a grandparent by authorizing the court to do so if (1) the petition for visitation rights was 
filed after an action for divorce, annulment, custody, or paternity was filed by a parent of 
the child, and (2) the court finds that granting visitation rights to a grandparent is in the 
best interests of the child and would not interfere with the parent-child relationship. The 
bill also requires a court to grant visitation rights to a grandparent in specified 
circumstances and establishes other restrictions on denying visitation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially impact the operations or finances of the 
Judiciary. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially impact the operations or finances of the 
circuit courts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In making a determination as to whether visitation is in the best interests 
of the child, the court must consider the amount of personal contact that occurred between 
the grandparent and the child before the filing of the petition. A court must grant visitation 
rights to a grandparent if (1) the child resided with the grandparent for a period of at least 
12 months or the child’s parent who is the child of the grandparent is deceased, and (2) the 
court finds that granting visitation rights to the grandparent is in the best interests of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 25/ Page 2 
child and would not interfere with the parent-child relationship. In making a determination 
regarding grandparent visitation, the court may not deny visitation rights based on 
allegations that granting visitation rights to the grandparent would interfere with the 
parent‑child relationship unless, after a hearing, the court determines by a preponderance 
of the evidence that interference would occur. 
 
Current Law:  An equity court may consider a petition for reasonable visitation of a 
grandchild by a grandparent and grant visitation rights to the grandparent, if the court finds 
it to be in the best interests of the child. 
 
Standards established in common law require an equity court, in considering a 
grandparent’s petition for visitation, to find either parental unfitness or exceptional 
circumstances indicating that the absence of grandparental visitation would have a 
significantly detrimental effect on a child. A presumption exists, based on the Due Process 
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, that a parent is acting in the 
best interests of the child. In Koshko v. Haining, 398 Md. 404 (2007), the Court of Appeals 
(now the Supreme Court of Maryland) observed that the common law has upheld the 
fundamental right of parents to make decisions regarding the care, custody, and control of 
their children. This standard influences any judicial determination regarding custody or 
visitation. Grandparents do not enjoy a constitutionally recognized liberty interest in 
visitation with their grandchildren. Whatever visitation rights exist are dependent on what 
rights, if any, are granted in statute. 
 
The court further observed that while there is no dispute that a grant or modification of 
visitation involves a lesser degree of intrusion on the fundamental right to parent than the 
assignment of custody, there is intrusion, nonetheless, on the parent’s basic right to direct 
the care, control, and custody of their children. Accordingly, the court ruled, “[t]o preserve 
fundamental liberty interests, we now apply a gloss to the Maryland GVS (sic) requiring a 
threshold showing of either parental unfitness or exceptional circumstances indicating that 
the lack of grandparental visitation has a significant deleterious effect upon the children 
who are the subject of the petition.” Koshko, p. 42. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 721 and SB 1004 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 25/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3