START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 36 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 36 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
 
Annotated Code - Terminology - Clergy and Churches, Faith Institutions, and 
Places of Worship 
 
 
This bill alters terminology throughout the Maryland Annotated Code so that (1) references 
to clergymen are replaced with terms that are religiously and gender neutral and 
(2) references to churches are replaced with terms that are religiously neutral, including 
“faith institutions” and “places of worship.” A “faith institution” is any Christian, Jewish, 
Islamic, Buddhist, or Hindu congregation, or any other religious society, congregation, or 
denomination. The bill also makes conforming changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is technical in nature and has no effect on governmental operations 
or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Maryland Annotated Code refers to clergymen in gendered 
language and religious institutions as churches. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 36/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 24 and HB 2 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 93 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2