START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 28 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 28 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Private Career Schools - Advertising 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Secretary of Higher Education to approve a request from an 
applicant for a private career school to advertise and collect contact information from 
potential new students before the private career school receives a certificate of approval 
(COA) to operate. A private career school granted approval must (1) advertise only 
information relating to the opening of the private career school, including the anticipated 
date of opening, programs of instruction, and the application process and (2) include a 
disclosure that the COA is still pending. These private career schools may not collect any 
fees or enter into an enrollment agreement with potential students. The Secretary must 
adopt regulations providing for the process to approve a private career school to advertise 
prior to receiving a COA, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can likely implement 
the bill with existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not directly affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 28/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Private Career Schools  
 
“Private career school” is defined in statute as a privately owned and privately operated 
institution of postsecondary education other than an institution of higher education that 
furnishes or offers to furnish programs, whether or not requiring a payment of tuition or 
fee, for the purpose of training, retraining, or upgrading individuals for gainful employment 
as skilled or semiskilled workers or technicians in recognized occupations or in new and 
emerging occupations. 
 
To operate in Maryland, a private career school must be approved by MHEC (i.e., have a 
COA); some are also accredited by national associations. Private career school programs 
generally provide training in one of the following areas:  allied health; audio visual 
methods; 
cosmetology; 
barbering; 
bartending; 
computers; 
massage; 
the  
Montessori Method of education; real estate; truck driving; or mechanics. There are also 
programs in cooking, dog grooming, dry cleaning, maritime studies, photography, 
polygraph, travel, and trade schools. 
 
Certificate of Approval 
 
An institution of postsecondary education may not operate, do business, or function 
without a COA from MHEC. MHEC must issue a COA if it determines that (1) the 
institution’s facilities, admission standards, and educational qualifications meet 
appropriate standards for its programs, training, and courses and (2) the proposed programs 
address the State’s educational needs. If an institution fails to meet these requirements, 
MHEC must provide written notice of deficiencies. An institution may request a hearing 
and judicial review, but MHEC’s decision is presumed correct, and the institution bears 
the burden of proof. 
 
Guaranty Funds 
 
Chapters 552 and 553 of 2016 required MHEC to create and provide for two separate 
guaranty funds (one each for private career schools and for-profit institutions of higher 
education), which had previously been optional. In the event of the closure of such a school, 
these guaranty funds must be used to provide a full refund of tuition and fees incurred by 
a student that have not been reimbursed or discharged. However, this requirement does not 
apply to a for-profit institution of higher education that underwent an orderly closure on or 
before October 1, 2016, which included a teach-out plan encompassing specified elements. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 28/ Page 3 
Each for-profit institution (as defined, the term does not include for-profit institutions 
required to register with MHEC) or private career school is required to pay an annual fee 
into the appropriate fund as determined by MHEC.  
 
The guaranty funds must be used to provide a refund, as determined by the  
Secretary of Higher Education, of tuition and fees incurred by a student that have not been 
reimbursed or discharged, if a for-profit institution of higher education or a private career 
school fails to (1) perform faithfully any enrollment agreement or contract with the student 
or (2) comply with any provision of the Education Article. Finally, the guaranty funds must 
be used to provide a refund, as determined by the Secretary of Higher Education, of tuition 
and fees incurred by a student that have not been reimbursed or discharged, for any other 
reason directly related to the original purpose of the funds deemed appropriate by the 
Secretary of Higher Education. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHEC advises that its Private Career School Unit is fully subscribed 
and that a full-time staff specialist is needed to ensure pre-approval advertising does not 
inadvertently lead to fraud against prospective students or administrative backlogs 
associated with the unit’s other duties. The unit currently consists of four staff responsible 
for oversight of approximately 140 schools; another 31 applications from organizations 
seeking to operate as private career schools are under review – an increase from 22 such 
applications in 2025.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that MHEC can likely manage the 
additional workload under the bill with existing resources. Pre-approval limits prospective 
private career schools to advertising about their anticipated opening and collecting contact 
information only. Such schools may not collect fees or enter into enrollment agreements, 
and any advertisement must disclose that the COA to operate is pending. Nevertheless, 
should growth in applications continue, additional assistance may be necessary and can be 
requested through the annual budget process.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Many private career schools are small businesses. The ability to 
build a prospective student list prior to receiving a COA and opening may facilitate a 
successful launch and, thus, have a meaningful fiscal impact on prospective private career 
schools.  
 
Additional Comments:  In 2025, MHEC advised that organizations intending to become 
certified as private career schools may face significant challenges in coming fully into 
regulatory compliance and, thus, ultimately not meet the standards for a COA. These 
challenges include ensuring curricular alignment with licensing board requirements, 
developing a course catalog that meets regulatory standards, creating an enrollment 
agreement that complies with State regulations, and meeting financial requirements, such 
as securing a financial guarantee.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 28/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1138 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
  

END OF PAGE 4