START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 8

R5 6lr0821
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Stewart
Requested: September 11, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Dangerous Driver Abatement Program – Establishment
3 (Dangerous Driver Accountability Act)

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Dangerous Driver Abatement Program; requiring the
5 Motor Vehicle Administration to administer the Program, provide a certain notice to
6 repeat offenders, suspend the renewal of a repeat offender’s vehicle registration
7 under certain circumstances, and develop and post on the Administration’s website
8 a list of certain courses; requiring a repeat offender to successfully complete a certain
9 course within a certain number of days after receiving the notice; and generally
10 relating to the Dangerous Driver Abatement Program.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Labor and Employment
13 Section 3–1701
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Transportation
18 Section 21–202.1(a)(1) and (5), 21–704.1(a)(1) and (3), 21–706.1(a)(1) and (5),
19 21–707.1(b)(1) and (5), 21–809(a)(1) and (9), and 21–810(a)(1) and (7)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY adding to
23 Article – Transportation
24 Section 21–8A–01 through 21–8A–06 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8A.
25 Dangerous Driver Abatement Program”
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0008*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 8

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Labor and Employment

4 3–1701.

5 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (b) “Emergency” means a catastrophic health emergency, as defined under §
7 14–3A–01 of the Public Safety Article, that is the subject of an executive proclamation
8 under § 14–3A–02 of the Public Safety Article and is related to a communicable disease.

9 (c) (1) “Essential employer” means a person that employs an essential worker.

10 (2) “Essential employer” includes a unit of State or local government.

11 (d) “Essential worker” means an individual who:

12 (1) performs a duty or work responsibility during an emergency that
13 cannot be performed remotely or is required to be completed at the work site; and

14 (2) provides services that the essential employer determines to be essential
15 or critical to its operations.

16 Article – Transportation

17 21–202.1.

18 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (5) “Traffic control signal monitoring system” means a device with one or
20 more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic control signal to produce
21 recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal indication.

22 21–704.1.

23 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

24 (3) “Automated railroad grade crossing enforcement system” means a
25 system operated by an agency that records a driver’s response to a traffic control signal or
26 traffic control device located at a railroad grade crossing.

27 21–706.1.

28 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 8 3

1 (5) “School bus monitoring camera” means a camera placed on a school bus
2 that is designed to capture a recorded image of a driver of a motor vehicle committing a
3 violation.

4 21–707.1.

5 (b) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (5) “Stop sign monitoring system” means a device designed to capture a
7 recorded image of a violation.

8 21–809.

9 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

10 (9) “Speed monitoring system” means a device with one or more motor
11 vehicle sensors producing recorded images of motor vehicles traveling at speeds at least 12
12 miles per hour above the posted speed limit.

13 21–810.

14 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

15 (7) “Work zone speed control system” means a device that:

16 (i) Has one or more motor vehicle sensors connected to a camera
17 system capable of producing recorded images of motor vehicles traveling at or above a
18 predetermined speed in or approaching a work zone; and

19 (ii) Is equipped with flashing blue lights.

20 SUBTITLE 8A. DANGEROUS DRIVER ABATEMENT PROGRAM.

21 21–8A–01.

22 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
23 INDICATED.

24 (B) “AUTOMATED RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM”
25 HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–704.1 OF THIS TITLE.

26 (C) “ESSENTIAL WORKER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3–1701 OF THE
27 LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 8

1 (D) “LOW–INCOME REPEAT OFFENDER” MEANS A REPEAT OFFENDER WITH
2 AN ANNUAL HOUSEHOLD INCOME THAT IS AT OR BELOW 200% OF THE FEDERAL
3 POVERTY LEVEL.

4 (E) (1) “OWNER” MEANS:

5 (I) THE REGISTERED OWNER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE;

6 (II) A LESSEE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE UNDER A LEASE OF 6
7 MONTHS OR MORE; OR

8 (III) A PERSON WHO RENTS AND OPERATES A RENTAL MOTOR
9 VEHICLE.

10 (2) “OWNER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

11 (I) A MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL OR LEASING COMPANY; OR

12 (II) A HOLDER OF A SPECIAL REGISTRATION PLATE ISSUED
13 UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 9, PART III OF THIS ARTICLE.

14 (F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE DANGEROUS DRIVER ABATEMENT PROGRAM.

15 (G) “QR CODE” MEANS A MACHINE–READABLE CODE, CONSISTING OF AN
16 ARRAY OF SQUARES, USED FOR STORING AN INTERNET WEBSITE IN ORDER TO
17 ACCESS A WEBPAGE.

18 (H) “REPEAT OFFENDER” MEANS AN OWNER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT,
19 WITHIN A 12–MONTH PERIOD, IS RECORDED BY:

20 (1) A TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM WHILE
21 OPERATING THE MOTOR VEHICLE IN VIOLATION OF § 21–202.1 OF THIS TITLE THREE
22 OR MORE TIMES;

23 (2) AN AUTOMATED RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING ENFORCEMENT
24 SYSTEM WHILE OPERATING THE MOTOR VEHICLE IN VIOLATION OF § 21–704.1 OF
25 THIS TITLE THREE OR MORE TIMES;

26 (3) A SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERA WHILE OPERATING THE
27 MOTOR VEHICLE IN VIOLATION OF § 21–706.1 OF THIS TITLE THREE OR MORE TIMES;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 8 5

1 (4) A STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM WHILE OPERATING THE
2 MOTOR VEHICLE IN VIOLATION OF § 21–707.1 OF THIS TITLE THREE OR MORE TIMES;
3 OR

4 (5) A SPEED MONITORING SYSTEM OR WORK ZONE SPEED CONTROL
5 SYSTEM WHILE BEING OPERATED IN VIOLATION OF SUBTITLE 8 OF THIS TITLE FIVE
6 OR MORE TIMES.

7 (I) “SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERA” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
8 21–706.1 OF THIS TITLE.

9 (J) “SPEED MONITORING SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–809
10 OF THIS TITLE.

11 (K) “STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
12 21–707.1 OF THIS TITLE.

13 (L) “TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING
14 STATED IN § 21–202.1 OF THIS TITLE.

15 (M) “WORK ZONE SPEED CONTROL SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
16 21–810 OF THIS TITLE.

17 21–8A–02.

18 (A) THERE IS A DANGEROUS DRIVER ABATEMENT PROGRAM.

19 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO REDUCE MOTOR
20 VEHICLE–RELATED DEATHS BY REQUIRING REPEAT OFFENDERS TO COMPLETE AN
21 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE OR
22 BE SUBJECT TO SANCTIONS.

23 (C) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

24 21–8A–03.

25 THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE BY MAIL AND, WHEN
26 POSSIBLE, ELECTRONICALLY TO EACH REPEAT OFFENDER OF:

27 (1) THE NUMBER AND TYPE OF EACH VIOLATION RECORDED BY A
28 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM, AN AUTOMATED RAILROAD
29 GRADE CROSSING ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM, A SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERA, A
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 8

1 STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM, A SPEED MONITORING SYSTEM, OR A WORK ZONE
2 SPEED CONTROL SYSTEM FOR WHICH THE REPEAT OFFENDER IS LIABLE;

3 (2) THE LOCATION OF EACH VIOLATION;

4 (3) THE LOCATION OF EACH SYSTEM OR CAMERA THAT RECORDED
5 EACH VIOLATION;

6 (4) THE DATE AND TIME OF THE VIOLATIONS;

7 (5) THE REQUIREMENT TO COMPLETE AN
8 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE IN
9 ACCORDANCE WITH § 21–8A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

10 (6) THE ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY
11 AND SAFETY COURSES AVAILABLE, INCLUDING:

12 (I) A LINK AND QR CODE FOR THE LIST OF
13 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSES
14 POSTED ON THE ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE;

15 (II) THE LANGUAGE IN WHICH EACH COURSE IS PROVIDED;

16 (III) WHETHER A COURSE IS IN–PERSON OR VIRTUAL;

17 (IV) THE COST OF EACH COURSE; AND

18 (V) THE DATES OF EACH COURSE; AND

19 (7) THE CONSEQUENCES OF FAILING TO COMPLY WITH THE
20 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

21 21–8A–04.

22 (A) (1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, EACH REPEAT
23 OFFENDER SHALL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE AN ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED
24 DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING
25 NOTICE UNDER § 21–8A–03 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

26 (2) (I) THE DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE
27 PROVIDER SHALL SUBMIT TO THE ADMINISTRATION PROOF OF A REPEAT
28 OFFENDER’S SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THE COURSE, INCLUDING THE REPEAT
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 8 7

1 OFFENDER’S DRIVER’S LICENSE NUMBER OR OTHER ADMINISTRATION IDENTIFIER,
2 WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THE COURSE.

3 (II) A REPEAT OFFENDER MAY:

4 1. UPLOAD ON THE ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE PROOF
5 OF SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF A DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE;
6 OR

7 2. PROVIDE PROOF OF SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF A
8 DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE IN PERSON AT AN ADMINISTRATION
9 OFFICE.

10 (B) (1) IF A REPEAT OFFENDER FAILS TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF
11 SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL SUSPEND THE
12 RENEWAL OF THE REPEAT OFFENDER’S MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION UNTIL THE
13 REPEAT OFFENDER SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETES AN ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED
14 DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE.

15 (2) IF A REPEAT OFFENDER DOES NOT SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE AN
16 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE
17 WITHIN 180 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE UNDER § 21–8A–03 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
18 THE ADMINISTRATION MAY IMPOUND OR IMMOBILIZE THE REPEAT OFFENDER’S
19 MOTOR VEHICLE UNTIL THE REPEAT OFFENDER SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETES AN
20 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE.

21 (3) A SUSPENSION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
22 SHALL BE LIFTED AUTOMATICALLY ON RECEIPT OF PROOF OF SUCCESSFUL COURSE
23 COMPLETION IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION.

24 (C) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY GRANT A WAIVER FROM THE
25 REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION FOR A PERSON WHO
26 PROVIDES EVIDENCE THAT:

27 (I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
28 MOTOR VEHICLE OR THE REGISTRATION PLATES OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE WERE
29 STOLEN BEFORE A VIOLATION OCCURRED AND WERE NOT UNDER THE CONTROL OR
30 POSSESSION OF THE PERSON AT THE TIME OF A VIOLATION;

31 (II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
32 PERSON WAS NOT OPERATING THE MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF A VIOLATION;
33 OR
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 8

1 (III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
2 PERSON WAS NOT THE OWNER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF A
3 VIOLATION.

4 (2) TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR THE
5 REGISTRATION PLATES WERE STOLEN BEFORE A VIOLATION OCCURRED AND WERE
6 NOT UNDER THE CONTROL OR POSSESSION OF THE PERSON ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN
7 OPERATING THE MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF A VIOLATION, THE PERSON SHALL
8 SUBMIT PROOF THAT A POLICE REPORT REGARDING THE STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE
9 OR REGISTRATION PLATES WAS FILED IN A TIMELY MANNER.

10 (3) TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PERSON ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN
11 DRIVING THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS NOT OPERATING THE MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE
12 TIME OF A VIOLATION, THE PERSON SHALL PROVIDE TO THE ADMINISTRATION A
13 LETTER, SWORN TO OR AFFIRMED BY THE PERSON AND MAILED BY CERTIFIED MAIL,
14 RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED, THAT:

15 (I) STATES THAT THE PERSON WAS NOT OPERATING THE
16 MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION; AND

17 (II) INCLUDES ANY OTHER CORROBORATING EVIDENCE.

18 (4) TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PERSON ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN
19 DRIVING THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS NOT THE OWNER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE AT
20 THE TIME OF A VIOLATION, THE PERSON SHALL PROVIDE TO THE ADMINISTRATION:

21 (I) A COPY OF THE TRANSFERRED TITLE OR BILL OF SALE; AND

22 (II) PROOF THAT THE REGISTRATION PLATES WERE
23 SURRENDERED OR THAT THE SECURITY REQUIRED UNDER TITLE 17, SUBTITLE 1 OF
24 THIS ARTICLE WAS CANCELED.

25 (D) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL DEVELOP AND POST ON THE
26 ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE A LIST OF ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER
27 ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSES.

28 (2) THE LIST OF ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER
29 ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSES SHALL INCLUDE:

30 (I) THE LANGUAGE IN WHICH EACH COURSE IS PROVIDED;

31 (II) WHETHER A COURSE IS IN–PERSON OR VIRTUAL;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 8 9

1 (III) THE COST OF EACH COURSE; AND

2 (IV) THE DATES OF EACH COURSE.

3 (E) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL PROVIDE AN OPTION FOR
4 UPLOADING ON THE ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE PROOF OF SUCCESSFUL
5 COMPLETION OF A DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE.

6 (2) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS SPECIFYING
7 THE FILE FORMAT FOR UPLOADING MATERIALS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
8 SUBSECTION.

9 21–8A–05.

10 (A) A LOW–INCOME REPEAT OFFENDER MAY APPLY FOR:

11 (1) A WAIVER OR REDUCTION IN ANY APPLICABLE DRIVER
12 ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSE FEES;

13 (2) A FLEXIBLE PAYMENT PLAN FOR ANY APPLICABLE FINES; AND

14 (3) ACCESS TO ONLINE OR COMMUNITY–BASED
15 ADMINISTRATION–APPROVED DRIVER ACCOUNTABILITY AND SAFETY COURSES.

16 (B) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ESTABLISH A HARDSHIP APPEAL
17 PROCESS FOR:

18 (1) ESSENTIAL WORKERS; AND

19 (2) INDIVIDUALS FROM HOUSEHOLDS WITH NO VIABLE TRANSIT
20 ALTERNATIVES TO A MOTOR VEHICLE.

21 21–8A–06.

22 ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2028, THE
23 ADMINISTRATION SHALL PUBLISH ON ITS WEBSITE AND REPORT TO THE GENERAL
24 ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE,
25 THE NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAM IN THE IMMEDIATELY
26 PRECEDING YEAR, DISAGGREGATED BY RACE, INCOME, AND GEOGRAPHY.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
28 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9