START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 24

F1 6lr1191
HB 1395/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Metzgar
Requested: October 14, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Education – Volunteer Aides – School Chaplain

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing each county board of education to use a chaplain as a
4 volunteer aide in schools to provide services to students; and generally relating to
5 county boards of education and volunteer aides.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 6–106
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Education

14 6–106.

15 (a) (1) Each county board may use volunteer aides in school activities in its
16 county.

17 (2) A COUNTY BOARD MAY USE A CHAPLAIN AS A VOLUNTEER AIDE IN
18 SCHOOLS TO PROVIDE SUPPORT SERVICES TO STUDENTS.

19 (b) A volunteer aide may not be used to supplant educational personnel but shall
20 be used to assist regular employees in their assignments.

21 (c) Each county superintendent shall establish guidelines for the use of volunteer

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0024*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 24

1 aides in the school system of the superintendent’s county.

2 (d) A volunteer aide is considered an agent of the county board for the limited
3 purposes of:

4 (1) Comprehensive liability insurance coverage under § 4–105 of this
5 article; and

6 (2) Workers’ compensation coverage under the Maryland Workers’
7 Compensation Act.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2