START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 46

C7 6lr1647
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Queen
Requested: November 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Sports Wagering – Gambling Prevention Technology Pilot Program
3 – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Gambling Prevention Technology Pilot Program in the
5 State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission; requiring Bowie State University
6 and Morgan State University to participate in the Pilot Program; requiring the
7 Commission, in collaboration with certain entities, to designate certain no gambling
8 zones on each campus, develop certain informational signage, and identify and
9 implement certain technologies; and generally relating to the Gambling Prevention
10 Technology Pilot Program.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – State Government
13 Section 9–1E–18
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – State Government

19 9–1E–18.

20 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

22 (2) “GEOFENCE” MEANS A VIRTUAL PERIMETER AROUND A PHYSICAL
23 LOCATION.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0046*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 46

1 (3) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE GAMBLING PREVENTION
2 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAM.

3 (B) (1) THERE IS A GAMBLING PREVENTION TECHNOLOGY PILOT
4 PROGRAM IN THE COMMISSION.

5 (2) BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY AND MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY
6 SHALL PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM.

7 (C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO:

8 (1) IDENTIFY STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING OR MITIGATING THE
9 NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF PROBLEM GAMBLING BY STUDENTS ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
10 IN THE STATE;

11 (2) COMPILE AND ANALYZE DATA ON THE VIABILITY OF UTILIZING
12 TECHNOLOGY, INCLUDING GEOFENCING TECHNOLOGY, TO REDUCE PROBLEM
13 GAMBLING; AND

14 (3) GAIN INSIGHTS TO IMPROVE ENFORCEMENT OF EXISTING ONLINE
15 SPORTS WAGERING LAWS IN THE STATE.

16 (D) THE COMMISSION, IN COLLABORATION WITH BOWIE STATE
17 UNIVERSITY, MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, AND THE MARYLAND CENTER OF
18 EXCELLENCE ON PROBLEM GAMBLING, SHALL:

19 (1) IDENTIFY LOCATIONS AND BOUNDARIES ON EACH PARTICIPATING
20 CAMPUS TO BE DESIGNATED AS NO GAMBLING ZONES;

21 (2) DEVELOP INFORMATIONAL SIGNAGE TO BE POSTED AROUND
22 EACH ZONE; AND

23 (3) IDENTIFY AND IMPLEMENT ANY COST–EFFECTIVE TECHNOLOGIES
24 THAT FURTHER THE GOALS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM, INCLUDING REAL–TIME
25 MONITORING OF ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING ACTIVITY.

26 (E) (1) EACH ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR SHALL:

27 (I) ESTABLISH A GEOFENCE ENCOMPASSING THE DESIGNATED
28 NO GAMBLING ZONE THAT PREVENTS ACCESS TO THE OPERATOR’S ONLINE SPORTS
29 WAGERING PLATFORM WITHIN THE BOUNDARY; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 46 3

1 (II) COLLABORATE WITH THE COMMISSION TO ENFORCE AND
2 IMPLEMENT THE RESTRICTION WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE NO GAMBLING
3 ZONES.

4 (2) IF AN INDIVIDUAL ATTEMPTS TO PARTICIPATE IN ONLINE SPORTS
5 WAGERING WHILE WITHIN THE DESIGNATED GEOFENCE, THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL BE:

6 (I) PREVENTED FROM ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING; AND

7 (II) SHOWN A WARNING THAT CONTAINS INFORMATION ON:

8 1. THE PILOT PROGRAM UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

9 2. OPTIONS FOR OBTAINING RESPONSIBLE GAMBLING
10 ASSISTANCE.

11 (F) THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE THE TIME FRAME AND
12 NECESSARY STEPS TO ESTABLISH THE PILOT PROGRAM.

13 (G) THE COMMISSION MAY NOT FINE, PENALIZE, OR OTHERWISE SANCTION
14 AN ONLINE SPORTS WAGERING OPERATOR FOR UNFORESEEABLE TECHNOLOGICAL
15 FAILURES THAT OCCUR WITHIN THE GEOFENCED BOUNDARIES DURING THE PILOT
16 PROGRAM.

17 (H) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2031, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A
18 REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE,
19 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON ITS FINDINGS FROM THE PILOT PROGRAM,
20 INCLUDING INFORMATION ON THE EFFECTIVENESS AND VIABILITY OF
21 IMPLEMENTING GEOFENCING TECHNOLOGY TO LIMIT THE NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF
22 PROBLEM GAMBLING ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES IN THE STATE.

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
24 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of June 30, 2031,
25 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
26 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 3