START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 86

P4, L6, L3 6lr0687
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 13, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State and Local Employees – Cancer Screening – Paid Leave

3 FOR the purpose of providing that State, county, and municipal employees are entitled to
4 a certain amount of cancer screening leave with pay under certain circumstances;
5 and generally relating to cancer screening leave for State, county, and municipal
6 employees.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Local Government
9 Section 1–210
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY adding to
13 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
14 Section 9–1110
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Local Government

20 1–210.

21 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO ALL EMPLOYEES OF A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT
22 OF A COUNTY OR A MUNICIPALITY IN THE STATE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0086*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 86

1 (B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, ON REQUEST, AN
2 EMPLOYEE SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION IS ENTITLED TO CANCER SCREENING LEAVE
3 WITH PAY.

4 (C) AN EMPLOYEE MAY:

5 (1) USE UP TO 4 HOURS OF CANCER SCREENING LEAVE IN ANY
6 12–MONTH PERIOD FOR CANCER SCREENING; AND

7 (2) USE CANCER SCREENING LEAVE ONLY AFTER OBTAINING
8 APPROVAL FROM THE EMPLOYEE’S APPOINTING AUTHORITY.

9 (D) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY SHALL ADOPT
10 PROCEDURES GOVERNING CANCER SCREENING LEAVE, INCLUDING REGULATIONS
11 THAT ESTABLISH CONDITIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING AND
12 APPROVING CANCER SCREENING LEAVE.

13 Article – State Personnel and Pensions

14 9–1110.

15 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO ALL EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING TEMPORARY
16 EMPLOYEES AND PART–TIME EMPLOYEES, OF ALL UNITS IN THE EXECUTIVE,
17 JUDICIAL, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCHES OF STATE GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING ANY
18 UNIT WITH AN INDEPENDENT PERSONNEL SYSTEM.

19 (B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, ON REQUEST, AN
20 EMPLOYEE SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION IS ENTITLED TO CANCER SCREENING LEAVE
21 WITH PAY.

22 (C) AN EMPLOYEE MAY:

23 (1) USE UP TO 4 HOURS OF CANCER SCREENING LEAVE IN ANY
24 12–MONTH PERIOD FOR CANCER SCREENING; AND

25 (2) USE CANCER SCREENING LEAVE ONLY AFTER OBTAINING
26 APPROVAL FROM THE EMPLOYEE’S APPOINTING AUTHORITY.

27 (D) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS GOVERNING CANCER
28 SCREENING LEAVE, INCLUDING REGULATIONS THAT ESTABLISH CONDITIONS AND
29 PROCEDURES FOR REQUESTING AND APPROVING CANCER SCREENING LEAVE.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2