START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 5

C9, Q7, C4 6lr1551
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0998

By: Delegates Fair and Patterson
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters and Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Community Development – Maryland New Markets Development Program –
3 Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland New Markets Development Program;
5 requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to administer
6 the Program; authorizing a credit against the State insurance premium receipts tax
7 and certain State insurance retaliatory taxes, fees, charges, and penalties for certain
8 equity investments in certain community development entities; authorizing the
9 Department to recapture a credit under certain circumstances; and generally
10 relating to the Maryland New Markets Development Program.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Housing and Community Development
13 Section 4–3101 through 4–3111 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 31. Maryland
14 New Markets Development Program”
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY adding to
18 Article – Insurance
19 Section 6–123 and 6–306
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Article – Housing and Community Development

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0005*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 5

1 SUBTITLE 31. MARYLAND NEW MARKETS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.

2 4–3101.

3 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
4 INDICATED.

5 (B) “MARYLAND QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY” MEANS A
6 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY HEADQUARTERED IN THE STATE OR
7 OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY A BUSINESS ENTITY HEADQUARTERED IN THE STATE
8 THAT:

9 (1) FORMED ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2021; AND

10 (2) HAS NOT ENTERED INTO AN ALLOCATION AGREEMENT UNDER THE
11 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM.

12 (C) “PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OPERATIONS” MEANS THE PLACE OR PLACES
13 WHERE:

14 (1) AT LEAST 60% OF A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY
15 BUSINESS’S EMPLOYEES WORK; OR

16 (2) EMPLOYEES WHO ARE PAID AT LEAST 60% OF A QUALIFIED ACTIVE
17 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS’S PAYROLL WORK.

18 (D) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND NEW MARKETS DEVELOPMENT
19 PROGRAM.

20 (E) (1) “QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS”
21 MEANS A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT:

22 (I) HAS ITS PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OPERATIONS IN THE STATE;
23 AND

24 (II) MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A QUALIFIED ACTIVE
25 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS UNDER § 45D OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE
26 CODE.

27 (2) “QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS” DOES
28 NOT INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 5 3

1 (I) A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION EXEMPT FROM TAXATION
2 UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE; OR

3 (II) A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT DERIVES OR PROJECTS TO
4 DERIVE AT LEAST 15% OF ANNUAL REVENUE FROM THE RENTAL OR SALE OF REAL
5 ESTATE, UNLESS THE BUSINESS ENTITY OWNS OR CONTROLS A SUBSIDIARY
6 BUSINESS ENTITY THAT:

7 1. DERIVES OR PROJECTS TO DERIVE LESS THAN 15% OF
8 ANNUAL REVENUE FROM THE RENTAL OR SALE OF REAL ESTATE; AND

9 2. IS THE PRIMARY TENANT OF REAL ESTATE OWNED BY
10 THE PARENT ENTITY.

11 (F) “QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY” MEANS A BUSINESS
12 ENTITY THAT HAS ENTERED INTO AN ALLOCATION AGREEMENT UNDER THE
13 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM THAT INCLUDES THE STATE
14 WITHIN THE SERVICE AREA OF THE AGREEMENT.

15 (G) “QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT” MEANS AN EQUITY INVESTMENT IN
16 A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY THAT:

17 (1) (I) IS ORIGINALLY ISSUED AND ACQUIRED ON OR AFTER JULY
18 1, 2026, IN EXCHANGE FOR CASH; OR

19 (II) IS ORIGINALLY ISSUED AND ACQUIRED BEFORE JULY 1,
20 2026, IN EXCHANGE FOR CASH AND, ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2026, IS TRANSFERRED
21 OR SOLD;

22 (2) THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY USES IN AN
23 AMOUNT EQUAL TO 100% OF THE CASH PURCHASE PRICE TO MAKE QUALIFIED
24 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENTS IN QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME
25 COMMUNITY BUSINESSES;

26 (3) DOES NOT EXCEED DOUBLE THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
27 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY’S EQUITY INVESTMENT AUTHORITY UNDER THE FEDERAL
28 NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM UNLESS THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
29 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY IS A MARYLAND QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
30 ENTITY;

31 (4) IS DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THE
32 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
33 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO AT LEAST 50% OF THE CASH
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 5

1 PURCHASE PRICE UNLESS THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY IS A
2 MARYLAND QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY;

3 (5) IS DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER
4 THIS SUBTITLE BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY; AND

5 (6) IS JOINTLY CERTIFIED AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT
6 UNDER THIS SUBTITLE BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY AND
7 THE DEPARTMENT.

8 (H) “QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT” MEANS A
9 CAPITAL OR EQUITY INVESTMENT IN OR LOAN TO A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME
10 COMMUNITY BUSINESS.

11 4–3102.

12 (A) THERE IS A MARYLAND NEW MARKETS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.

13 (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

14 4–3103.

15 (A) A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT DOES NOT MEET THE REQUIREMENTS TO BE
16 CONSIDERED A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS UNDER
17 THIS SUBTITLE BECAUSE THE BUSINESS ENTITY’S PRINCIPAL BUSINESS
18 OPERATIONS ARE NOT IN THE STATE MAY BE CONSIDERED A QUALIFIED ACTIVE
19 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IF THE BUSINESS
20 ENTITY AGREES TO:

21 (1) RELOCATE OR HIRE EMPLOYEES TO ESTABLISH PRINCIPAL
22 BUSINESS OPERATIONS IN THE STATE;

23 (2) USE THE PROCEEDS OF A QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY
24 INVESTMENT TO HIRE OR RELOCATE THE EMPLOYEES; AND

25 (3) HIRE OR RELOCATE THE EMPLOYEES WITHIN 180 DAYS AFTER
26 RECEIVING THE QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, OR ON A LATER
27 DATE AGREED TO BY THE DEPARTMENT.

28 (B) A BUSINESS ENTITY SHALL BE CONSIDERED A QUALIFIED ACTIVE
29 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IF THE QUALIFIED
30 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY REASONABLY EXPECTS AT THE TIME OF AN
31 APPLICATION UNDER § 4–3105 OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT THE BUSINESS ENTITY WILL
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 5 5

1 MEET THE DEFINITION OF A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY
2 BUSINESS FOR THE ENTIRE DURATION OF THE QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
3 COMMUNITY INVESTMENT.

4 4–3104.

5 (A) A PERSON MAY CLAIM A CREDIT FOR A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT
6 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE AGAINST ANY PREMIUM RECEIPTS TAX OR
7 INSURANCE RETALIATORY TAX, FEE, CHARGE, OR PENALTY IMPOSED BY THE STATE,
8 INCLUDING ANY TAX, FEE, CHARGE, OR PENALTY UNDER:

9 (1) § 3–324 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE;

10 (2) § 4–209 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE;

11 (3) § 4–211 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE;

12 (4) § 4–211.1 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE;

13 (5) § 6–102 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE; AND

14 (6) TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE.

15 (B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A PERSON MAY CLAIM
16 THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION:

17 (1) FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR DURING WHICH THE QUALIFIED EQUITY
18 INVESTMENT IS MADE; AND

19 (2) FOR THE NEXT 6 TAXABLE YEARS.

20 (C) THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION EQUALS:

21 (1) FOR THE FIRST 3 TAXABLE YEARS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
22 SECTION, THE PURCHASE PRICE PAID FOR THE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT
23 MULTIPLIED BY 0%; AND

24 (2) FOR THE FINAL 4 TAXABLE YEARS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
25 THIS SECTION, THE PURCHASE PRICE PAID FOR THE QUALIFIED EQUITY
26 INVESTMENT MULTIPLIED BY 12.5%.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 5

1 (D) THE MARYLAND INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT IMPOSE ANY
2 ADDITIONAL PREMIUM RECEIPTS TAX OR INSURANCE RETALIATORY TAX, FEE,
3 CHARGE, OR PENALTY OR ANY OTHER TAX OR FEE ON A PERSON:

4 (1) IN ORDER FOR THE PERSON TO CLAIM A CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER
5 THIS SECTION; OR

6 (2) AS A RESULT OF CLAIMING A CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS
7 SECTION.

8 (E) THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION:

9 (1) (I) MAY NOT BE SOLD; BUT

10 (II) MAY BE TRANSFERRED TO AN AFFILIATED BUSINESS
11 ENTITY; AND

12 (2) MAY BE ALLOCATED AMONG THE PARTNERS, MEMBERS, OR
13 SHAREHOLDERS OF A BUSINESS ENTITY IN ANY MANNER AGREED TO BY THE
14 PARTNERS, MEMBERS, OR SHAREHOLDERS IN WRITING.

15 (F) IF THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR
16 EXCEEDS THE STATE PREMIUM RECEIPTS TAX OR INSURANCE RETALIATORY TAX,
17 FEE, CHARGE, OR PENALTY OWED OR IS OTHERWISE PROHIBITED FOR THAT
18 TAXABLE YEAR, ANY UNUSED CREDIT MAY BE CARRIED FORWARD AND APPLIED FOR
19 SUCCEEDING TAXABLE YEARS UNTIL THE EARLIER OF:

20 (1) THE DATE ON WHICH THE FULL AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT IS USED;
21 OR

22 (2) THE DATE OF THE EXPIRATION OF THE 5TH YEAR AFTER THE
23 TAXABLE YEAR FOR WHICH THE CREDIT WAS ALLOWED.

24 4–3105.

25 (A) TO DESIGNATE AN EQUITY INVESTMENT AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY
26 INVESTMENT ELIGIBLE FOR A CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND OBTAIN A CREDIT
27 CERTIFICATE, A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY SHALL SUBMIT AN
28 APPLICATION TO THE DEPARTMENT, USING A FORM ESTABLISHED BY THE
29 DEPARTMENT, THAT INCLUDES:

30 (1) THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OF THE
31 APPLICANT;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 5 7

1 (2) THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IF THE APPLICANT IS NOT A
2 MARYLAND QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY:

3 (I) EVIDENCE OF THE APPLICANT’S CERTIFICATION AS A
4 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW
5 MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM;

6 (II) A COPY OF THE APPLICANT’S ALLOCATION AGREEMENT
7 ESTABLISHED UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM;

8 (III) A STATEMENT ATTESTING THAT THE APPLICANT’S
9 ALLOCATION AGREEMENT ESTABLISHED UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX
10 CREDIT PROGRAM IS VALID AND HAS NOT BEEN REVOKED OR CANCELED; AND

11 (IV) THE AMOUNT AND EVIDENCE OF THE APPLICANT’S
12 QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT AUTHORITY UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS
13 TAX CREDIT PROGRAM;

14 (3) A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED AMOUNT, STRUCTURE, AND
15 PURCHASER OF THE EQUITY INVESTMENT;

16 (4) WHETHER THE APPLICANT ELECTS TO RECEIVE ADDITIONAL
17 ALLOCATIONS OF REDISTRIBUTED CREDITS THAT MAY BECOME AVAILABLE IN
18 ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–3106(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

19 (5) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES.

20 (B) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY SHALL PAY THE
21 DEPARTMENT AN APPLICATION FEE OF $5,000 FOR EACH APPLICATION SUBMITTED
22 UNDER THIS SECTION.

23 (C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROCESS APPLICATIONS UNDER THIS
24 SECTION DURING APPLICATION PERIODS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

25 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL OPEN AN INITIAL APPLICATION PERIOD
26 ON SEPTEMBER 1, 2026.

27 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL OPEN ADDITIONAL APPLICATION
28 PERIODS ON SEPTEMBER 1, 2028, AND EACH SEPTEMBER 1 EVERY 2 YEARS
29 THEREAFTER.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 5

1 (4) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND
2 FOLLOWING PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER OF A NOTICE OF FUNDING
3 AVAILABILITY UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM
4 DURING A YEAR IN WHICH AN APPLICATION PERIOD IS SCHEDULED TO OCCUR, THE
5 DEPARTMENT MAY ADVANCE OR DELAY THE START DATE OF AN APPLICATION
6 PERIOD UNDER THIS SUBSECTION BY NOT LONGER THAN 60 DAYS TO ALIGN WITH
7 THE NOTICE OF FUNDING AVAILABILITY.

8 (5) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COMPLETE EACH APPLICATION
9 PERIOD AND JOINTLY CERTIFY EACH QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT ELIGIBLE
10 FOR A CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–3106 OF THIS
11 SUBTITLE IN THE CALENDAR YEAR THE APPLICATION PERIOD IS SCHEDULED TO
12 OCCUR UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

13 (6) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH NOTICE OF AN APPLICATION
14 PERIOD AT LEAST 30 DAYS PRIOR TO THE START OF THE APPLICATION PERIOD.

15 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

16 (I) EVALUATE EACH APPLICATION BASED ON THE AMOUNT OF
17 THE EQUITY INVESTMENT IN THE APPLICATION COMPARED TO THE TOTAL AMOUNT
18 OF EQUITY INVESTMENTS IN ALL APPLICATIONS RECEIVED ON THE SAME DAY; AND

19 (II) APPROVE OR DENY EACH APPLICATION UNDER THIS
20 SECTION EITHER IN FULL OR IN PART WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE
21 APPLICATION.

22 (2) IF THE DEPARTMENT DENIES ANY PART OF AN APPLICATION, THE
23 DEPARTMENT SHALL INFORM THE APPLICANT OF THE GROUNDS FOR THE DENIAL
24 IN WRITING.

25 (3) IF THE APPLICANT PROVIDES ADDITIONAL INFORMATION WITHIN
26 15 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A NOTICE AND EXPLANATION OF A DENIAL, THE
27 DEPARTMENT SHALL RECONSIDER THE APPLICATION.

28 (4) IF THE APPLICANT FAILS TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
29 WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A NOTICE AND EXPLANATION OF A DENIAL, THE
30 DEPARTMENT MAY NOT RECONSIDER THE APPLICATION.

31 (5) IF THE DEPARTMENT APPROVES AN APPLICATION, THE
32 DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE DESIGNATION OF THE
33 QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT TO THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
34 ENTITY.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 5 9

1 (E) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY MAY WITHDRAW AN
2 APPLICATION AT ANY TIME BY NOTIFYING THE DEPARTMENT IN WRITING.

3 4–3106.

4 (A) (1) WHEN A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY OBTAINS
5 APPROVAL OF AN APPLICATION AND A DESIGNATION OF A QUALIFIED EQUITY
6 INVESTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT AND THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
7 ENTITY SHALL JOINTLY CERTIFY ALL OR PART OF EACH QUALIFIED EQUITY
8 INVESTMENT ELIGIBLE FOR A CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING:

9 (I) THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER;

10 (II) THE ELIGIBLE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT; AND

11 (III) THE ELIGIBLE TAXABLE YEARS.

12 (2) ON CERTIFICATION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ISSUE EACH
13 TAXPAYER ELIGIBLE FOR A CREDIT A CREDIT CERTIFICATE FOR EACH TAXABLE
14 YEAR FOR WHICH THE TAXPAYER IS ELIGIBLE.

15 (3) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY MAY TRANSFER
16 A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT’S CERTIFICATION TO AN AFFILIATED BUSINESS
17 ENTITY IF THE AFFILIATED BUSINESS ENTITY MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
18 SUBTITLE.

19 (4) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY HAS AN
20 ONGOING DUTY TO INFORM THE DEPARTMENT OF ANY CHANGE MADE TO A
21 QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT CERTIFIED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

22 (B) (1) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER CERTIFICATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
23 OF THIS SECTION, THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY SHALL:

24 (I) ISSUE THE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT; AND

25 (II) DESIGNATE THE EQUITY INVESTMENT IN AN AMOUNT
26 EQUAL TO AT LEAST 50% OF THE CASH PURCHASE PRICE AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY
27 INVESTMENT UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM, UNLESS
28 THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY IS A MARYLAND QUALIFIED
29 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 5

1 (2) WITHIN 35 DAYS AFTER CERTIFICATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
2 OF THIS SECTION, THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY SHALL
3 PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT WITH EVIDENCE OF:

4 (I) THE RECEIPT OF CASH PAYMENT FOR THE QUALIFIED
5 EQUITY INVESTMENT; AND

6 (II) DESIGNATION OF THE EQUITY INVESTMENT IN AN AMOUNT
7 EQUAL TO AT LEAST 50% OF THE CASH PURCHASE PRICE AS A QUALIFIED EQUITY
8 INVESTMENT UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM UNLESS
9 THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY IS A MARYLAND QUALIFIED
10 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY.

11 (3) IF A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY FAILS TO
12 SATISFY A REQUIREMENT OF THIS SUBSECTION:

13 (I) THE CERTIFICATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
14 SECTION SHALL LAPSE; AND

15 (II) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REDISTRIBUTE THE CREDIT
16 AMONG APPROVED APPLICANTS ON A PRO RATA BASIS.

17 (C) IF THE DEPARTMENT DOES NOT CERTIFY THE MAXIMUM AGGREGATE
18 AVAILABLE CREDIT UNDER § 4–3107 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

19 (1) REDISTRIBUTE THE CREDIT AMONG APPROVED APPLICANTS
20 THAT HAVE ELECTED TO RECEIVE ADDITIONAL ALLOCATIONS ON A PRO RATA BASIS;
21 AND

22 (2) WAIVE THE REQUIREMENT, IF APPLICABLE, THAT A QUALIFIED
23 EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE BE DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFIED
24 EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM.

25 (D) IF, AFTER A RECONSIDERATION OF APPLICATIONS UNDER SUBSECTION
26 (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT DOES NOT CERTIFY THE MAXIMUM
27 AGGREGATE AVAILABLE CREDIT UNDER § 4–3107 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
28 DEPARTMENT SHALL:

29 (1) ACCEPT NEW APPLICATIONS FOR THE SAME CALENDAR YEAR IN
30 ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–3105 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

31 (2) WAIVE:
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 5 11

1 (I) THE REQUIREMENT, IF APPLICABLE, THAT A QUALIFIED
2 EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE NOT EXCEED DOUBLE THE QUALIFIED
3 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY’S EQUITY INVESTMENT AUTHORITY UNDER THE
4 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM; AND

5 (II) THE REQUIREMENT, IF APPLICABLE, THAT A QUALIFIED
6 EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE BE DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFIED
7 EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THE FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM.

8 4–3107.

9 (A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY
10 NOT ISSUE CREDIT CERTIFICATES FOR CREDIT AMOUNTS THAT IN THE AGGREGATE
11 TOTAL MORE THAN $18,750,000 FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR.

12 (B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
13 THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT ISSUE CREDIT CERTIFICATES THAT IN THE AGGREGATE
14 TOTAL MORE THAN $9,375,000 FOR EACH SCHEDULED APPLICATION PERIOD UNDER
15 § 4–3105 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

16 (2) ANY PART OF THE AGGREGATE CREDIT AMOUNTS AVAILABLE FOR
17 ANY SCHEDULED APPLICATION PERIOD THAT IS NOT ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT
18 IN THAT APPLICATION PERIOD MAY BE CARRIED OVER AND ISSUED DURING ANY
19 SUBSEQUENT APPLICATION PERIOD.

20 4–3108.

21 (A) THE COMPLIANCE AND RECAPTURE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION
22 APPLY SEPARATELY WITH RESPECT TO EACH CREDIT CERTIFICATE ISSUED UNDER
23 THIS SUBTITLE.

24 (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL RECAPTURE ALL OR A PORTION OF A CREDIT
25 ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND ANY FUTURE CREDIT SHALL BE FORFEITED IF:

26 (1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, ANY AMOUNT OF
27 A FEDERAL TAX CREDIT ISSUED FOR A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER THE
28 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM IS RECAPTURED;

29 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A QUALIFIED
30 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY REDEEMS OR REPAYS THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT
31 OF THE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT PRIOR TO THE EXPIRATION OF THE CREDIT
32 ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 5

1 (3) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY FAILS TO
2 INVEST 100% OF THE CASH PURCHASE PRICE OF THE QUALIFIED EQUITY
3 INVESTMENT IN QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENTS WITHIN 1
4 YEAR AFTER RECEIPT OF THE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT;

5 (4) A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY VIOLATES
6 SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; OR

7 (5) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, A QUALIFIED
8 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY FAILS TO MAINTAIN A QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
9 COMMUNITY INVESTMENT EQUAL TO 100% OF THE CASH PURCHASE PRICE OF THE
10 QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT.

11 (C) (1) IF THE DEPARTMENT RECAPTURES A CREDIT UNDER
12 SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL RECAPTURE AN
13 AMOUNT PROPORTIONAL TO THE AMOUNT OF THE FEDERAL TAX CREDIT
14 RECAPTURED.

15 (2) IF THE DEPARTMENT RECAPTURES A CREDIT UNDER
16 SUBSECTION (B)(2) OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL RECAPTURE AN
17 AMOUNT PROPORTIONAL TO THE AMOUNT OF THE REDEMPTION OR PAYMENT.

18 (D) (1) THE MAXIMUM AGGREGATE AMOUNT OF QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
19 COMMUNITY INVESTMENTS MADE IN A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME
20 COMMUNITY BUSINESS AND ANY AFFILIATED BUSINESS ENTITY EQUALS
21 $15,000,000, INCLUDING $7,500,000 FOR ANY INDIVIDUAL QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
22 COMMUNITY INVESTMENT.

23 (2) THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
24 SUBSECTION IS EXCLUSIVE OF ANY PORTION OF A QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
25 COMMUNITY INVESTMENT REDEEMED OR REPAID BY A QUALIFIED ACTIVE
26 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS.

27 (E) (1) A QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT SHALL BE
28 CONSIDERED MAINTAINED BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY
29 EVEN IF THE INVESTMENT HAS BEEN TRANSFERRED, SOLD, OR REPAID IF THE
30 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY REINVESTS AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO
31 THE CAPITAL OR EQUITY RETURNED OR RECOVERED FROM THE ORIGINAL
32 INVESTMENT EXCLUSIVE OF ANY PROFIT REALIZED IN ANOTHER QUALIFIED
33 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT IN THE STATE WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER THE
34 RECEIPT OF THE CAPITAL OR EQUITY.
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 5 13

1 (2) A QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT SHALL BE
2 CONSIDERED MAINTAINED BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY
3 IF THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY RECEIVES PERIODIC LOAN
4 REPAYMENTS FROM A QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS AND
5 THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY REINVESTS THE AMOUNT IN A
6 QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT BY THE END OF THE NEXT
7 CALENDAR YEAR.

8 (F) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A
9 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY TO REINVEST CAPITAL OR EQUITY
10 RETURNED FROM A LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT AFTER THE SIXTH
11 TAXABLE YEAR IN WHICH THE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT IS ELIGIBLE FOR A
12 CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

13 (G) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE TO A
14 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY OF ANY PROPOSED RECAPTURE OF
15 A CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

16 (2) THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY SHALL CURE
17 ANY DEFICIENCY IDENTIFIED IN A NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
18 THIS SUBSECTION WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE.

19 (3) IF THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY FAILS TO
20 CURE A DEFICIENCY IDENTIFIED IN A NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
21 THIS SUBSECTION WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE, THE
22 DEPARTMENT SHALL:

23 (I) PROVIDE A FINAL WRITTEN ORDER OF RECAPTURE TO THE
24 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY; AND

25 (II) RECAPTURE THE CREDIT.

26 (4) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REALLOCATE A CREDIT RECAPTURED
27 UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–3106(C) AND (D) OF THIS
28 SUBTITLE.

29 4–3109.

30 ON OR BEFORE MAY 1, 2027, AND EACH MAY 1 THEREAFTER, A QUALIFIED
31 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY, FOR EACH CREDIT CERTIFICATE ISSUED
32 UNDER THIS SUBTITLE FOR A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT THAT HAS NOT BEEN
33 REDEEMED OR REPAID, SHALL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR THE
34 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TAXABLE YEAR INFORMATION ABOUT EACH QUALIFIED
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 5

1 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT MADE BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
2 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY, INCLUDING:

3 (1) THE DATE, AMOUNT, AND EVIDENCE OF THE QUALIFIED
4 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT;

5 (2) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF EACH QUALIFIED ACTIVE
6 LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS FUNDED BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
7 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY;

8 (3) FOR EACH QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY
9 BUSINESS FUNDED BY THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY, THE
10 NUMBER AND AVERAGE ANNUAL SALARY OF EMPLOYEES WHO WERE:

11 (I) EMPLOYED PRIOR TO THE QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME
12 COMMUNITY INVESTMENT;

13 (II) EMPLOYED AT THE END OF THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
14 CALENDAR YEAR; AND

15 (III) NEWLY HIRED AND RETAINED AS A RESULT OF THE
16 QUALIFIED LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY INVESTMENT;

17 (4) A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS AND FINANCING OF EACH
18 QUALIFIED ACTIVE LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY BUSINESS FUNDED BY THE
19 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY;

20 (5) A CERTIFICATION THAT THE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
21 DEVELOPMENT ENTITY HAS UPDATED THE DEPARTMENT REGARDING ANY
22 CHANGES TO A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT CERTIFIED UNDER § 4–3106 OF
23 THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING ANY TRANSFER OF A CERTIFICATION OR A CREDIT
24 CERTIFICATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE; AND

25 (6) A CERTIFICATION THAT NO CREDIT ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
26 MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS FOR RECAPTURE UNDER § 4–3108 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

27 4–3110.

28 (A) THE DEPARTMENT MAY:

29 (1) CONDUCT PERIODIC EXAMINATIONS TO ENFORCE THIS SUBTITLE
30 AND TO VERIFY WHETHER AN EVENT HAS OCCURRED THAT WOULD RESULT IN
31 RECAPTURE OF A CREDIT ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 5 15

1 (2) ISSUE, ON REQUEST, AN ADVISORY LETTER TO A QUALIFIED
2 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY ABOUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE
3 THAT:

4 (I) SHALL BIND THE DEPARTMENT AND THE MARYLAND
5 INSURANCE ADMINISTRATION; AND

6 (II) MAY NOT APPLY TO ANY PERSON OTHER THAN THE
7 QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY THAT REQUESTED THE ADVISORY
8 LETTER.

9 (B) WHEN CONDUCTING ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES AND ADMINISTERING
10 THE PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER GUIDANCE ISSUED UNDER THE
11 FEDERAL NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT PROGRAM.

12 4–3111.

13 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE
14 PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

15 Article – Insurance

16 6–123.

17 A PERSON MAY CLAIM A CREDIT FOR A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT AS
18 PROVIDED UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 31 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
19 DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

20 6–306.

21 A PERSON MAY CLAIM A CREDIT FOR A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT AS
22 PROVIDED UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 31 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
23 DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 15