START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 94 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 94 
(Delegates Valentine and Simmons) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Handgun Permits - Expiration and Renewal Periods for Retired 
Law Enforcement Officer 
 
 
This bill alters the expiration and renewal periods for a handgun permit issued to a retired 
law enforcement officer who retired in good standing from service with a law enforcement 
agency of the State or a county or municipal corporation of the State. Under the bill, the 
handgun permit expires on the last day of the holder’s birth month following five years 
after the date the permit is issued and may be renewed for successive periods of five years 
each if, at the time of an application for renewal, the applicant possesses the qualifications 
for the issuance of a permit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $170,000 in FY 2027 
only for one-time computer programming changes. As retired law enforcement officers of 
the State or a county or municipal corporation of the State are not charged fees for initial 
or renewal applications for a handgun permit, revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
170,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($170,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 94/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a handgun permit expires on the last day of the holder’s  
birth month following two years after the date the permit is issued; however, the Secretary 
of State Police may establish an alternative expiration date for a permit to coincide with 
the expiration of a private detective license, a security guard certification, or a special 
police officer commission. A permit may be renewed for successive periods of three years 
each if, at the time of an application for renewal, the applicant possesses the qualifications 
for the issuance of a permit and pays the renewal fee. 
 
A handgun permit application costs $125; two years after the initial permit and every 
three years thereafter, a $75 renewal fee is due; however, the Secretary may not charge a 
fee to a retired law enforcement officer of the State or a county or municipal corporation 
of the State. The applicant must pay for fingerprint-based federal and State criminal history 
background checks for an initial application. A person who applies for a renewal of a 
handgun permit is not required to be fingerprinted unless the Secretary requires a set of the 
person’s fingerprints to resolve a question of the person’s identity. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Department of State Police advises that the handgun permit 
system for initial applications and renewals is automated and needs to be reprogrammed to 
accommodate the bill’s changes. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $170,000 in fiscal 2027 only for programming changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 171 and SB 180 of 2025; SB 102 and HB 329 of 2024; and SB 825 
and HB 589 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 331 (Senator Folden, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2