START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 75

C7, G1 6lr0965
HB 160/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Cardin
Requested: September 25, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Video Lottery Operations – Prohibitions on Campaign Contributions – Parity
3 Act

4 FOR the purpose of repealing the prohibition on applicants for and holders of video lottery
5 operation licenses and persons who own an interest in video lottery facility
6 operations in the State from directly or indirectly making contributions to certain
7 campaign finance entities; and generally relating to campaign finance contributions
8 by persons with an interest in video lottery operations.

9 BY repealing
10 Article – Election Law
11 Section 13–237
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Election Law

17 [13–237.

18 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (2) “Own” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–01 of the State Government
20 Article.

21 (3) “Video lottery facility” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–01 of the State
22 Government Article.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0075*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 75

1 (4) “Video lottery operation license” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–01
2 of the State Government Article.

3 (b) This section applies to the following persons:

4 (1) an applicant for a video lottery operation license;

5 (2) a holder of a video lottery operation license; or

6 (3) a person who owns an interest in the operation of a video lottery facility
7 in this State.

8 (c) This section does not apply to gaming activity that an eligible organization is
9 authorized to conduct under the Criminal Law Article.

10 (d) A person subject to this section may not, directly or indirectly, make a
11 contribution to:

12 (1) the campaign finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public
13 office in the State; or

14 (2) any other campaign finance entity organized in support of a candidate
15 for any nonfederal public office in the State.]

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 2