START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 89 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 89 
(Delegate Nawrocki) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore County - Inspector General - Authority Over Baltimore County Public 
Schools 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore County Council to enact a local law that grants the 
Baltimore County Inspector General (IG) the same authority over Baltimore County Public 
Schools (BCPS) that the IG has over a department of county government, beginning in 
2027. The bill further specifies that it is the intent of the General Assembly that if the 
Baltimore County Council adopts a local law to grant the Baltimore County IG authority 
over BCPS, that local law must take effect at the beginning of the next following term of 
office of the IG. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County expenditures may increase by a significant amount to the 
extent that the IG is granted jurisdiction over BCPS. Expenditures for BCPS may likewise 
increase to comply with investigations under IG’s expanded scope. Local revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Chapter 329 of 2020, the General Assembly similarly authorized the 
Montgomery County Council to enact a local law that grants the Montgomery County IG 
the same authority over the Montgomery County Board of Education (and public schools 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 89/ Page 2 
located in Montgomery County) that the inspector general has over a department of county 
government. 
 
The Baltimore County IG’s purpose as established in local law is to provide (1) increased 
accountability and oversight in the operations of the county government by identifying 
fraud, waste and abuse in the county government and (2) ways to promote efficiency, 
accountability, and integrity in government. The Baltimore IG’s fiscal 2025 annual report 
notes the office does not currently have jurisdiction over BCPS.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Assuming the Baltimore County Council authorizes the IG to 
oversee the public school system, local expenditures may increase due to the expansion of 
the Baltimore County IG’s jurisdiction and responsibilities. Since the school district 
receives a significant amount of funding (representing about $2.8 billion in operating and 
capital expenditures in fiscal 2026), expanding the Baltimore County IG’s jurisdiction to 
encompass the public school system is likely a significant undertaking that may require 
additional resources and staff, a shift in current activities to focus on the school system, 
resulting in less resources for existing activities, or a combination of increased resources 
and a shift in existing oversight activities. 
 
For fiscal year 2025, the Baltimore County IG had a budget of $874,483 and operated with 
six full-time employees. Assuming the IG maintains some (or all) of its current oversight 
activities, Baltimore County may need to increase funding for the IG for work related to 
the public school system. Due to the sizeable expansion from its current mission, 
Baltimore County anticipates hiring three additional investigators, one management 
analyst, and one administrative assistant to handle the expanded responsibilities associated 
with potential new authority over BCPS. Baltimore County estimates that these additional 
positions will cost over $0.75 million annually. Actual costs to Baltimore County will 
depend on the number of investigations into BCPS the IG chooses to conduct and on and 
the extent to which the IG may instead shift existing staff and resources investigate matters 
relating to BCPS. 
 
Additionally, BCPS may require additional expenditures to comply with investigations 
conducted by the Baltimore County IG under an expanded authority. Exact costs to comply 
with an investigation are unknown and will depend on the level of reporting required by a 
given investigation.  
 
Any increase in expenditures for Baltimore County or BCPS take effect only after 
Baltimore County enacts a local law providing such authority and after the next term of 
office for the Baltimore IG in accordance with the intent language in the bill. The 
Baltimore County IG holds office for a term of four years commencing at the time of their 
appointment and until their successor qualifies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 89/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 15 (Senator Jackson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3