START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 6

F2 6lr1426
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1427

By: Delegate Kerr
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Institutions of Higher Education – Pregnant and Parenting Students –
3 Plan and Reporting

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Higher Education Commission to collect
5 certain data regarding the parental status of students from each public institution
6 of higher education in the State; requiring public institutions of higher education to
7 collect and report certain demographic data from students; requiring all public
8 institutions of higher education to adopt a certain plan for pregnant and parenting
9 students; and generally relating to pregnant and parenting students at public
10 institutions of higher education.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Education
13 Section 11–409
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Education
18 Section 15–140
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Education

24 11–409.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0006*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 6

1 (A) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL COLLECT DATA FROM EACH PUBLIC
2 INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE ON THE PARENTAL STATUS OF
3 STUDENTS ENROLLED IN EACH INSTITUTION.

4 (2) THE COMMISSION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE PUBLIC
5 INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, SHALL DEVELOP QUESTIONS THAT ALLOW
6 EACH STUDENT TO IDENTIFY:

7 (I) WHETHER THE STUDENT IS A PARENT OR A LEGAL
8 GUARDIAN, ACTING AS A PARENT OR A LEGAL GUARDIAN, OR EXERCISING CARE,
9 CUSTODY, OR CONTROL OVER A CHILD OF ANY AGE;

10 (II) THE AGE OF THE CHILDREN FOR WHICH THE STUDENT HAS
11 RESPONSIBILITY; AND

12 (III) THE TYPE OF CAREGIVING RESPONSIBILITIES THE
13 STUDENT PROVIDES, INCLUDING WHETHER THE STUDENT:

14 1. IS A SINGLE PARENT; OR

15 2. SHARES PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES WITH
16 SOMEONE IN THE SAME HOUSEHOLD OR A DIFFERENT HOUSEHOLD.

17 (B) (1) EACH PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION SHALL PLACE
18 THE QUESTIONS DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION ON ONE OR
19 MORE FORMS THAT ARE USED BY THE INSTITUTION TO COLLECT DEMOGRAPHIC
20 DATA FROM STUDENTS.

21 (2) EACH PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION SHALL MAKE
22 THE DATA COLLECTED UNDER THIS SECTION AVAILABLE TO THE COMMISSION IN
23 ACCORDANCE WITH THE FORMAT DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER
24 SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

25 (C) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
26 SECTION, INCLUDING:

27 (1) ESTABLISHING A COMMON FORMAT AND TIME FRAME FOR THE
28 COLLECTION AND REPORTING OF THE DATA REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

29 (2) REQUIRING THE COLLECTION OF PARENTAL STATUS DATA TO BE
30 INCLUDED WITH THE COLLECTION OF OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC DATA.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 6 3

1 (D) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2027, AND EACH SEPTEMBER 1
2 THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE SENATE BUDGET
3 AND TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, ENERGY,
4 AND THE ENVIRONMENT, AND THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, IN
5 ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT
6 SUMMARIZES THE DATA COLLECTED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER THIS SECTION.

7 15–140.

8 (a) [(1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

9 (2) “Pregnant] IN THIS SECTION, “PREGNANT and parenting student”
10 means a student enrolled at a public [senior higher education] institution OF HIGHER
11 EDUCATION who:

12 [(i)] (1) Is pregnant; [or]

13 [(ii)] (2) Exercises care, custody, or control over a child[.

14 (3) (i) “Public senior higher education institution” means:

15 1. The constituent institutions of the University System of
16 Maryland;

17 2. Morgan State University; and

18 3. St. Mary’s College of Maryland.

19 (ii) “Public senior higher education institution” does not include:

20 1. The University of Maryland Center for Environmental
21 Studies;

22 2. The University of Maryland Global Campus; or

23 3. The University of Baltimore] OF ANY AGE; OR

24 (3) SHARES PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES WITH SOMEONE IN
25 THE SAME HOUSEHOLD OR A DIFFERENT HOUSEHOLD.

26 (b) The General Assembly finds that all students at an institution of higher
27 education in the State, regardless of their gender, shall enjoy freedom from discrimination
28 of any kind, including pregnancy discrimination as described in Title IX of the Education
29 Amendments of 1972.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 6

1 (c) (1) Each public [senior higher education] institution OF HIGHER
2 EDUCATION shall adopt a plan regarding pregnant and parenting students that is
3 consistent with Title IX of the federal Higher Education Act.

4 (2) The plan required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall include:

5 (i) Referral to on–campus or off–campus services to assist regarding
6 the availability of or eligibility for government assistance programs, including:

7 1. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
8 for Women, Infants, and Children;

9 2. The Child Care Scholarship Program;

10 3. The Maryland Medical Assistance Program;

11 4. The Maryland Children’s Health Insurance Program; and

12 5. Any other programs, scholarships, or subsidies for
13 pregnant and parenting students;

14 (ii) The provision of information about or referrals to resources
15 regarding adoption services;

16 (iii) The availability of institutional accommodations for pregnant
17 and parenting students; and

18 (iv) A referral network of on–campus and off–campus health care
19 service providers.

20 (d) On or before [August] OCTOBER 1, 2026, each public [senior higher
21 education] institution OF HIGHER EDUCATION shall post the plan adopted under
22 subsection (c) of this section on the institution’s website.

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
24 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4