START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 85

C1, N1 6lr0877
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1288

By: Delegate Charkoudian
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Corporations and Associations – Cooperative Limited Equity Housing
3 Corporations – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing a Maryland nonstock corporation to convert to a
5 cooperative limited equity housing corporation and establishing certain procedures
6 and requirements for the conversion of a Maryland nonstock corporation to a
7 cooperative limited equity housing corporation; establishing the allocation of votes
8 in a cooperative limited equity housing corporation; requiring a cooperative limited
9 equity housing corporation to provide certain notice and an offer to certain
10 households under certain circumstances; requiring a cooperative limited equity
11 housing corporation to reimburse certain households for moving expenses;
12 restricting the appreciation and sale of a cooperative interest in a cooperative limited
13 equity housing corporation; requiring a certain membership composition for a
14 cooperative limited equity housing corporation; authorizing the Department of
15 Housing and Community Development to establish certain rights and requirements
16 for a cooperative limited equity housing corporation and its members and to provide
17 certain grants to promote the establishment of cooperative limited equity housing
18 corporations; prohibiting local governments from imposing restrictions on
19 cooperative limited equity housing corporations or the conversion of a Maryland
20 nonstock corporation to a cooperative limited equity housing corporation; and
21 generally relating to cooperative limited equity housing corporations and the
22 conversion of Maryland nonstock corporations.

23 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
24 Article – Corporations and Associations
25 Section 5–207(a)
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2025 Replacement Volume)

28 BY adding to

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0085*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 85

1 Article – Corporations and Associations
2 Section 5–6D–01 through 5–6D–09 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 6D.
3 Cooperative Limited Equity Housing Corporations”
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2025 Replacement Volume)

6 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
7 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

8 Article – Corporations and Associations

9 5–207.

10 (a) (1) A nonstock corporation may consolidate or merge only with:

11 (I) ANOTHER nonstock corporation; OR

12 (II) A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION
13 UNDER SUBTITLE 6D OF THIS TITLE.

14 (2) A Maryland nonstock corporation may convert only into a foreign
15 corporation that does not have the authority to issue stock.

16 (3) A foreign corporation that does not have the authority to issue stock:

17 (i) May convert into a Maryland nonstock corporation; and

18 (ii) May not convert into [a]:

19 1. A Maryland corporation that has the authority to issue
20 stock; OR

21 2. A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING
22 CORPORATION UNDER SUBTITLE 6D OF THIS TITLE.

23 SUBTITLE 6D. COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATIONS.

24 5–6D–01.

25 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
26 INDICATED.

27 (B) “ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION” MEANS THE CHARTER BY WHICH A
28 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION BECOMES INCORPORATED
29 UNDER THIS ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 85 3

1 (C) “BYLAWS” MEANS THE DOCUMENT THAT DETAILS AND GOVERNS THE
2 INTERNAL ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION OF THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY
3 HOUSING CORPORATION.

4 (D) “CONVERSION” MEANS THE TRANSITION OF A PROPERTY FROM A
5 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITY TO A PROPERTY OWNED BY A COOPERATIVE
6 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION FOR USE BY THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED
7 EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION, THE MEMBERS, AND THE HOUSEHOLDS OF THE
8 MEMBERS.

9 (E) “COOPERATIVE INTEREST” MEANS THE OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN A
10 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION THAT IS COUPLED WITH A
11 POSSESSORY INTEREST IN REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE
12 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION AND EVIDENCED BY A
13 MEMBERSHIP CERTIFICATE.

14 (F) “COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION” MEANS A
15 MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION QUALIFIED IN THE STATE, HAVING ONLY ONE
16 CLASS OF MEMBERSHIP, IN WHICH EACH MEMBER, BY VIRTUE OF THE MEMBER’S
17 MEMBERSHIP, HAS A COOPERATIVE INTEREST IN THE CORPORATION.

18 (G) “COOPERATIVE PROJECT” MEANS ALL THE REAL AND PERSONAL
19 PROPERTY IN THE STATE THAT IS OWNED OR LEASED BY A COOPERATIVE LIMITED
20 EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION FOR THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF RESIDENTIAL USE.

21 (H) “DISABLED PERSON” MEANS A PERSON WITH A MEASURABLE
22 LIMITATION OF MOBILITY DUE TO CONGENITAL DEFECT, DISEASE, OR TRAUMA.

23 (I) “LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLD” MEANS A HOUSEHOLD WITH AN INCOME
24 THAT DOES NOT EXCEED 80% OF THE AREA MEDIAN INCOME FOR A HOUSEHOLD OF
25 THE SAME SIZE.

26 (J) “MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO OWNS A COOPERATIVE
27 INTEREST ON BEHALF OF A HOUSEHOLD.

28 (K) “MEMBERSHIP CERTIFICATE” MEANS:

29 (1) A DOCUMENT ISSUED BY A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY
30 HOUSING CORPORATION EVIDENCING OWNERSHIP OF A COOPERATIVE INTEREST;
31 OR

32 (2) IF THERE IS NO DOCUMENT THAT SATISFIES ITEM (1) OF THIS
33 SUBSECTION, AN OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 85

1 (L) “MODERATE–INCOME HOUSEHOLD” MEANS A HOUSEHOLD WITH AN
2 INCOME GREATER THAN 80% OF THE AREA MEDIAN INCOME FOR A HOUSEHOLD OF
3 THE SAME SIZE BUT THAT DOES NOT EXCEED 120% OF THE AREA MEDIAN INCOME
4 FOR A HOUSEHOLD OF THE SAME SIZE.

5 (M) “MOVING EXPENSES” MEANS COSTS INCURRED TO:

6 (1) HIRE CONTRACTORS, LABOR, TRUCKS, OR EQUIPMENT FOR THE
7 TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY;

8 (2) PACK AND UNPACK PERSONAL PROPERTY;

9 (3) DISCONNECT AND INSTALL PERSONAL PROPERTY;

10 (4) INSURE PERSONAL PROPERTY TO BE MOVED; AND

11 (5) DISCONNECT AND RECONNECT UTILITIES SUCH AS TELEPHONE
12 SERVICE, GAS, WATER, AND ELECTRICITY.

13 (N) (1) “OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT” MEANS AN AGREEMENT WITH THE
14 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION UNDER WHICH A MEMBER
15 AND THE HOUSEHOLD OF A MEMBER HAS AN EXCLUSIVE POSSESSORY INTEREST IN
16 A UNIT AND A POSSESSORY INTEREST IN COMMON WITH OTHER MEMBERS IN THAT
17 PORTION OF A COOPERATIVE PROJECT NOT CONSTITUTING UNITS AND THAT
18 CREATES RESTRICTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS SIMILAR TO A LEGAL RELATIONSHIP OF
19 LANDLORD AND TENANT BETWEEN THE CORPORATION AND THE MEMBER,
20 RESPECTIVELY.

21 (2) “OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT” INCLUDES, IF THERE IS NO OTHER
22 DOCUMENT THAT SATISFIES PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A MEMBERSHIP
23 CERTIFICATE.

24 (O) “RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITY” MEANS PROPERTY CONTAINING AT
25 LEAST FIVE DWELLING UNITS LEASED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES.

26 (P) “SENIOR CITIZEN” MEANS A PERSON WHO IS AT LEAST 62 YEARS OLD.

27 (Q) “UNIT” MEANS A PORTION OF THE COOPERATIVE PROJECT AVAILABLE
28 FOR EXCLUSIVE OCCUPANCY BY A MEMBER AND THE HOUSEHOLD OF A MEMBER
29 UNDER AN OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT.

30 5–6D–02.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 85 5

1 A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION MAY BE ORGANIZED FOR THE
2 PURPOSE OF CONVERTING TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING
3 CORPORATION AFTER ACQUIRING OWNERSHIP OF A RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
4 FACILITY.

5 5–6D–03.

6 (A) ON ACQUIRING A RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITY, A MARYLAND
7 NONSTOCK CORPORATION ORGANIZED FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONVERTING TO A
8 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION SHALL HOLD A VOTE TO
9 CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION NOT LATER
10 THAN 60 DAYS AFTER DELIVERING NOTICE THAT:

11 (1) INFORMS THE MEMBERS OF THE DATE OF THE VOTE; AND

12 (2) PROVIDES THE MEMBERS WITH A COPY OF THE DOCUMENTS TO
13 BE SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT.

14 (B) (1) A VOTE TO CONVERT SHALL:

15 (I) CONSIST OF A QUORUM OF THE MAJORITY OF THE TOTAL
16 MEMBERSHIP; AND

17 (II) REQUIRE AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE BY A MAJORITY OF THE
18 MEMBERS PRESENT.

19 (2) A VOTE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONDUCTED IN
20 ACCORDANCE WITH THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS OF THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK
21 CORPORATION.

22 (C) (1) IF A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK
23 CORPORATION PRESENT FOR THE VOTE ELECT TO CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE
24 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION, THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK
25 CORPORATION SHALL PREPARE AND SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT THE REQUIRED
26 DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–6D–04 OF THIS
27 SUBTITLE.

28 (2) IF A VOTE TO CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY
29 HOUSING CORPORATION UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION FAILS, THE
30 MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION MAY NOT ATTEMPT TO CONVERT TO A
31 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION FOR AT LEAST 12 MONTHS
32 AFTER THE DATE OF THE FAILED VOTE.

33 5–6D–04.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 85

1 (A) FOLLOWING AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE TO CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE
2 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION, A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION
3 SHALL:

4 (1) PREPARE AND SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT THE FOLLOWING
5 DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A COOPERATIVE
6 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION:

7 (I) ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION, INCLUDING:

8 1. THE NAME AND LOCATION OF THE COOPERATIVE
9 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION; AND

10 2. A STATEMENT OF THE PURPOSES OF THE
11 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION; AND

12 (II) ANY OTHER DOCUMENTS OR INFORMATION REQUIRED BY
13 THE DEPARTMENT; AND

14 (2) MAINTAIN:

15 (I) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF EACH MEMBER OF THE
16 MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION;

17 (II) A DISCLOSURE STATEMENT, INCLUDING:

18 1. THE DATE ON WHICH THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE TO
19 CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION TOOK
20 PLACE;

21 2. A STATEMENT OF THE FORM OF OWNERSHIP OF ALL
22 REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY THAT IS INTENDED TO BE OWNED OR LEASED BY
23 THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION;

24 3. A STATEMENT OF THE PROJECTED COMPLETION
25 DATES FOR ANY PROPOSED IMPROVEMENTS;

26 4. A STATEMENT OF THE PROJECTED DATE OF
27 FORMATION FOR THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION;

28 5. A DESCRIPTION OF THE VOTING AND OTHER RIGHTS
29 IN THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 85 7

1 6. A STATEMENT OF ANY FEES REQUIRED BY THE
2 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION IN CONNECTION WITH THE
3 TRANSFER OF MEMBERSHIP OR ISSUANCE OF AN OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT;

4 7. A STATEMENT OF THE KNOWN OR ANTICIPATED
5 COMMON CHARGES THAT MAY BE IMPOSED ON MEMBERS;

6 8. A STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP INTEREST
7 ASSOCIATED WITH EACH UNIT AND THE UNDERLYING DEBT RESPONSIBILITY
8 ASSOCIATED WITH EACH UNIT ON A PRO RATA BASIS, IF APPLICABLE;

9 9. A STATEMENT AS TO WHETHER THE COOPERATIVE
10 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION HAS OR WILL OBTAIN INSURANCE
11 COVERAGE FOR CASUALTY, PROPERTY DAMAGE, AND PUBLIC LIABILITY AND IN
12 WHAT AMOUNTS;

13 10. A STATEMENT OF ALL WARRANTIES AND
14 DISCLAIMERS MADE DURING THE PURCHASE OF THE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
15 FACILITY BY THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION; AND

16 11. COPIES OF THE PROPOSED OR FINAL:

17 A. CONTRACT OF SALE FOR THE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
18 FACILITY THAT IS THE SUBJECT OF THE REAL PROPERTY OF THE COOPERATIVE
19 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION;

20 B. MEMBERSHIP CERTIFICATE;

21 C. OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT;

22 D. RULES, IF ANY;

23 E. LEASE, OTHER THAN THE OCCUPANCY AGREEMENT,
24 TO A THIRD PARTY OF REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY TO WHICH THE COOPERATIVE
25 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION IS A PARTY; AND

26 F. IF APPLICABLE, WRITTEN NOTICE TO AFFECTED
27 HOUSEHOLDS THAT MAY BE REQUIRED UNDER § 5–6D–05 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

28 (III) AN ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET, INCLUDING INSURANCE,
29 MAINTENANCE, RESERVES, AND GENERAL EXPENSES;

30 (IV) BYLAWS; AND
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 85

1 (V) A SUBSCRIPTION AGREEMENT.

2 (B) STATEMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE SUMMARIZED OR
3 PRODUCED IN A COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTS THAT EFFECTIVELY CONVEYS THE
4 REQUIRED INFORMATION.

5 (C) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION
6 PROVIDED BY A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
7 SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

8 (1) ACCEPT THE DOCUMENTS FOR RECORD; OR

9 (2) IF THE DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION DO NOT MEET THE
10 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION AND ANY ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
11 ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT, DENY THE DOCUMENTS FOR RECORD AND
12 NOTIFY THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION OF THE BASIS FOR THE DENIAL.

13 (D) (1) (I) ON ACCEPTANCE OF THE DOCUMENTS FOR RECORD BY THE
14 DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE MARYLAND
15 NONSTOCK CORPORATION SHALL BE CONVERTED TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED
16 EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION.

17 (II) ONCE A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION IS
18 CONVERTED TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION, VOTES
19 SHALL BE ASSIGNED SO THAT EACH UNIT OCCUPIED BY A MEMBER HAS ONE VOTE.

20 (2) ON RECEIPT OF A DENIAL UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS
21 SECTION, THE MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION MAY RESUBMIT THE
22 DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION IN ORDER TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
23 SECTION.

24 5–6D–05.

25 (A) (1) AFTER A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION IS CONVERTED
26 TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION, THE COOPERATIVE
27 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION SHALL:

28 (I) PROMPTLY PROVIDE ALL HOUSEHOLDS IN THE
29 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITY WITH WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE CONVERSION AND
30 THE REQUIREMENTS TO VACATE UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

31 (II) OFFER THE OPPORTUNITY TO ACQUIRE A COOPERATIVE
32 INTEREST AND BECOME A MEMBER OF THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 85 9

1 HOUSING CORPORATION TO EACH HOUSEHOLD THAT HAS LAWFULLY RESIDED IN
2 THE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITY:

3 1. ON THE DATE OF THE CONVERSION; AND

4 2. FOR AT LEAST 180 DAYS PRIOR TO THE DATE OF THE
5 CONVERSION.

6 (2) IF AN ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD FAILS TO ACCEPT THE OFFER UNDER
7 PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION WITHIN 89 DAYS OF RECEIPT, THE OFFER
8 SHALL BE DEEMED TO HAVE BEEN REJECTED.

9 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION, A
10 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION MAY REQUIRE A
11 HOUSEHOLD TO VACATE A UNIT AS FOLLOWS:

12 (1) FOR HOUSEHOLDS THAT ARE NOT ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE AN
13 OFFER TO ACQUIRE A COOPERATIVE INTEREST IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
14 (A)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION, NOT EARLIER THAN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF A
15 WRITTEN NOTICE TO VACATE; OR

16 (2) FOR ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS THAT RECEIVE AND REJECT AN
17 OFFER TO ACQUIRE A COOPERATIVE INTEREST IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
18 (A)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION, NOT EARLIER THAN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE
19 OFFER AND A WRITTEN NOTICE TO VACATE.

20 (C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A
21 HOUSEHOLD MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO VACATE A UNIT EARLIER THAN 12 MONTHS
22 FOLLOWING THE RECEIPT OF A WRITTEN NOTICE TO VACATE IF, ON THE DATE THAT
23 THE NOTICE IS GIVEN:

24 (1) A MEMBER OF THE HOUSEHOLD IS A DISABLED PERSON OR A
25 SENIOR CITIZEN WHO HAS BEEN A MEMBER OF THE HOUSEHOLD FOR AT LEAST 12
26 MONTHS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE TO VACATE; AND

27 (2) THE HOUSEHOLD:

28 (I) IS A LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLD;

29 (II) NOTIFIES THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING
30 CORPORATION OF THE INTENT TO REMAIN IN THE UNIT FOR A PERIOD OF MORE
31 THAN 90 DAYS; AND
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 85

1 (III) SUBMITS THE NOTICE UNDER ITEM (II) OF THIS ITEM TO
2 THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION WITHIN 30 DAYS
3 AFTER RECEIVING THE NOTICE TO VACATE.

4 (D) A HOUSEHOLD MAY BE REQUIRED TO VACATE THE PREMISES BEFORE
5 THE EXPIRATION OF ANY MINIMUM TIME PERIOD UNDER THIS SECTION IF THE
6 HOUSEHOLD:

7 (1) BREACHES A COVENANT IN THE LEASE OCCURRING BEFORE OR
8 AFTER THE NOTICE TO VACATE IS GIVEN; OR

9 (2) FAILS TO PAY RENT BEFORE OR AFTER THE NOTICE TO VACATE
10 HAS BEEN GIVEN.

11 (E) A LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLD THAT IS REQUIRED TO VACATE A UNIT
12 UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL RECEIVE REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE COOPERATIVE
13 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION FOR MOVING EXPENSES THAT:

14 (1) ARE ACTUALLY AND REASONABLY INCURRED; AND

15 (2) ARE AT LEAST $375 BUT LESS THAN $751.

16 5–6D–06.

17 (A) THE APPRECIATION AND RESALE OF A COOPERATIVE INTEREST MAY
18 NOT EXCEED THE COST PAID BY THE MEMBER FOR THE INITIAL COOPERATIVE
19 INTEREST, ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION PLUS THE COST OF IMPROVEMENTS TO THE
20 COOPERATIVE INTEREST MADE BY THE MEMBER THAT WERE APPROVED IN
21 ADVANCE BY THE COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION.

22 (B) A COOPERATIVE INTEREST MAY BE SOLD ONLY TO AN INDIVIDUAL OR
23 INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE IN:

24 (1) A LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLD;

25 (2) A MODERATE–INCOME HOUSEHOLD; OR

26 (3) AN ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD THAT RECEIVES AND ACCEPTS AN
27 OFFER TO ACQUIRE A COOPERATIVE INTEREST IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
28 5–6D–05(A)(1)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

29 (C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
30 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION SHALL HAVE THE
31 FOLLOWING MEMBERSHIP COMPOSITION:
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 85 11

1 (I) AT LEAST 75% OF THE MEMBERS SHALL BE IN A
2 LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLD; AND

3 (II) ALL OTHER MEMBERS WHO ARE NOT IN A LOW–INCOME
4 HOUSEHOLD SHALL BE IN A MEDIUM–INCOME HOUSEHOLD.

5 (2) THE MEMBERSHIP COMPOSITION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH
6 (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT INCLUDE HOUSEHOLDS THAT ACQUIRE A
7 COOPERATIVE INTEREST FOLLOWING AN OFFER UNDER § 5–6D–05(A)(1)(II) OF THIS
8 SUBTITLE.

9 5–6D–07.

10 (A) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MAY:

11 (1) TO THE EXTENT APPLICABLE TO AND NOT INCONSISTENT WITH
12 THIS SUBTITLE, USING A STANDARDIZED METHODOLOGY, ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL
13 RIGHTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING
14 CORPORATION AND ITS MEMBERS BASED ON AN INDIVIDUALIZED ASSESSMENT OF
15 THE COOPERATIVE;

16 (2) BASE A DETERMINATION UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
17 ON THE RIGHTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATIONS
18 AND THEIR MEMBERS UNDER SUBTITLE 6B OF THIS TITLE; AND

19 (3) ESTABLISH A PROGRAM TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO MARYLAND
20 NONSTOCK CORPORATIONS TO PROMOTE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF COOPERATIVE
21 LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATIONS.

22 (B) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
23 SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

24 5–6D–08.

25 (A) A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY MAY NOT IMPOSE RESTRICTIONS ON A
26 COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION OR THE CONVERSION OF A
27 MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY
28 HOUSING CORPORATION.

29 (B) THE PROHIBITION IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION INCLUDES
30 REQUIREMENTS THROUGH LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE THAT RESTRICT THE SALE OF
31 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL FACILITIES TO A MARYLAND NONSTOCK CORPORATION THAT
32 PLANS TO CONVERT TO A COOPERATIVE LIMITED EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATION.
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 85

1 5–6D–09.

2 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
3 SUBTITLE AND ENSURE THE EFFECTIVE FUNCTIONING OF COOPERATIVE LIMITED
4 EQUITY HOUSING CORPORATIONS.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
6 October 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 12