START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 60 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 60 
(Delegate Patterson) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Sickle Cell Disease - Institutions of Higher Education - Policies, Procedures, and 
Educational Campaigns 
 
 
This bill prohibits an institution of higher education from denying access to facilities or 
services to a student based on a sickle cell disease (SCD) diagnosis and requires provision 
of reasonable accommodations. Each institution must establish a process for reporting 
violations and publicize access requirements and reporting procedures. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with specified organizations, must develop 
an education and awareness campaign for institutions regarding students with SCD. MDH, 
in consultation with the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC), the Statewide 
Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease, and SCD community organizations must 
develop a framework and procedures for institutions to follow in assessing, supporting, and 
treating students with SCD. Beginning December 1, 2026, MDH, MHEC, and the 
Statewide Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease must provide technical assistance to 
institutions to implement such procedures and develop a process to monitor compliance. 
MDH, in consultation with specified entities, must also develop or compile SCD 
educational materials for institutional employees. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $139,400 and $157,900 in FY 2027 
and 2028, respectively, for contractual personnel, as discussed below. Institutions of higher 
education can likely meet the requirements of the bill using existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
139,400 
157,900 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($139,400) 
($157,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 60/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can likely meet the requirements of the bill using 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Education and Awareness Campaign 
 
MDH, in consultation with SCD treatment providers and community-based organizations, 
must develop an education and awareness campaign, which must describe challenges faced 
by young adults living with SCD. The campaign must also provide information on the 
accommodations and support that institutions can offer to students. 
 
Framework, Procedures, and Technical Assistance 
 
MDH, MHEC, and the Statewide Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease must jointly 
provide technical assistance to institutions to implement a framework and procedures and 
instruct institutional personnel regarding the procedures developed. 
 
Educational Resources and Institutional Activities 
 
Each institution is encouraged to conduct periodic assessments, surveillance activities, 
awareness campaigns, and educational sessions based on the materials developed or 
compiled under the bill as financial resources allow.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Institution of Higher Education 
 
“Institution of higher education” is defined as an institution of postsecondary education 
that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools and awards degrees at 
either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level. It includes public, private nonprofit, 
and for-profit institutions.  
 
Sickle Cell Disease 
 
SCD is a group of inherited red blood cell disorders in which the cells become hard and 
sticky and look like a C-shaped farm tool called a “sickle.” Approximately 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 60/ Page 3 
4,000 individuals in Maryland have SCD. In Maryland, all newborn babies are screened 
for SCD as part of universal newborn screening. The screening includes sickle cell trait, 
sickle beta thalassemia, and SCD testing and identifies newborns that are “at risk” for 
potential disorders. Information is also provided on whether additional diagnostic testing 
is required.  
 
On determination of the presence of sickle cell anemia, MDH must (1) notify the physician 
of record or the institution where the child is born, and the parents or guardian of the infant; 
(2) provide the parents or guardian of the infant and the physician with educational 
materials; and (3) offer referral for genetic counseling. Within two months after a positive 
finding of sickle cell anemia, a confirmatory test must be administered, and the results must 
be reported to MDH.  
 
On determination of the presence of sickle beta thalassemia, which indicates the presence 
of thalassemia, a laboratory must notify the appropriate health care provider, who often 
refers the newborn to a hematologist. Additional testing can confirm the type of 
thalassemia abnormality present. MDH advises that there is no current requirement for a 
health care provider to notify parents or guardians of a newborn’s thalassemia trait status, 
or to provide the parent with educational materials.  
 
State/Local Expenditures: 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Under the bill, MDH must (1) develop an education and awareness campaign for 
institutions, including information on accommodations and support and (2) in consultation 
with MHEC, the Statewide Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease, and other partners, 
develop a framework and procedures for institutions to follow in assessing, supporting, and 
treating students with SCD; (3) provide technical assistance beginning December 1, 2026; 
and (4) develop a process to monitor implementation.  
 
MDH advises that additional resources are needed to implement the bill. Thus, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $90,565 in fiscal 2027. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring one contractual nurse program administrator to develop educational 
materials, clinical procedures, and a monitoring process. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Positions 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$81,424 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 MDH Expenditures 
$90,565 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 60/ Page 4 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
This analysis assumes that once the education and awareness campaign, educational 
materials, and framework and procedures have been developed and initially implemented 
by institutions (presumably by the start of the 2027-2028 academic year), the position will 
provide ongoing technical assistance and monitor initial implementation for that 
academic year before terminating on June 30, 2028. After that time, it is assumed that 
MDH can absorb ongoing responsibilities under the bill with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
Under the bill, MHEC must provide consultation to MDH to develop a framework and 
procedures for institutions to follow regarding students with SCD and, jointly with MDH 
and the Statewide Steering Committee, (1) provide technical assistance to institutions to 
implement the procedures and instruct personnel about them and (2) develop a process to 
monitor implementation.  
 
MHEC advises that it currently lacks a dedicated Student Affairs department to provide 
statewide support for campuses regarding health-related policy mandates, such as overdose 
medication and reproductive health. Current Academic Affairs staff are at capacity with 
institutional and program review and cannot absorb the additional high-touch coordination 
required to provide technical assistance under this bill. 
 
As a result, MHEC general fund expenditures increase by $48,811 in fiscal 2027. This 
estimate reflects the cost to hire one part-time (50%) contractual program manager to serve 
as the primary liaison with MDH and national SCD organizations, design technical 
assistance toolkits, and maintain the monitoring framework to ensure institutional 
compliance. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$40,712 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total MHEC FY 2027 Expenditures 
$48,811 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. As discussed above, this 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 60/ Page 5 
analysis assumes that the position terminates on June 30, 2028. After that time, it is 
assumed that MHEC can more readily absorb ongoing responsibilities under the bill with 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
Institutions of Higher Education 
 
With technical assistance from the contractual staff at MDH and MHEC, and the clinical 
expertise of the Statewide Steering Committee on Sickle Cell Disease, it is assumed that 
institutions of higher education – including public four-year institutions and local 
community colleges – can implement the bill’s requirements using existing resources.  
 
However, some resources may need to be temporarily diverted from current health 
initiatives. This estimate assumes that accommodations are generally low-cost to 
implement, such as providing extra time on assignments, bathroom access, hydration 
access, and flexible attendance policies. More extensive accommodations, such as 
providing transportation between classes, may increase higher education expenditures but 
have not been considered as part of this estimate.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Independent College and University Association 
advises that private nonprofit institutions can likely develop and implement a policy for 
awareness of SCD using existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1352 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5