START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 82

Q6 6lr1300
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 33

By: Delegate Cardin
Requested: October 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Recordation and Transfer Taxes – Exemption for Related Business Entities –
3 Common Law Trusts

4 FOR the purpose of altering an exemption from the recordation tax and State and county
5 transfer tax for transfers between related business entities to include transfers
6 involving common law trusts; and generally relating to exemptions from the
7 recordation tax and State and county transfer tax.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Tax – Property
10 Section 12–108(p) and 13–405(c)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Tax – Property
15 Section 13–207(a)(9)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Tax – Property

21 12–108.

22 (p) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
23 indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0082*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 82

1 (ii) “Business entity” means a limited liability company, corporation,
2 limited partnership, [or] statutory trust, OR COMMON LAW TRUST.

3 (iii) “Owner” means a member, stockholder, limited partner, or
4 beneficial owner of a business entity OR OTHER PERSON, AS DEFINED IN § 12–101 OF
5 THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

6 (iv) “Ownership interest” means a membership interest, stock,
7 limited partnership interest, or beneficial interest.

8 (2) An instrument of writing is not subject to recordation tax if the
9 instrument of writing is:

10 (i) a transfer of title to real property between a parent business
11 entity and its wholly owned subsidiary business entity or between 2 or more subsidiary
12 business entities wholly owned by the same parent business entity, if the parent business
13 entity is an original owner of the subsidiary business entity, or became an owner through
14 gift or bequest from an original owner of the subsidiary business entity, for:

15 1. no consideration;

16 2. nominal consideration; or

17 3. consideration that comprises only the issuance,
18 cancellation, or surrender of the ownership interests of a subsidiary business entity;

19 (ii) an instrument of writing made pursuant to the reorganization of
20 a business entity as described in § 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code; or

21 (iii) a transfer of title to real property from a subsidiary business
22 entity to its parent business entity for no consideration, nominal consideration or
23 consideration that comprises only the issuance, cancellation, or surrender of a subsidiary’s
24 ownership interest, where the parent business entity:

25 1. previously owned the real property;

26 2. currently owns the ownership interest of the subsidiary
27 and has owned that ownership interest for a period greater than 18 months; or

28 3. acquires the ownership interest of a subsidiary business
29 entity which has been in existence and has owned the real property for a period of 2 years.

30 13–207.

31 (a) An instrument of writing is not subject to transfer tax to the same extent that
32 it is not subject to recordation tax under:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 82 3

1 (9) § 12–108(p) of this article (Transfer of property between related
2 business entities);

3 13–405.

4 (c) A corporate, limited liability company, [or] partnership, OR OTHER transfer
5 as described in § 12–108(p), (q), (v), (w), (y), and (bb) of this article is not subject to the
6 county transfer tax.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
8 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to instruments of writing recorded on or after July 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3