START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 57

F1 6lr0717
HB 72/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF SB 204

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 20, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools – Maryland Civic Excellence Program – Established

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Civic Excellence Program in the State
4 Department of Education; authorizing a local school system to participate in the
5 Program to recognize students who meet criteria related to student proficiency in
6 civics and civic literacy; and generally relating to the Maryland Civic Excellence
7 Program.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Education
10 Section 7–137
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Education

16 7–137.

17 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND CIVIC
18 EXCELLENCE PROGRAM.

19 (B) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND CIVIC EXCELLENCE PROGRAM IN THE
20 DEPARTMENT.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0057*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 57

1 (2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO RECOGNIZE STUDENTS
2 AND PUBLIC SCHOOLS THAT PROMOTE THE CIVIC READINESS AND CIVIC
3 ENGAGEMENT OF STUDENTS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.

4 (C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

5 (D) NOT LATER THAN THE 2027–2028 SCHOOL YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
6 CONSULTATION WITH EXPERTS AND STAKEHOLDERS, SHALL DEVELOP GUIDELINES
7 TO ASSIST PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO DETERMINE STUDENT
8 PROFICIENCY IN CIVICS AND CIVIC LITERACY.

9 (E) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM
10 THAT PARTICIPATES IN THE PROGRAM.

11 (2) A PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL UTILIZE THE
12 GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION TO
13 ESTABLISH:

14 (I) A MARYLAND CIVIC EXCELLENCE PROGRAM IN SCHOOLS;

15 (II) APPLICATION CRITERIA TO ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM;
16 AND

17 (III) CRITERIA FOR AWARDING A STUDENT THE SEAL OF CIVIC
18 EXCELLENCE.

19 (F) A PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM THAT DETERMINES A
20 STUDENT HAS FULFILLED THE CRITERIA UNDER THE PROGRAM MAY:

21 (1) AWARD THE STUDENT A SEAL OF CIVIC EXCELLENCE; AND

22 (2) RECOGNIZE THE AWARD BY AWARDING A CORD OR MEDAL OR BY
23 ATTACHING OTHER INSIGNIA ON THE STUDENT’S HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA.

24 (G) A PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM MAY COLLABORATE WITH
25 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS, CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS, OR INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
26 EDUCATION TO SUPPORT THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.

27 (H) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, AND EACH JULY 1 THEREAFTER, EACH
28 PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A
29 REPORT ON THE PROGRAM BASED ON THE MOST RECENTLY COMPLETED SCHOOL
30 YEAR.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 57 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3