START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 6 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 6 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Public Institutions of Higher Education - Pregnant and Parenting Students - Plan 
and Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to collect data 
from every public institution of higher education on the parental status of enrolled students. 
Each public institution must place questions developed under the bill on one or more 
demographic data collection forms and report the data to MHEC as specified. By 
September 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, MHEC must report the data to specified 
committees of the General Assembly. The bill also expands the definition of a pregnant 
and parenting student and extends existing requirements to adopt a plan for pregnant and 
parenting students (under the Pregnant and Parenting Student Support Act) to encompass 
community colleges as well as all public four-year institutions. The bill extends the existing 
posting deadline, which applies to all affected institutions under the bill, by two months to 
October 1, 2026. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $51,900 in FY 2027 for MHEC 
personnel. Higher education expenditures for public four-year institutions and Baltimore 
City Community College (BCCC) may increase minimally to collect required data; BCCC 
and currently excluded public four-year institutions can likely adopt and post required 
plans using existing resources. To the extent that referrals increase participation in 
government assistance programs, including Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health 
Program (MCHP), federal and general fund expenditures increase, potentially 
significantly, with a corresponding increase in federal fund revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges incur minimal costs to collect and report required 
data to MHEC. Local community colleges can adopt and post policies related to pregnant 
and parenting students that are consistent with Title IX using existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 6/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MHEC, in consultation with the public institutions of higher education, 
must develop questions that allow each student to identify: 
 
 
whether the student is a parent, acting as a parent, or a legal guardian; 
 
the age of the children for which the student has responsibility; and 
 
the type of caregiving responsibilities the student provides, including whether the 
student is a single parent or shares parental responsibilities with someone in the 
same household or a different household. 
 
MHEC must adopt regulations to implement the bill, including (1) establishing a common 
format and timeframe for the collection and reporting of the data and (2) a requirement that 
the collection of parental status data be included with the collection of other demographic 
data. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Pregnant and Parenting Student Support Act 
 
Under Chapters 335 and 336 of 2025, specified public senior (four-year) higher education 
institutions (all but the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Studies, the 
University of Maryland Global Campus, and the University of Baltimore) must adopt a 
plan regarding pregnant and parenting students that is consistent with Title IX of the federal 
Higher Education Act and includes certain elements. The plan must include (1) referral to 
on-campus or off-campus services regarding the availability of or eligibility for 
government assistance programs; (2) provision of information about or referral to adoption 
services; (3) availability of institutional accommodations, as specified; and (4) a referral 
network of health care service providers. By August 1, 2026, each affected institution must 
post the plan on its website. 
 
The General Assembly finds that all students at an institution of higher education in the 
State, regardless of their gender, must enjoy freedom from discrimination of any kind, 
including pregnancy discrimination as described in Title IX of the Education Amendments 
of 1972. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 6/ Page 3 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 
 
Under federal law – specifically, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 – 
discrimination on the basis of sex in educational programs and activities is prohibited for 
all educational institutions receiving federal funding. Every institution that receives federal 
financial assistance is bound by Title IX; however, an educational institution that is 
controlled by a religious organization is exempt from Title IX when the law’s requirements 
would conflict with the organization’s religious tenets. 
 
Federal regulations implementing Title IX prohibit discrimination against a student based 
on pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery from any 
of these conditions and prohibit a school from applying any rule related to a student’s 
parental, family, or marital status that treats students differently based on their sex. 
 
Institutions may not exclude a pregnant student from participating in any part of an 
educational program. Institutions may implement special instructional programs or classes 
for a pregnant student; participation must be completely voluntary on the part of the 
student, and the programs and classes must be comparable to those offered to other 
students. 
 
Medicaid 
 
Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, elderly or 
disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for Medicaid, 
applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Effective January 1, 2014, Medicaid 
coverage was expanded to persons with household incomes up to 138% of federal poverty 
guidelines, as authorized under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
MCHP is Maryland’s name for medical assistance for low-income children. MCHP 
provides all the same services as Medicaid. 
 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
 
At the federal level, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974 
governs the privacy of student data. FERPA generally prohibits the disclosure by schools 
that receive federal education funding of personally identifiable information from a 
student’s education record unless the educational institution has obtained signed and dated 
written consent from a parent or eligible student or one of FERPA’s exceptions applies. 
An education record includes a range of information about a student. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 6/ Page 4 
State/Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
The bill requires a significant expansion of data collection regarding student parental status 
and child care responsibilities. As a result, MHEC general fund expenditures increase by 
$51,857 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 90-day startup delay following the bill’s 
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one permanent half-time 
Staff Specialist II to develop statewide data collection protocols (including data privacy), 
provide technical assistance to 29 institutions, and prepare the mandated annual reports. It 
includes a half-time salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$43,758 
Operating Expenses 
   8,099 
Total FY 2027 MHEC Expenditures 
$51,857 
 
Future year expenditures reflects a half-time salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Public Four-year Institutions 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM) advises that the bill creates a significant 
administrative workload for tracking and securely storing sensitive caregiving data, 
particularly at the University of Maryland, College Park Campus and the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES). UMES also notes that the requirement to track student 
outcomes may divert resources from other institutional priorities and represents an 
unfunded mandate. While it is assumed that most USM institutions can generally 
implement the bill’s requirements using existing resources, those previously excluded 
likely experience both operational and fiscal impacts. However, Morgan State University 
and St. Mary’s College of Maryland can generally collect and submit to MHEC the 
required data using existing resources. 
 
Community Colleges 
 
BCCC and the local community colleges can likely develop and post the required plans 
and collect and submit to MHEC the required data using existing resources. As educational 
institutions subject to Title IX requirements, these institutions must already have a policy 
in place to accommodate students for specified pregnancy-related reasons. However, to the 
extent that additional services are provided, higher education expenditures may increase, 
by an unknown, but likely minimal or moderate, amount. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 6/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; Morgan State University; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5