START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 32

E4 6lr1290
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Simmons
Requested: October 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Local Law Enforcement Vehicles – Requirements – Automated External
3 Defibrillators

4 FOR the purpose of requiring local law enforcement vehicles to carry automated external
5 defibrillators; requiring a local law enforcement agency to maintain the functionality
6 of an automated external defibrillator carried by a local law enforcement vehicle; and
7 generally relating to requirements for local law enforcement vehicles.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Public Safety
10 Section 3–510
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Public Safety

16 3–510.

17 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR” MEANS A
18 MEDICAL HEART MONITOR AND DEFIBRILLATOR DEVICE THAT:

19 (1) IS CLEARED FOR MARKET BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
20 ADMINISTRATION;

21 (2) RECOGNIZES THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF VENTRICULAR
22 FIBRILLATION OR RAPID VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0032*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 32

1 (3) DETERMINES, WITHOUT INTERVENTION BY AN OPERATOR,
2 WHETHER DEFIBRILLATION SHOULD BE PERFORMED;

3 (4) ON DETERMINING THAT DEFIBRILLATION SHOULD BE
4 PERFORMED, AUTOMATICALLY CHARGES; AND

5 (5) (I) REQUIRES OPERATOR INTERVENTION TO DELIVER THE
6 ELECTRICAL IMPULSE; OR

7 (II) AUTOMATICALLY CONTINUES WITH DELIVERY OF THE
8 ELECTRICAL IMPULSE.

9 (B) EACH LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE SHALL CARRY AN
10 AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR.

11 (C) A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY SHALL MAINTAIN THE
12 FUNCTIONALITY OF EACH AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR DESCRIBED IN
13 SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
15 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2