START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 78

Q1 6lr0881
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1624

By: Delegate Stewart
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Property Taxes – Authority of Counties to Establish Subclasses and Set
3 Separate Rates for Land and Improvements to Land

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the
5 governing body of a county to establish subclasses of real property consisting of land
6 and improvements to land and set separate real property tax rates for each subclass;
7 and generally relating to the authority of counties to establish subclasses and set
8 separate tax rates for land and improvements to land.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Tax – Property
11 Section 6–202.1 and 6–302(b)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Tax – Property
16 Section 6–302(e)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Tax – Property

22 6–202.1.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0078*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 78

1 The Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county may
2 establish, by law, a subclass of real property consisting of:

3 (1) vacant lots or improved property cited as vacant and unfit for
4 habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building violation notice;

5 (2) LAND; OR

6 (3) IMPROVEMENTS TO LAND.

7 6–302.

8 (b) (1) Except as provided in [subsection] SUBSECTIONS (c) AND (E) of this
9 section and §§ 6–305 and 6–306 of this subtitle:

10 (i) there shall be a single county property tax rate for all real
11 property subject to county property tax except for operating real property described in §
12 8–109(c) of this article; and

13 (ii) the county tax rate applicable to personal property and the
14 operating real property described in § 8–109(c) of this article shall be no more than 2.5
15 times the rate for real property.

16 (2) Paragraph (1) of this subsection does not affect a special rate prevailing
17 in a taxing district or part of a county.

18 (E) (1) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
19 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY MAY SET SEPARATE REAL PROPERTY TAX RATES
20 FOR EACH OF THE FOLLOWING SUBCLASSES OF REAL PROPERTY:

21 (I) LAND; AND

22 (II) IMPROVEMENTS TO LAND.

23 (2) IF THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
24 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY ESTABLISHES SEPARATE REAL PROPERTY TAX
25 RATES UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

26 (I) THE TAX RATE FOR LAND AND THE TAX RATE FOR
27 IMPROVEMENTS TO LAND ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BE EQUAL; AND

28 (II) EACH OF THE SEPARATE TAX RATES SHALL APPLY
29 UNIFORMLY THROUGHOUT THE TAXING JURISDICTION TO ALL REAL PROPERTY
30 WITHIN THE SUBCLASS TO WHICH THE TAX RATE APPLIES.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 78 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
2 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2027.
END OF PAGE 3