START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 87 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 87 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Energy Efficient Home Improvement Credit 
 
 
This bill establishes a nonrefundable credit against the personal income tax for up to 30% 
of costs paid or incurred during the tax year for energy efficient home improvements, not 
to exceed $3,200. The credit is modeled on the federal energy efficient home improvement 
credit, which was terminated for tax years after 2025 under the federal One Big Beautiful 
Bill Act (OBBBA) of 2025. An individual must provide any documents or information 
required by the Comptroller to receive a credit allowed under the bill. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $60.9 million in FY 2027; 
future years reflect projected growth in authorized tax credits. General fund expenditures 
for the Comptroller’s Office increase by approximately $62,200 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization and ongoing costs.    
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($60.9) 
($64.1) 
($67.5) 
($71.0) 
($74.8) 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
Net Effect 
($60.9) 
($64.2) 
($67.5) 
($71.1) 
($74.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed below.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 87/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Energy efficient home improvement” means a home energy audit, a 
qualified energy efficiency improvement, or a residential energy property expenditure as 
each term is defined in Internal Revenue Code § 25C (energy efficient home improvement 
credit). An individual may claim a credit under the bill if the energy efficient home 
improvement was made to the residence of the taxpayer and originally placed in service by 
the taxpayer. The credit is not allowed for energy efficient home improvements purchased 
with subsidized energy financing (as defined). 
 
Annual limitations on the allowable credit for specified categories of energy efficient home 
improvements mirror those under the expiring federal credit. Specifically, a credit allowed 
under the bill may not exceed: 
 
 
$150 for a home energy audit; 
 
$600 total for exterior windows and exterior skylights;  
 
$500 total for all exterior doors, at a rate of up to $250 per door;  
 
$2,000 for the purchase or installation of a heat pump, heat pump water heater, or 
biomass stove or biomass boiler; or  
 
$600 for any other residential energy property expenditure.  
 
The credit for energy efficient home improvements other than the purchase or installation 
of a heat pump, heat pump water heater, or biomass stove or boiler may not exceed $1,200 
for a given tax year.  
 
An individual may claim an expenditure on an energy efficient home improvement that 
was made to multiple dwelling units; the amount of credit allowed must be computed 
separately with respect to the amount of the expenditure for each dwelling unit. The bill 
further specifies rules for allocating creditable expenditures among joint occupants of a 
dwelling unit, tenant-stockholders of a cooperative housing corporation, or members of a 
condominium management association. If less than 80% of the use of an energy efficient 
home improvement is for nonbusiness purposes, only the portion of the expenditure for the 
improvement allocable for nonbusiness purposes may be considered.  
 
In general, an expenditure for an energy efficient home improvement must be treated as 
being made when the original installation of the improvement is completed. For an energy 
efficient home improvement made in connection with construction or reconstruction of a 
residence, the expenditure is treated as being made when the original use of the residence 
by the taxpayer begins.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 87/ Page 3 
Current Law:  As discussed above, the bill is modeled on the federal nonrefundable 
energy efficient home improvement credit (formerly the nonbusiness energy property 
credit), as modified and enhanced under the federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 for 
tax years after 2022. OBBBA accelerated the termination of the federal credit from 2033 
to 2026; thus, the federal credit is unavailable for property placed in service after  
December 31, 2025. Maryland does not offer a State income tax credit to individuals for 
energy efficient home improvements, specifically. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $60.9 million in 
fiscal 2027 and similar amounts annually thereafter due to an increase in credits claimed 
against the personal income tax. This estimate is based on (1) the amount of federal energy 
efficient home improvement credits claimed by Maryland taxpayers for tax year 2023 as 
reported by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and (2) the estimated federal revenue 
effects of the termination of the federal credit under OBBBA published by the U.S. Joint 
Committee on Taxation. For context, according to statistics published by IRS, Maryland 
taxpayers claimed over $52 million in federal energy efficient home improvement tax 
credits for tax year 2023. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
an estimated $62,218 in fiscal 2027, which reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s 
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time revenue 
examiner to process and validate tax credit claims under the bill. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$53,077 
Other Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$62,218 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  While the primary beneficiaries of the tax benefit established 
under the bill are individuals, small businesses involved in the manufacture, sale, or 
installation of energy efficient residential equipment may benefit to the extent the bill 
results in increased demand for energy efficient home improvements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 87/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Energy Administration; Internal 
Revenue Service; U.S. Joint Committee on Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4