START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 81 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 81 
(Delegate Phillips) 
Judiciary and Environment and 
Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Police Stops - Secondary Enforcement and Excludable Evidence 
 
 
This bill subjects specified vehicle offenses to secondary enforcement only. Additionally, 
the bill requires a police officer to document all reasons for a traffic stop (or other stop) on 
any citation or police report resulting from the stop. The failure of a police officer to 
comply with existing specified statutory requirements at a traffic stop or other stop may 
serve as the basis for exclusion of evidence under the exclusionary rule. The bill applies 
retroactively to proceedings not finally adjudicated by the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective 
date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant decrease in general fund revenues, beginning in 
FY 2027, due to foregone fine revenues. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues 
decrease due to fewer referrals to the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) for 
noncompliance with vehicle registration requirements. General fund expenditures for the 
Judiciary increase by $4,200 in FY 2027 only for one-time computer programming. While 
the bill reduces District Court caseloads beginning in FY 2027, State expenditures are not 
likely affected. The bill may have an operational effect on the Department of State Police 
(DSP), as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 81/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Required Actions at Traffic Stops and Other Stops 
 
Under current law, at the commencement of a traffic stop or other stop, absent exigent 
circumstances, a police officer must (1) display proper identification to the stopped 
individual; (2) provide to the stopped individual the officer’s name, the officer’s 
identification number, and the name of the officer’s law enforcement agency; and 
(3) provide the stopped individual with the reason for the traffic stop or other stop. A police 
officer’s failure to comply with these requirements (1) may be grounds for administrative 
disciplinary action against the officer and (2) may not serve as the basis for the exclusion 
of evidence under the exclusionary rule. 
 
Under the bill, a police officer’s failure to comply with these requirements may serve as 
the basis for the exclusion of evidence under the exclusionary rule. 
 
Citations for Traffic Offenses 
 
Under current law, violations of the Maryland Vehicle Law are subject to primary 
enforcement unless otherwise specified. Accordingly, a police officer may detain a driver 
for a suspected violation of most provisions of the Maryland Vehicle Law without having 
to first suspect a violation of another State law. 
 
Under the bill, the following vehicle offenses under the Transportation Article are subject 
to secondary enforcement only: 
 
 
§ 13-401(d)-(e) (driving or knowingly allowing a vehicle to be driven with an 
unpaid registration fee); 
 
§ 13-411(f) (displaying an expired registration plate issued by any state); 
 
§ 13-701 (driving a vehicle without evidence of registration); 
 
§ 21-1111 (putting glass, injurious substances, or refuse on highways, bridges, or 
public waters); 
 
§ 22-203(b) (failing to have both headlamps on the front of a motor vehicle working, 
if at least one headlamp is working); 
 
§ 22-204(f) (failing to properly illuminate a rear registration plate and render it 
clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear); 
 
§ 22-403(d) (failing to have two operable outside rearview mirrors when the inside 
rearview mirror is obstructed); and 
 
§ 22-406(i) (operating a vehicle with unauthorized window tinting materials). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 81/ Page 3 
The bill does not alter the penalties for these offenses. A person convicted of any of these 
offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $500; none of these 
are incarcerable offenses. Exhibit 1 displays, for the above-listed offenses, the maximum 
prepayment penalties, the number of points MVA may assess against a driver’s license for 
a violation, and the number of fiscal 2025 violations, guilty dispositions, and prepayment 
requests in the District Court. 
 
Under existing law, § 22-203(b) of the Transportation Article states that every 
motor vehicle (other than a motorcycle) must be equipped with at least two headlamps – 
with one on each side of the front of the vehicle – that emit white light and comply with all 
other requirements and limitations set forth in Title 22. The bill, however, specifies that if 
a motor vehicle (other than a motorcycle) has at least one working headlamp on the front 
of the vehicle that emits white light and otherwise complies with Title 22, a police officer 
may only enforce such a violation as a secondary action. If both headlamps on the front of 
a motor vehicle are not working, a police officer is still authorized to conduct primary 
enforcement of such a violation. 
 
Compliance with Vehicle Registration Requirements 
 
Among other things, unless otherwise exempted, § 13-411 of the Transportation Article 
requires two registration plates to be displayed in all vehicles in Maryland, with 
one attached on the front and other on the rear of the vehicle. An owner of a vehicle may 
not drive the vehicle on any highway in the State without validated registration plates. 
Expired registration plates may not be displayed. 
 
Section 13-411 imposes a duty on every police officer to report to MVA any vehicle that 
is operating without validated registration plates. In turn, MVA must verify whether the 
owner of a reported vehicle has complied with requirements of § 13-411. 
 
Under § 13-701 of the Transportation Article, a person is prohibited from driving a vehicle 
on any highway in Maryland unless the person carries a current registration card and the 
vehicle displays current registration plates. Additionally, an owner of a vehicle may not 
knowingly permit the vehicle to be driven on a State highway without the vehicle 
displaying current registration plates and a current registration card being carried. 
 
Under the bill, in addition to limiting a police officer to enforcing § 13-411 and § 13-701 
as secondary actions only, an officer is prohibited from stopping a vehicle for displaying 
an expired registration prior to the first day of the fourth month following the registration’s 
original expiration date. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
SB 55/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maximum and Prepayment Penalties, MVA Points Assessments, and FY 2025 District Court Data for 
Specified Traffic Offenses 
 
Section Violated 
Maximum 
Penalty 
Prepayment 
Penalty 
Points 
Assessed 
FY 2025 
Violations 
FY 2025 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
FY 2025 
Prepayment 
Requests 
§ 13-401(d) 
$500 
$290 
0 
2,374 
931 
468 
§ 13-401(e) 
$500 
$290 
0 
400 
88 
49 
§ 13-411(f) 
$500 
$70 
0 
35,108 
21,675 
17,832 
§ 13-701 
$500 
$60 
0 
184 
87 
69 
§ 21-1111 
$500 
$140 
$180 (if CTA) 
2 
3 (if CTA) 
239 
158 
126 
§ 22-203(b) 
$500 
$70 
0 
452 
195 
129 
§ 22-204(f) 
$500 
$70 
0 
1,150 
474 
312 
§ 22-403(d)* 
$500 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
§ 22-406(i) 
$500 
$70 
0 
5,481 
3,278 
2,693 
 
CTA:  contributes to an accident 
FY:  fiscal year 
MVA:  Motor Vehicle Administration 
 
Note:  § 22-403(d) is not a new offense; however, the Judiciary notes that § 22-403(d) is not currently listed within its traffic database. The Judiciary 
advises that it will be added to the database in accordance with this bill. 
 
Source:  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
 
SB 55/ Page 5 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2027 due to reduced fine collections from traffic violations. TTF revenues decrease 
due to decreased referrals by law enforcement to MVA for noncompliance with vehicle 
registration requirements. However, as discussed below, the exact magnitude of these 
revenue decreases is unknown and can only be determined with actual experience under 
the bill. 
 
General Fund Revenues 
 
As noted above, under the bill, a police officer may not enforce specified offenses as a 
primary action. It is unknown how many fewer traffic stops will occur and, thus, how many 
fewer traffic citations will be issued, as a result of these restrictions. While DSP did not 
provide statistics, the bill may preclude an appreciable number of DSP traffic stops. 
 
According to data provided by the Judiciary (and as shown in Exhibit 1), in fiscal 2025, a 
total of 45,388 citations were issued for violations that the bill would restrict to  
secondary enforcement. During fiscal 2025, there were 26,886 guilty dispositions and  
21,678 prepayment requests associated with these offenses. It is unknown how many of 
the 45,388 citations could continue to be issued because they were issued during traffic 
stops that involved other violations that remain subject to primary enforcement under the 
bill. 
 
Violations of Transportation Article § 13-411(f) (displaying an expired registration plate 
issued by any state) accounted for 77.4% of the citations, 80.6% of the guilty dispositions, 
and 82.3% of the prepayment requests referenced above. In addition to unknown eligibility 
for secondary enforcement, data is not readily available regarding how many of these 
citations involved registrations that were expired for more than four months after the 
original expiration date. 
 
To the extent that fewer citations are issued (resulting in fewer payments of fines and 
prepayment requests), general fund revenues decrease, potentially significantly, due to 
foregone fine revenues. Without actual experience under the bill, the exact magnitude of 
this decrease cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Transportation Trust Fund Revenues 
 
The bill is likely to reduce the number of referrals that MVA receives from law 
enforcement regarding noncompliance with MVA registration requirements discovered 
during traffic stops and may contribute to additional noncompliance. When MVA receives 
law enforcement referrals, it investigates the alleged violations and engages in enforcement 
actions, if necessary, which may include various avenues for revenue recovery  
(e.g., late fees/fines for unpaid or expired registrations). Additionally, some motorists who 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 55/ Page 6 
currently comply with MVA’s vehicle registration requirements may choose to let their 
registrations lapse, knowing that police officers are no longer permitted to pull them over 
solely because they have an expired registration. 
 
While the affected violations can still be enforced as secondary actions, subject to 
additional restrictions on enforcement for registrations that have been expired for less than  
four months, the exact magnitude of any reduction in MVA referrals (and corresponding 
TTF revenues) resulting from the bill and its effect on overall driver compliance with MVA 
registration requirements cannot be reliably determined at this time. 
 
The Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) advises that the bill reduces its ability to 
collect unpaid tolls by creating a disincentive to maintain proper vehicle registration. 
MDTA is authorized by statute to flag vehicle registrations for nonpayment of tolls, which 
results in a registration refusal or suspension depending on the amount owed. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $4,194 in 
fiscal 2027 only for one-time computer programming to reflect the bill’s provisions. 
 
District Court caseloads decrease to the extent that fewer citations for specified offenses 
are issued and go to trial as a result of the bill. Regardless of any reduction in caseloads 
experienced under the bill, it is assumed that District Court personnel are redirected to other 
tasks. Thus, the bill is not expected to affect District Court caseload-related expenditures. 
 
While the bill reduces DSP traffic stops, this estimate assumes that resources corresponding 
to DSP traffic stops that are eliminated under the bill will be redirected to other tasks. Thus, 
the bill is not expected to materially affect DSP expenditures. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  While the bill may alter operations for local law enforcement and 
local efforts to recoup unpaid tickets and unpaid automated traffic enforcement violations, 
any such impact is not expected to materially affect local finances. The fines and 
prepayment penalties paid for the vehicle offenses affected by the bill are State  
general fund revenues. However, local jurisdictions do place administrative flags on 
vehicle registrations for unpaid tickets, such as parking tickets and red light and speed 
camera violations. 
 
The Maryland Municipal League advises that the bill may slightly reduce fine revenue 
from citations, as well as impose modest new training and documentation requirements on 
municipalities. Prince George’s County advises that the bill is not expected to directly 
impact its police department. For a similar bill introduced in the 2025 session, the Maryland 
Association of Counties advised that the legislation was not anticipated to have a 
meaningful impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 55/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 292 and HB 635 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 55 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7