START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 98

Q7 6lr0964
HB 245/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Cardin
Requested: September 25, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Inheritance Tax – Beneficiaries of Limited Means – Installment Payments

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a register of wills to allow an installment payment plan for
4 the inheritance tax to be paid by a certain beneficiary of limited means under certain
5 circumstances and subject to certain limitations; and generally relating to the
6 inheritance tax.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Tax – General
9 Section 7–218.1
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Tax – General

15 7–218.1.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “AGRICULTURAL LAND” MEANS REAL PROPERTY THAT IS OR WAS
19 ASSESSED ON THE BASIS OF FARM OR AGRICULTURAL USE UNDER § 8–209 OF THE
20 TAX – PROPERTY ARTICLE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0098*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 98

1 (3) “BENEFICIARY OF LIMITED MEANS” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL
2 ENTITLED TO PROPERTY OF A DECEDENT IF THE INDIVIDUAL’S FEDERAL ADJUSTED
3 GROSS INCOME DOES NOT EXCEED:

4 (I) $125,000 FOR AN INDIVIDUAL OTHER THAN AN INDIVIDUAL
5 DESCRIBED IN ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH; OR

6 (II) $250,000 FOR SPOUSES FILING A JOINT RETURN OR FOR A
7 SURVIVING SPOUSE OR HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD AS DEFINED IN § 2 OF THE INTERNAL
8 REVENUE CODE.

9 (4) “ELIGIBLE REAL PROPERTY” MEANS REAL PROPERTY THAT:

10 (I) PASSES FROM THE DECEDENT TO A BENEFICIARY OF
11 LIMITED MEANS; AND

12 (II) 1. IS THE PRIMARY RESIDENCE OF THE BENEFICIARY OF
13 LIMITED MEANS; OR

14 2. IS AGRICULTURAL LAND THAT THE BENEFICIARY OF
15 LIMITED MEANS MAINTAINS AS AGRICULTURAL LAND.

16 (5) “FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED
17 IN § 10–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

18 (B) ON APPLICATION OF A BENEFICIARY OF LIMITED MEANS, THE REGISTER
19 WHO DETERMINES THE INHERITANCE TAX UNDER § 7–214 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL
20 ALLOW AN INSTALLMENT PAYMENT PLAN FOR THE INHERITANCE TAX TO BE PAID BY
21 THE BENEFICIARY OF LIMITED MEANS ON ELIGIBLE REAL PROPERTY IF PAYMENT
22 OF THE INHERITANCE TAX ON THE DUE DATE WOULD REQUIRE THE SALE OF THE
23 ELIGIBLE REAL PROPERTY.

24 (C) A BENEFICIARY OF LIMITED MEANS MAY APPLY FOR THE INSTALLMENT
25 PAYMENT PLAN BY FILING WITH THE REGISTER AN APPLICATION ON THE FORM AND
26 IN THE MANNER THAT THE REGISTER REQUIRES.

27 (D) THE REGISTER SHALL SPECIFY THE INSTALLMENT PAYMENT SCHEDULE
28 AND THE AMOUNT OF ANY INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
29 SECTION.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all decedents dying on or after July 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2