START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 79 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 79 
(Delegate Chisholm) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Climate Solutions Affordability Act of 2026 
 
 
This bill alters specified provisions of the Climate Solutions Now Act (CSNA) 
(Chapter 38 of 2022) so that they apply only to the extent economically practicable. 
Affected provisions relate to (1) the development and implementation of building energy 
performance standards (BEPS) and related reporting and benchmarking requirements for 
owners of covered buildings; (2) the implementation of a final plan to achieve statewide 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets; (3) the purchase of zero-emission 
school buses; (4) requirements for utility companies to pay prevailing wages on specified 
projects; (5) the adoption and implementation of the International Green Construction Code 
(IGCC); (6) the procurement of electricity for State facilities using no- or low-carbon 
energy sources; and (7) the purchase of zero-emission vehicles (ZEV) for the State fleet. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all/multiple funds) to implement CSNA may decrease or 
be delayed depending on the determinations of whether implementation is economically 
practicable. However, any such impacts cannot be reliably predicted, as discussed below. 
State revenues are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures to implement CSNA may decrease or be 
delayed depending on the determinations of whether implementation is economically 
practicable. However, any such impacts cannot be reliably predicted, as discussed below. 
Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 79/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Building Energy Performance Standards 
 
Under current law, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must develop 
BEPS for covered buildings that achieve (1) a 20% reduction in net direct GHG emissions 
by January 1, 2030, as compared with 2025 levels for average buildings of similar 
construction and (2) net-zero direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2040. Covered buildings 
are buildings that have a gross floor area of 35,000 feet or more and are commercial or 
multifamily residential buildings or buildings owned by the State, with specified 
exceptions. Under the bill, the standards must achieve these same stated targets to the 
extent economically practicable. 
 
Under current law, to facilitate the development of BEPS, MDE must require owners of 
covered buildings to measure and report direct emissions data to the department each year 
beginning in 2025. Under the bill, MDE must require owners of covered buildings to 
annually report direct emissions data to MDE to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets and Related Plans 
 
Under current law and the bill, by June 30, 2023, MDE was required to submit a proposed 
plan to the Governor and the General Assembly that reduces statewide GHG emissions by 
60% from 2006 levels by 2031. By December 31, 2023, MDE was required to adopt a 
final plan to meet the 2031 goal and that set the State on a path toward achieving 
net‑zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. By December 31, 2030, MDE must adopt a 
final plan that achieves net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045; by December 31, 2035, 
MDE must review and, as necessary, revise that plan. 
 
Under the bill, the final plan to reduce statewide GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels 
by 2031 must be implemented to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Zero-emission Vehicles 
 
School Buses:  Under current law and the bill, beginning in fiscal 2025, a local board of 
education is prohibited from entering into a new contract to purchase any school bus that 
is not a ZEV or to use any school bus that is not a ZEV, unless the school bus has an 
in‑service date of July 1, 2024, or before. However, the prohibition does not apply if 
(1) MDE determines that no available ZEVs meet the performance requirements for the 
local school board’s use, or (2) the local school board is unable to obtain federal, State, or 
private funding that is sufficient to cover the incremental costs associated with contracting 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 79/ Page 3 
for the purchase or use of school buses that are ZEVs. The bill establishes another 
exemption to the prohibition if it is not economically practicable for the local school board 
to meet the ZEV school bus requirements. 
 
Zero-emission Passenger Cars and Other Light-duty Vehicles:  Under current law, it is the 
intent of the General Assembly that 100% of passenger cars in the State vehicle fleet be 
ZEVs by 2031 and that other light-duty vehicles in the State vehicle fleet be ZEVs by 2036. 
Under the bill, these goals still apply, but only to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Current law specifies that (1) in fiscal 2023 through 2025, inclusive, at least 25% of the 
passenger cars purchased for the State vehicle fleet were required to be ZEVs; (2) in 
fiscal 2026 and 2027, at least 50% of the passenger cars purchased for the State vehicle 
fleet must be ZEVs; (3) beginning in fiscal 2028, 100% of the passenger cars purchased 
for the State vehicle fleet must be ZEVs; and (4) beginning in fiscal 2024, any passenger 
car purchased for the State vehicle fleet that is not a ZEV must be a hybrid vehicle. Under 
the bill, these requirements apply to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Further, under current law, the State must ensure that (1) in fiscal 2028 through 2030, 
inclusive, at least 25% of all other light-duty vehicles purchased for the State vehicle fleet 
are ZEVs; (2) in fiscal 2031 and 2032, at least 50% of all other light-duty vehicles 
purchased for the State vehicle fleet are ZEVs; and (3) beginning in fiscal 2033, 100% of 
all other light-duty vehicles purchased for the State vehicle fleet are ZEVs. Under the bill, 
these requirements apply to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Wage and Labor Requirements for Specified Electric Infrastructure Work  
 
Under current law, an investor-owned electric company or gas and electric company must 
require a contractor or subcontractor that is working on specified projects (described 
below) to (1) pay the area prevailing wage for each trade employed, including wages and 
fringe benefits; (2) offer health care and retirement benefits to the employees working on 
the project; (3) participate in an apprenticeship program registered with the State for each 
trade employed on the project; (4) establish and execute a plan for outreach, recruitment, 
and retention of State residents, as specified, to perform work on the project; (5) have been 
in compliance with federal and State wage and hour laws for the previous three years; 
(6) be subject to all State reporting and compliance requirements; and (7) maintain all 
appropriate licenses in good standing. Under the bill, the requirement to pay the prevailing 
wage for each trade employed, including wages and fringe benefits, applies to the extent 
economically practicable. The other requirements remain unchanged. 
 
Under current law and the bill, these wage and labor requirements apply to a project that 
(1) involves the construction, reconstruction, installation, demolition, restoration, or 
alteration of any electric infrastructure of the company (and any related traffic control 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 79/ Page 4 
activities) and (2) is funded by federal funds to meet the State’s policy goals for electric 
system planning, as specified. The wage and labor requirements only apply to the portion 
of a project supported by the federal funds. 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards and the International Green Construction 
Code 
 
Under current law and the bill, the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) is required 
to adopt, as the Maryland Building Performance Standards, the most recent version of the 
International Building Code (IBC), including the International Energy Conservation Code 
(IECC), along with applicable modifications authorized in Title 12 of the Public Safety 
Article. Within 18 months of the release of each new version of IBC, MD Labor is required 
to review the new version, consider modifications, and adopt specified modifications 
related to energy conservation and efficiency. MD Labor is prohibited from adopting any 
modification that is more stringent than IBC, except that an energy conservation 
requirement may be more stringent than IECC. MD Labor was also required to adopt by 
regulation the 2018 IGCC by January 1, 2023, and is required to adopt each subsequent 
version within 18 months after it is issued.  
 
Under the bill, however, a regulation adopted pursuant to these requirements must allow 
for IGCC to be implemented to the extent economically practicable. 
 
Electricity Supply for State Facilities 
 
Under current law, by January 1, 2030, each primary procurement unit must ensure that at 
least 75% of the electricity supply procured by the unit for use in State facilities is derived 
from no- or low-carbon energy sources. Under the bill, each primary procurement unit 
must meet this standard to the extent economically practicable. 
 
State Expenditures:  In general, it is anticipated that the bill may result in reduced 
expenditures for State agencies (all/multiple fund types). However, actual impacts depend 
on determinations of whether the implementation of the requirements under CSNA are 
economically practicable. A more detailed description of the potential impacts related to 
the bill’s provisions are discussed below.  
 
Building Energy Performance Standards, Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction 
Requirements, and Other Energy-related Measures 
 
MDE is the lead agency in charge of developing statewide plans and general 
implementation of the statewide GHG emissions reductions targets and BEPS under 
CSNA. MDE advises that it does not anticipate that the bill affects its implementation of 
CSNA because MDE’s implementation plans are designed to function within economic 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 79/ Page 5 
practicability. Further, MDE anticipates that in the long run, the implementation of BEPS 
and other GHG emissions reduction measures provides economic benefits to the State. 
According to MDE, under its Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, which was published in 
December 2023 to implement CSNA, new policies are estimated to generate up to 
$1.2 billion in public health benefits, $2.5 billion in increased personal income, and a net 
gain of 27,400 jobs by 2031. Therefore, the extent to which the bill’s changes affect the 
implementation of these provisions and related State expenditures is unclear, but the 
resulting effects may be negligible. 
 
MD Labor advises that the requirement that specified regulations adopted by MD Labor 
must allow for IGCC to be implemented to the extent economically practicable renders this 
standard permissible rather than mandatory. However, MD Labor also notes that that the 
adoption of IGCC is in addition to the Maryland Building Performance Standards and there 
is no binding requirement for State agencies to use IGCC under this provision of the 
Public Safety Article. Thus, it is unclear whether the bill’s changes regarding adoption of 
IGCC have any impact. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that 
MD Labor first published regulations in the January 9, 2026 issue of the Maryland Register 
that incorporate by reference the most recent 2024 edition of IGCC.  
 
Any delays in implementing BEPS or IGCC may reduce the cost of future State capital 
projects since they will not have to implement GHG-reducing technologies and design 
features. Although the bill has no effect on total capital spending, which is established 
annually by the Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process, 
funding available for other capital projects is increased to the extent that capital project 
costs are reduced as a result of the bill. 
 
Zero-emission Vehicles for the State Fleet 
 
The bill’s fiscal impacts relating to the purchase of ZEVs for the State fleet are unclear. 
The Department of General Services (DGS), which is responsible for procuring most 
vehicles for the State fleet, notes that since there is no definition of “economically 
practicable,” and the bill is silent as to who makes determinations of economic 
practicability, the actual impacts of these provisions cannot be reliably estimated at this 
time.  
 
DLS anticipates that it is possible that State expenditures (multiple fund types) may 
decrease depending on determinations of economic practicability regarding the 
requirements set under CSNA to convert the State vehicle fleet to ZEVs, but DLS is unable 
to predict any such decrease.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 79/ Page 6 
Procurement of Electricity for State Facilities  
 
DGS is responsible for procuring electricity on behalf of most State agencies and notes that 
the department already takes price into consideration, including for the purchase of no- and 
low‑carbon energy sources. Again, DGS notes that since there is no definition of 
“economically practicable,” and the bill is silent as to who makes determinations of 
economic practicability, the actual impacts of these provisions cannot be reliably estimated 
at this time. 
 
DLS anticipates that it is possible that State expenditures (multiple fund types) may 
decrease depending on determinations of the economic practicability of the requirement 
that at least 75% of the electricity supply procured for use in State facilities be derived 
from no- or low-carbon energy sources by January 1, 2030. However, DLS is unable to 
predict any such decrease.  
 
Prevailing Wage Requirements for Utility Contractors and Subcontractors  
 
Neither MD Labor nor the Public Service Commission has an operational role in enforcing 
prevailing wage requirements for public utilities, so the bill has no direct effect on 
State agencies. To the extent that the bill eliminates the requirement to pay prevailing 
wages on affected utility construction projects, electricity costs for all consumers, including 
the State, may decrease minimally. 
 
Local Expenditures:  In general, it is anticipated that the bill may result in reduced 
expenditures for local governments. However, actual impacts depend on determinations of 
whether the implementation of the requirements under CSNA are economically 
practicable. A more detailed discussion of some of the potential effects on local 
governments is provided below. 
 
Similar to the impact on State agencies, the extent to which the bill results in cost savings 
for local governments as owners of covered buildings is somewhat unclear. According to 
MDE, the current plans to implement BEPS and to meet other GHG emissions reductions 
targets already incorporate economic practicability.  
 
Current law already exempts local boards of education from the requirement to obtain 
ZEV school buses if MDE determines that no ZEV school buses meet the performance 
requirements for the local board’s use or if the local board is unable to obtain federal, State, 
or private funding sufficient to cover the incremental costs associated with contracting for 
the purchase or use of ZEV school buses. Therefore, it is unclear whether the additional 
exemption established by the bill – if it is not economically practicable for a local school 
board to meet the ZEV school bus requirements – has any meaningful impact on local 
government spending.  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 79/ Page 7 
Any local impacts related to the requirement that regulations adopted by MD Labor must 
allow for IGCC to be implemented to the extent economically practicable are unclear. 
Similar to the discussion above, there is no State‑level statutory requirement for local 
governments to adopt IGCC. However, typically, local governments adopt amendments to 
local building codes after statewide adoption. Thus, if the bill does delay or halt the 
adoption of the most recent IGCC at the State level, local governments that still desire to 
adopt the most recent IGCC may potentially need to adopt the code through their own local 
processes.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The requirement to pay prevailing wages on specified utility 
construction projects only to the extent economically practicable may reduce electricity 
costs for small businesses, but any effect is expected to be minimal.  
 
Similar to the impact on State agencies and local governments described above, the extent 
to which the bill results in cost savings for small businesses that own covered buildings is 
somewhat unclear. According to MDE, the current plan regarding the implementation of 
BEPS already incorporates economic practicability. Further, as mentioned above, the 
current plans to implement CSNA are anticipated to result in a net increase in job 
opportunities, including for small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1451 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; State Treasurer’s Office; University System of Maryland;  
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Interagency Commission on School Construction; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Board of Public Works; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service 
Commission; Maryland Stadium Authority; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore 
County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7