START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 92

M3 6lr0676
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Schindler, Behler, Guyton, Kaufman, Mireku–North, and Ziegler
Requested: August 11, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Environment – Beverage Containers Connected With Plastic Rings – Restriction
3 on Sale

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from selling, offering for sale, or distributing for
5 sale beverage containers that are connected to other beverage containers with a
6 plastic ring connector unless the plastic ring connector is made of a biodegradable
7 material; and generally relating to beverage containers and plastic ring connectors.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Environment
10 New part designation “Part I. Labeling of Biodegradable and Compostable Plastic
11 Products” to immediately precede Section 9–2101; Section 9–2108 through
12 9–2110 to be under the new part “Part II. Plastic Ring Connectors”
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Environment
17 Section 9–2101(a) and 9–2105
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the new part designation “Part I. Labeling of Biodegradable and Compostable Plastic
22 Products” be added to immediately precede Section 9–2101 of Article – Environment of the
23 Annotated Code of Maryland.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
25 as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0092*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 92

1 Article – Environment

2 9–2101.

3 (a) In this [subtitle] PART the following words have the meanings indicated.

4 9–2105.

5 (a) A person that violates this [subtitle] PART is subject to:

6 (1) For a first violation, a civil penalty of $500;

7 (2) For a second violation, a civil penalty of $1,000; and

8 (3) For a third and subsequent violation, a civil penalty of $2,000.

9 (b) Any penalties collected under this section shall be paid to the county,
10 municipality, or other local government that brought the enforcement action.

11 9–2106. RESERVED.

12 9–2107. RESERVED.

13 PART II. PLASTIC RING CONNECTORS.

14 9–2108.

15 IN THIS PART, “BIODEGRADABLE MATERIAL” MEANS A MATERIAL THAT IS
16 ABLE TO BE BROKEN DOWN INTO NATURAL, HARMLESS SUBSTANCES BY LIVING
17 MICROORGANISMS.

18 9–2109.

19 (A) A PERSON MAY NOT SELL, OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE FOR SALE,
20 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT ARE CONNECTED TO OTHER BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
21 WITH A PLASTIC RING CONNECTOR UNLESS THE PLASTIC RING CONNECTOR IS MADE
22 OF BIODEGRADABLE MATERIAL.

23 (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ADMINISTER AND
24 ENFORCE THIS SECTION.

25 9–2110.

26 (A) THE PROVISIONS OF §§ 9–334 THROUGH 9–344 OF THIS TITLE APPLY TO
27 ENFORCE VIOLATIONS OF:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 92 3

1 (1) THIS PART;

2 (2) ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS PART; OR

3 (3) ANY ORDER ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

4 (B) ANY PENALTY COLLECTED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SECTION
5 SHALL BE PAID INTO THE MARYLAND CLEAN WATER FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER §
6 9–320 OF THIS TITLE.

7 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3