START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 4

R4 6lr1236
SB 782/15 – JPR (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1235

By: Delegates Miller and M. Morgan
Requested: October 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Historic Motor Vehicles – Minimum Age

3 FOR the purpose of requiring that a motor vehicle be at least a certain number of years old
4 in order to be eligible for registration as a historic motor vehicle; requiring the Motor
5 Vehicle Administration to reinstate certain historic motor vehicle registrations; and
6 generally relating to historic motor vehicles.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 13–936
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 13–936.

16 (a) In this section, “historic motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle, including a
17 passenger vehicle, motorcycle, or truck that:

18 (1) Is [a model year of 1999 or earlier] AT LEAST 25 YEARS OLD;

19 (2) Has not been substantially altered from the manufacturer’s original
20 design; and

21 (3) Meets criteria contained in regulations adopted by the Administration.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0004*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 4

1 (b) In this section, “historic motor vehicle” does not include a vehicle that has been
2 remanufactured or reconstructed as a replica of an original vehicle.

3 (c) If registered with the Administration under this section, every historic motor
4 vehicle is a Class L (historic) vehicle.

5 (d) Except as provided in subsection (i) of this section, for each Class L (historic)
6 vehicle, the annual registration fee is:

7 (1) On or after July 1, 2024, but before July 1, 2025, $45.50; and

8 (2) On or after July 1, 2025, $55.50.

9 (e) In applying for registration of a historic motor vehicle under this section, the
10 owner of the vehicle shall submit with the application a certification that the vehicle for
11 which the application is made:

12 (1) Will be maintained for use in exhibitions, club activities, parades, tours,
13 and occasional transportation; and

14 (2) Will not be used:

15 (i) For general daily transportation;

16 (ii) Primarily for the transportation of passengers or property on
17 highways;

18 (iii) For employment;

19 (iv) For transportation to and from employment or school; or

20 (v) For commercial purposes.

21 (f) Except as provided in § 13–936.1 of this subtitle, on registration of a vehicle
22 under this section, the Administration shall issue a special, historic motor vehicle
23 registration plate of the size and design that the Administration determines.

24 (g) Unless the presence of the equipment was specifically required by a statute of
25 this State as a condition of sale when the vehicle was manufactured, the presence of any
26 specific equipment is not required for the operation of a vehicle registered under this
27 section.

28 (h) (1) A vehicle with a model year of 1985 or earlier registered under this
29 section is exempt from any statute that requires vehicle inspections.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 4 3

1 (2) A vehicle registered under this section is exempt from any statute that
2 requires the use and inspection of emission controls.

3 (i) (1) For a motor vehicle manufactured at least 60 years prior to the current
4 model year, there is a onetime registration fee of $50.00.

5 (2) Registration of a motor vehicle manufactured under this subsection is
6 not transferable to a subsequent owner.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Motor Vehicle
8 Administration shall reinstate, without any action required by the owner of a vehicle, the
9 historic motor vehicle registration of a motor vehicle that before July 1, 2025, was
10 registered as a historic motor vehicle and that on or after July 1, 2025, had its historic
11 vehicle registration suspended or revoked as a result of the change to the definition of
12 “historic motor vehicle” in Chapter 604 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025.

13 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall be
14 construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any
15 effect on or application to any historic motor vehicle registered before the effective date of
16 this Act.

17 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3