START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 97

P1 6lr1074
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 135

By: Delegate T. Morgan
Requested: October 2, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Designations – State Shark – Megalodon

3 FOR the purpose of designating the megalodon as the State shark; and generally relating
4 to the State shark.

5 BY renumbering
6 Article – General Provisions
7 Section 7–310
8 to be Section 7–311
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – General Provisions
13 Section 7–310
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 Preamble

17 WHEREAS, The megalodon was the largest shark that ever lived and one of the
18 largest predators; and

19 WHEREAS, Fossilized teeth are found in Calvert County along Calvert Cliffs and
20 also found in Anne Arundel, Caroline, Charles, Dorchester, Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s
21 counties; and

22 WHEREAS, The megalodon continues to be a source of popular and scientific
23 fascination derived from their fossilized large, serrated teeth; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0097*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 97

1 WHEREAS, This macro predator provides evidence for the rich fossil history
2 preserved in Maryland; and

3 WHEREAS, There are extant sharks in both the Chesapeake Bay and Maryland’s
4 coastal waters, and the megalodon, although extinct, lived in this area for millions of years
5 and is a reminder of the important role modern and prehistoric sharks have played in
6 shaping past and present ecosystems; and

7 WHEREAS, As the Maryland State Paleontology Collection and Research Center,
8 the Calvert Marine Museum houses over 1,700 fossilized megalodon teeth, including the
9 only associated dentition (over 50 teeth from one individual) of the shark ever found within
10 the State; now, therefore,

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That Section(s) 7–310 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland
13 be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–311.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
15 as follows:

16 Article – General Provisions

17 7–310.

18 THE MEGALODON (OTODUS MEGALODON) IS THE STATE SHARK.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2