START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 50 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 50 
(Delegate Foley) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
General Assembly - Special Election to Fill a Vacancy in Office 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, alters the procedure for filling a vacancy in the office of State senator or 
delegate. It requires the Governor to, immediately upon a vacancy in the office of State 
senator or delegate, if the vacancy occurs on or before a specified date, declare special 
primary and general elections to fill the vacancy. The special primary and general elections 
must take place during the regular statewide primary and general elections that occur in the 
second year of a term, and the Governor must appoint an eligible individual to fill the 
vacancy until a successor is elected. The proposed constitutional amendment exempts a 
special election to fill a vacancy in a specified office from the quadrennial schedule for the 
election of State and county officers. The bill also makes stylistic changes to replace 
gendered language with nongendered language. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any increase in State expenditures can be absorbed within existing 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Any increase in local expenditures can be absorbed within existing 
resources, as discussed below. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 50/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a vacancy in the office of State senator or delegate occurs at least 
55 days before the candidacy filing deadline for the regular statewide primary and 
general elections held in the second year of the term, the Governor must immediately 
declare special primary and general elections to elect a successor. The special primary and 
general elections must take place during the regular statewide primary and  
general elections, as specified, and the Governor must, in accordance with specified 
procedures, appoint a qualified individual to fill the vacancy until a successor is elected.  
 
If a vacancy occurs after or fewer than 55 days before the specified candidacy filing 
deadline, the Governor appoints an eligible individual to serve the remainder of the 
vacating senator’s or delegate’s unexpired term.  
 
Accordingly, the proposed constitutional amendment exempts a specified special election 
to fill a vacancy in the office of State senator or delegate from the general requirement that 
elections for State and county officers take place on a specified quadrennial schedule.  
 
Current Law:  In the case of death, disqualification, resignation, refusal to act, or 
expulsion of a State senator or delegate, or in the case of a senator’s or delegate’s removal 
from the city or county from which he or she was elected, the Governor must, in accordance 
with specified procedures, appoint a person to serve the remainder of the vacating senator’s 
or delegate’s unexpired term.  
 
The Governor appoints a person named by the specified central committee of the political 
party, if any, with which the vacating senator or delegate was affiliated only if that central 
committee submits, in writing, the name of a qualified person no more than 30 days after 
the vacancy occurs. In the event of a vacancy in a district that includes all or a portion of 
two or more counties, the affected central committees follow specified procedures for 
selecting and submitting a name or list of names to the Governor.  
 
Upon receipt of a submission from the affected central committee, as specified, the 
Governor must, within 15 days, appoint the central committee’s selection to fill the 
vacancy. If the central committee does not submit a name to the Governor within the 
30-day period, as specified, the Governor must, within 15 days of the expiration of the 
30-day period, select and appoint a person to fill the vacancy. The appointee must be 
(1) affiliated with the same political party, if any, as the vacating senator or delegate and 
(2) otherwise properly qualified to hold the office of senator or delegate in the affected 
district or county. Similarly, if no central committee exists in the affected county or district, 
the Governor must, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, appoint a person who is 
(1) affiliated with the same political party, if any, as the vacating senator or delegate and 
(2) otherwise properly qualified to hold the office.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 50/ Page 3 
A gubernatorial appointee to fill a vacancy in the office of State senator or delegate serves 
the remainder of the vacating senator’s or delegate’s unexpired term.  
 
Elections for State and county offices, with the exception of special elections to fill 
vacancies in specified county offices, may be held only every four years, as specified.  
 
State and Local Expenditures:  To the extent that special elections held in accordance 
with the bill result in additional unique ballot styles, expenditures for the State Board of 
Elections and local boards of elections may increase minimally due to printing and 
programming-related costs. However, for purposes of this fiscal and policy note, it is 
assumed that any such costs are absorbable within existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 2 and HB 174 of 2025; HB 412 of 2024; and HB 417 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 5 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Somerset counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Governor’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3