START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 80 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 80 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Residential Leases - Fee Disclosures 
 
 
This bill generally requires landlords to provide prospective tenants with specified 
information about fees and prohibits the charging of undisclosed mandatory fees. The bill 
also authorizes a tenant to bring an action against a landlord for a violation of the bill’s 
provisions that occurred within specified timeframes. A county or municipal corporation 
may enact local laws consistent with the bill’s provisions. Local laws or ordinances that 
are comparable in subject matter to the bill supersede the bill’s provisions to the extent the 
local laws/ordinances are more stringent or provide stronger protection to a tenant or 
broader applicability. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “mandatory fee” means a compulsory fee imposed on a tenant as a condition of tenancy. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 80/ Page 2 
An “optional fee” means a voluntary fee that a tenant may elect to pay a landlord for 
benefits or services related to the tenancy, including a fee for parking, storage, or pets. 
 
Fee Disclosure Requirements 
 
The bill’s requirements only apply to (1) a landlord that offers four or more dwelling units 
for rent and (2) a lease signed or renewed on or after October 1, 2026. Further, the bill does 
not apply to:   
 
 
charges imposed on a tenant for the payment of water, sewer, gas, or electric 
utilities;  
 
costs, fines, or fees for minor violations of a lease agreement, or other irregular costs 
incurred as a result of a tenant’s actions, such as a charge for a replacement key or 
a penalty for a violation of the bylaws of a common ownership community if the 
dwelling unit is located in a common ownership community; or 
 
the withholding of any portion of a security deposit at the end of a tenancy in 
accordance with § 8-203 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Under the bill, a landlord must, in writing, provide a prospective tenant with an itemized 
list clearly identifying all fees that may be imposed on the prospective tenant, and include 
information on (1) the basis for the fee; (2) the amount of the fee; (3) whether the fee is 
mandatory or optional; and (4) when the fee is due, as specified. A lease provision that is 
in violation of the bill is void and unenforceable. 
 
Cause of Action 
 
The bill grants a tenant the right to pursue legal action against a landlord for a violation of 
the bill that occurred on or after February 1, 2027, and during the tenancy or up to two years 
after its expiration. If a court finds that a landlord has violated the bill’s provisions, the 
court may award damages equal to three times the actual damages resulting from the 
violation, as well as reasonable attorney’s fees. 
 
Current Law:  State statute does not expressly require the disclosure of all fees to tenants 
or prospective tenants when advertising or offering a unit. However, some fees or 
obligations must be disclosed by landlords either in writing or in a lease agreement. For 
example, a landlord that uses a ratio utility billing system for one or more utilities must 
provide certain information to all prospective tenants in writing. A lease provision that 
requires a tenant to pay the utility charges billed to the tenant under a ratio utility billing 
system is unenforceable if the landlord fails to provide the necessary information. 
 
Any landlord who offers five or more dwelling units in the State for rent may not rent a 
unit without using a written lease. The lease must include certain disclosures and notices, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 80/ Page 3 
including (1) a statement that the premises will be delivered in a livable condition, with 
reasonable safety, if that is the agreement, or if both parties agree otherwise, a statement of 
the agreement concerning the condition of the premises; (2) the landlord’s and the tenant’s 
specific obligations for heat, gas, electricity, water, and repair of the premises; (3) a receipt 
for the security deposit, as specified; and (4) a copy of the most current version of the 
Maryland Tenants’ Bill of Rights. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1257 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3