START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 55 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 55 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Speed Monitoring Systems - Residential Districts 
 
   
This bill expands the authorization to install and utilize speed monitoring systems 
(i.e., speed cameras) on highways in residential districts with a maximum posted speed 
limit of 35 miles per hour to all local jurisdictions (instead of only Anne Arundel, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties). Any expanded use of speed cameras under 
the bill is subject to existing requirements related to the enactment of local legislation and 
the administration of speed camera programs.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues from contested cases in the District Court may 
increase minimally as early as FY 2027 to the extent that additional speed cameras are 
installed, as discussed below. Any additional caseload for the District Court can be handled 
using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  For local jurisdictions other than Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and  
Prince George’s counties, expenditures and revenues increase, potentially significantly, to 
the extent that any speed cameras are installed pursuant to the bill’s expanded authority.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 55/ Page 2 
systems. Generally, pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who 
receives a citation, may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court.  
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Assuming that speed cameras are installed in additional residential 
districts throughout the State, pursuant to the bill’s expanded authority, the total number of 
speed camera citations issued is expected to increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027. As 
a result of this expected increase in citations, the number of individuals opting for a trial in 
District Court is also likely to increase.  
 
Accordingly, general fund revenues increase, likely minimally, as fine revenues paid by 
individuals convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. It is anticipated that 
the Judiciary can handle any increased case volume using existing budgeted resources. For 
context, the Judiciary advises that there were 6,479 requests for trial based on citations 
issued from speed monitoring systems in fiscal 2025.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Prince George’s are already 
authorized to install speed cameras on certain highways within residential districts under 
current law and, therefore, the bill has no effect on these counties. 
 
For all other local jurisdictions, the bill authorizes the installation of speed cameras on 
highways in residential districts with a maximum speed limit of 35 miles per hour if the 
local jurisdiction authorizes the cameras by ordinance or resolution adopted by its 
governing body and other specified requirements are met. To the extent that any local 
jurisdiction chooses to implement a speed camera program pursuant to the bill’s expanded 
authority: 
 
 
expenditures increase to install the speed cameras and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the speed camera 
program (e.g., mailing or contractual costs); 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the local 
jurisdiction; and  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 55/ Page 3 
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 530 and HB 644 of 2025 and HB 1444 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 45 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Montgomery County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 55/ Page 4 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 55/ Page 5 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5