START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 44 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 44 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Petitions and Ballot Questions - Contents, Plain Language 
Requirement, and Procedures 
 
 
This bill makes changes to State election law relating to (1) information included on each 
petition signature page (for a petition to place a question on the ballot) and on the ballot 
(for each ballot question); (2) deadlines and requirements for the preparation and 
certification of ballot questions; and (3) publication of ballot questions. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) can handle the bill’s requirements with 
existing resources. The bill is not otherwise expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Requirements for Petition Signature Pages, for a Petition That Seeks to Place a Question 
on the Ballot 
 
The bill modifies an existing provision that requires, if a petition (other than a municipal 
petition) seeks to place a question on the ballot, that each signature page of the petition 
include either a fair and accurate summary of the substantive provisions of the proposal or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 44/ Page 2 
the full text of the proposal. The bill modifies the provision by instead requiring each 
signature page to include:   
 
 
a brief title that describes the topic, goal, or outcome of the ballot question;  
 
(1) a fair and accurate summary of the substantive provisions of the proposal written 
in plain, clear language that a voter can easily understand, does not explain the legal 
mechanism providing for the policy change, and does not contain legal jargon or 
use double negatives or the passive voice or (2) the full text of the proposal; and 
 
a brief statement explaining what the practical outcome of each voting choice would 
be.  
 
The bill also requires SBE, when preparing guidelines and instructions for compliance with 
the bill’s plain language requirement for a summary of a proposal on a petition to place a 
question on the ballot, to (1) consider any generally accepted guidelines regarding 
compliance with the federal Plain Writing Act of 2010 and (2) prohibit the use of the 
passive voice, legal jargon, and double negatives.  
 
Ballot Questions 
 
 
Information Included on the Ballot 
 
The bill alters provisions governing the information that must be included on the ballot, for 
each ballot question, by:   
 
 
modifying a requirement that each question include a brief descriptive title in 
boldface type so that it instead requires a brief title in boldface type that describes 
the topic, goal, or outcome of the ballot question;  
 
modifying a requirement that each question include a condensed statement of the 
purpose of the question so that it instead requires a condensed statement describing 
the change in policy to be adopted in plain and clear language that a voter can easily 
understand, does not explain the legal mechanism providing for the policy change, 
and does not contain legal jargon or use double negatives or the passive voice; and 
 
adding a requirement that each question include a brief statement explaining what 
the practical outcome of each voting choice would be.  
 
 
Preparation and Certification of Ballot Questions 
 
The bill moves up the deadlines by which governmental entities (described in detail under 
current law) must prepare and certify ballot question information. The bill moves the 
deadlines to July 1 immediately preceding a general election. However, the bill does not 
alter the deadlines by which, if the ballot question information has not been timely certified 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 44/ Page 3 
by a county or municipal attorney, a clerk of the circuit court must prepare and certify 
ballot question information to SBE (which under current law and under the bill is no later 
than the first Friday in August).  
 
The bill requires SBE to make available to the public the submitted ballot question 
information for a 15-day comment period. 
 
By the fourth day immediately following the end of the 15-day comment period, the person 
required to prepare a question must (1) review the comments received during the comment 
period and make any necessary changes to the question and (2) submit the certified plain 
text of the question to SBE for publication on its website. 
 
The certification by SBE of the content and arrangement of a ballot that includes a question 
may not be construed to be a certification of the ballot language required by statute to be 
included on the ballot, including the plain language condensed statement required by the 
bill. 
 
 
Publication of Ballot Questions 
 
The bill requires – for specified types of ballot questions – that SBE and each applicable 
local board of elections post in a manner widely accessible to the public for at least 90 days 
before the general election (1) the complete text of the constitution, charter, amendment, 
or enactment that is being submitted to the voters and (2) for each question posted, a link 
to the General Assembly or county webpage for the applicable legislation. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Petition Requirements 
 
Under State law provisions that apply to any petition (other than a municipal petition) 
authorized by law to place the name of an individual or a question on the ballot, or to create 
a new political party, a petition must contain an information page (containing, among other 
things, a description of the subject and purpose of the petition and identification of the 
sponsor) and signature pages containing not less than the total number of signatures 
required by law to be filed. 
 
Each signature page must contain, among other information, (1) a description of the subject 
and purpose of the petition; (2) if the petition seeks to place a question on the ballot, either 
a fair and accurate summary of the substantive provisions of the proposal or the full text of 
the proposal; and (3) a statement, to which each signer subscribes, that the signer supports 
the purpose of that petition process and, based on the signer’s information and belief, the 
signer is a registered voter in the county specified on the page and is eligible to have his or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 44/ Page 4 
her signature counted. If a summary of the proposal is included on each signature page in 
place of the full text of the proposal, the circulator must have the full text of the proposal 
present at the time and place that each signature is affixed to the page, and the signature 
page must state that the full text is available from the circulator. 
 
SBE is required to prepare guidelines and instructions relating to the petition process. 
 
Ballot Question Requirements 
 
Under provisions applicable to any ballot question voted on in an election conducted 
pursuant to State election law, each ballot question must appear on the ballot containing 
(1) a question number or letter; (2) a brief designation of the type or source of the question; 
(3) a brief descriptive title in boldface type; (4) a condensed statement of the purpose of 
the question; and (5) the voting choices that the voter has. 
 
Notice/Publication of Ballot Questions 
 
A local board of elections must provide notice of each question to be submitted statewide 
and each question to be submitted to the voters of the county by (1) specimen ballot mailed 
at least one week before any early voting period before the general election or 
(2) publication or dissemination by mass communication during the three weeks 
immediately preceding the general election at which a question will appear on the ballot. 
For a ballot question regarding an amendment to the Maryland Constitution or regarding 
an enactment of the General Assembly that has been petitioned to referendum, the notice 
must include both the ballot question and a brief statement, prepared in clear and concise 
language, devoid of technical and legal terms to the extent practicable, summarizing the 
question. 
 
The complete text of a ballot question must be posted or available for public inspection in 
the office of SBE and each applicable local board of elections for 65 days prior to the 
general election. An individual may receive without charge a copy of the complete text of 
all constitutional amendments and questions from a local board, either in person, by mail, 
or electronically. 
 
Deadline for the Preparation and Certification of Ballot Questions 
 
The Secretary of State must prepare and certify to SBE, not later than the ninety-fifth day 
before the general election, ballot question information for all statewide ballot questions 
and all questions relating to an enactment of the General Assembly, which is petitioned to 
referendum. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 44/ Page 5 
SBE must prepare and certify to the appropriate local board of elections, not later than the 
one‑hundred fifth day before the general election, ballot question information for all 
questions referred to the voters of one county or part of one county pursuant to an 
enactment of the General Assembly. 
 
The county attorney of the appropriate county must prepare and certify to SBE, not later 
than the ninety-fifth day before the general election, ballot question information for each 
question to be voted on in a single county or part of a county other than those prepared and 
certified by the Secretary of State and SBE. If the ballot question is not timely certified, 
the clerk of the circuit court of a jurisdiction must, not later than the first Friday in August, 
prepare and certify the ballot question information required to be prepared and certified by 
the county attorney. 
 
The municipal attorney of the appropriate municipality must, not later than the  
ninety‑fifth day before the general election, prepare and certify to SBE ballot question 
information for any other question to be voted on in the municipality. If the ballot question 
is not timely certified, the clerk of the circuit court, for the county in which a municipality 
is located, must, not later than the first Friday in August, prepare and certify the ballot 
question information required to be prepared and certified by the municipal attorney. 
 
Certification of Ballots 
 
SBE must certify and publicly display the content and arrangement of each ballot: 
 
 
for a primary election, at least 64 days before the election; 
 
for a general election, at least 64 days before the election; 
 
for a special primary election, at least 55 days before the election; and 
 
for a special general election, not later than a date specified in the Governor’s 
proclamation. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland, on petition of SBE, may establish a later date in 
extraordinary circumstances. 
 
SBE must publicly display the content and arrangement of each certified ballot on its 
website. Except pursuant to a court order, or as provided by law, the content and 
arrangement of the ballot may not be modified after the second day of the public display. 
Unless a delay is required by court order, SBE may begin to print the ballots after 
certification and three days of public display and correct any noted errors. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 44/ Page 6 
Executive Order – Maryland Plain Language Initiative 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.25 establishes a Maryland Plain Language Initiative within 
the Department of Information Technology’s Maryland Digital Service. The initiative 
includes the creation of a Maryland Plain Language Plan that among other things must 
identify plain language standards. The executive order requires State agencies subject to 
the direction and supervision of the Governor to implement the recommendations of the 
plan, in phases.  
 
Federal Plain Writing Act of 2010 
 
The federal Plain Writing Act of 2010 was enacted with the purpose of “improv[ing] the 
effectiveness and accountability of federal agencies to the public by promoting clear 
government communications that the public can understand and use.” The act required the 
Director of the Office of Management and Budget to develop and issue guidance on 
implementing the requirements of the act and that guidance references Federal Plain 
Language Guidelines for agencies to follow. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill’s  
June 1, 2026 effective date may result in the requirements applicable to the content of a 
petition signature page changing part-way through a given petition effort. For a referendum 
petition (referring a law passed by the General Assembly to the voters), for example, if 
more than one‑third but less than the full number of required signatures are filed before 
June 1 (after the session in which the law was passed), the remainder of the signatures may 
be filed by June 30 (Art. XVI, §3(b) of the Maryland Constitution).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 615 and HB 816 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 29 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Allegany and Harford counties; Secretary of 
State; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 44/ Page 7 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7