START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 10 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 10 
(Delegate Foley) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Legal Advertisement or Legal Notice - Publication in Newspaper or Newspaper 
in General Circulation - Digital Newspapers 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “newspaper” or “newspaper in general circulation,” as 
they apply to statutory or other requirements to publish a legal advertisement or legal 
notice, to include print or digital publications, as defined under the bill. A digital 
publication that publishes a legal advertisement or legal notice must (1) maintain an archive 
of all published legal advertisements and legal notices that shall be available to the public; 
and (2) be accessible in the county or municipal corporation that is required to publish the 
legal advertisement or legal notice. The bill also repeals provisions that are generally 
duplicative of the bill relating to the publication of legal advertisements or legal notices in 
Dorchester County. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill relates only to local governments. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For legal notifications to be published in a digital publication, the digital 
publication must (1) employ or retain one or more persons to create, edit, produce, and 
distribute original content concerning matters of public interest through specified forms of 
reporting; (2) employ at least one individual full‑time, working at least 30 hours a week, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 10/ Page 2 
as specified; (3) publish at least one article per week concerning matters of public interest 
for the county or municipal corporation during the immediately preceding 12 months; and 
(4) meet specified reporting criteria if designated as a tax‑exempt organization. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Newspapers and Legal Advertisement Requirements – Generally 
 
Unless otherwise specified, “newspaper” or “newspaper in general circulation” mean a 
publication that (1) has at least four pages; (2) habitually contains news items, reports of 
current events, editorial comments, advertising matter, and other miscellaneous 
information that is of public interest and is found generally in an ordinary newspaper;  
(3) has been published and distributed, by sale, from an established place of business at 
least once a week for six months or more before publication of the advertisement or notice; 
(4) has general circulation throughout the community where the publication is published; 
and (5) qualifies for periodicals rates for mailing through the United States Postal Service. 
 
Broadly, legal advertisements and legal notices must be published in newspapers to give 
sufficient notice of specified government and public activities of interest to the general 
public. Legal advertisements and legal notices include, among other things, the 
appointment and election of government officials, specified judicial activity and 
judgements, business entity and real property actions, meetings and decisions of 
government bodies, and other specified occurrences and events as required under current 
law. 
 
County‑specific Provisions 
 
In Prince George’s County, “newspaper in general circulation” includes a newspaper that 
(1) is designated by the county council as a newspaper of record, or (2) meets specified 
criteria with respect to the county and is published by a small business. 
 
Chapter 688 of 2024 established that, in Dorchester County only, if a law, resolution, or 
court order, judgement, or decree requires the county to publish a legal advertisement or 
legal notice (1) any required advertisement or notice must be published and distributed 
through print and digital format; (2) the time period required for publication starts once the 
first advertisement or notice appears in print or digital format; and (3) if there is no print 
and digital publication that meets specified qualifications, the advertisement or notice may 
be placed in any digital publication that can be accessed in the county and that regularly 
contains local news and information for the county. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 10/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 74 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 64 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Dorchester, Frederick, 
Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Havre de 
Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3