START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 64 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 64 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Task Force on Education Funding and Student Population Growth 
 
   
This bill establishes a Task Force on Education Funding and Student Population Growth. 
The task force must (1) analyze challenges related to the delay in student enrollment counts 
and its effect on school funding; (2) analyze the connection between growing student 
populations and the provision of school funding; and (3) make recommendations regarding 
improvements to the provision of school funding. The Office of the Governor must provide 
staff for the task force. A member of the task force may not receive compensation as a 
member of the task force but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The task force must 
by December 15, 2026, report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) assumes that the task force 
can be staffed using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The vast majority of mandatory State and local education funding for 
public schools in Maryland is based upon funding formulas that include public school 
student enrollment as key variables. This includes the foundation formula, which is based 
upon “enrollment count,” which is defined below; and includes targeted enrollment‑based 
funding of compensatory education formula grants, concentration of poverty grants 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 64/ Page 2 
(CPGs), English language-learners grants, special education grants, and full-day 
prekindergarten grants. Funding mandates via these formulas in a given fiscal year is 
generally based on actual enrollment counts in the fall of the prior fiscal year – the most 
recent actual counts available at the time of State budget formulation. Chapter 36 of 2021 
substantially increased per pupil State and county funding of public schools and initiated 
several additional funding formulas. Per Chapter 36, the “enrollment count” for the 
foundation program is the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) 
enrollment and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. 
 
Each of the above-named programs includes an enrollment-based local share. Annually, 
the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate funds to the 
local board of education equivalent to the greater of the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) 
requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per pupil MOE 
amount is based upon the “enrollment count,” as described above. Only counties that 
benefit from the compensatory education State funding floor are required to fund the local 
share of CPGs. However, for some counties, the combined local share across these several 
programs is subject to certain adjustments.  
 
Chapters 6 and 607 of 2017 provided declining enrollment supplemental grants to eligible 
local boards of education for fiscal 2018 through 2020. A local board was eligible for an 
enrollment-based supplemental grant if the county’s most recent prior three-year moving 
average FTE enrollment is greater than the FTE enrollment in the previous school year. 
Chapter 771 of 2019 extended the grants through fiscal 2021. Initiation of the “enrollment 
count” per Chapter 36 effectively made declining enrollment grants redundant.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Office of the Governor advises that it lacks the capacity to 
adequately staff the task force and therefore will in fiscal 2027 require both contractual 
support at an estimated cost of approximately $200,000 and a contractual executive 
assistant at an estimated cost of $54,000.   
 
However, DLS notes that task force membership includes State and local entities with 
considerable expertise regarding education funding law and procedures, including 
representatives from the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), the Maryland 
General Assembly, and various associations representing Maryland public education 
stakeholders. MSDE posts documents showing the calculation of major State education aid 
programs; enrollment data for several past years is readily available, allowing for 
projection of future enrollment; and the Maryland Department of Planning projects 
Maryland school enrollment. DLS assumes that the Office of the Governor can rely on 
these various State and local resources to provide data and analytical support, and thereby 
can adequately staff the task force using existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 64/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 62 and HB 53 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 170 (Senators Lewis Young and Ready) - Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3