START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 68 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 68 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Special Registration Plates - Old Line Plates (Old Line Plate 
Program Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to develop and make available 
an Old Line Plate for certain vehicles. An Old Line Plate must resemble the registration 
plate issued by the State for display on a motor vehicle in 1911 (i.e., white characters on a 
black background). The bill establishes numerous requirements and limitations related to 
the issuance, through auction, and transfer of such plates. Fees collected pursuant to the 
bill’s authorization must be (1) used to recover MVA’s costs and (2) credited to the 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). MVA must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
MVA must conduct the first auction by December 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  TTF revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2027 due 
to fee revenues from the new registration plate program, as discussed below. TTF 
expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027 for MVA to produce the new special 
registration plates and to hold auctions, as discussed below.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to the following types of vehicles:  Class A (passenger); 
Class E (truck) with a maximum gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less; Class M 
(multipurpose); or any other class of vehicle that MVA designates by regulation.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 68/ Page 2 
“Old Line Plate” means a registration plate issued under the bill bearing an Old Line 
Number. “Old Line Number” means a numeric-only vehicle registration number consisting 
of one to five digits, without letters, punctuation, or leading zeros. A “registration number 
right” means a revocable, transferable authorization issued by MVA to have a particular 
Old Line Number assigned to the registration of a qualifying vehicle.  
 
Old Line Plates 
 
MVA must develop and make available for qualifying vehicles an Old Line Plate; however, 
the State must retain ownership of all Old Line Plates, and the holder of such a plate does 
not have a property interest in the plate.  
 
MVA must maintain an inventory of unassigned Old Line Numbers. Generally, MVA may 
not reassign an active numeric-only vehicle registration number to be an Old Line Number. 
However, on request of a holder of an active numeric-only vehicle registration number (and 
payment of the applicable transfer fee), MVA must (1) issue the holder a registration 
number right and (2) exchange the individual’s current registration plate with an Old Line 
Plate bearing the holder’s current registration number.  
 
MVA must (1) establish and operate a public auction program to award registration number 
rights in Old Line Numbers and (2) adopt reserve prices, bid increments, bidder 
qualifications, and offer number categories. An auction must be live, online, or by sealed 
bid and must be conducted periodically or on a rolling basis.  
 
Transfer Provisions  
 
MVA may transfer a registration number right and issue a new, identical Old Line Plate to 
another vehicle registrant on application and payment of a transfer fee (as determined by 
MVA). However, a registration right may not be transferred within 180 days after its initial 
issuance or most recent transfer. Only one transfer of a single registration number right 
may occur during any 12-month period unless the transfer meets specified criteria (e.g., is 
to or from the estate of a deceased holder, is to a spouse, domestic partner, parent, child, 
or sibling of the holder of the right, etc.).  
 
Generally, a registration number right for an Old Line Number not assigned to a qualifying 
vehicle for 12 consecutive months must revert to MVA 60 days after written notice is sent 
to the registrant’s last address on file. However, for good cause shown, MVA may 
authorize a one-time delay on reversion of a registration number right for up to 12 months.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 68/ Page 3 
Enforcement and Reversion of Number  
 
MVA may deny, suspend, or revoke (1) a registration number right for fraud or misuse, 
nonpayment of required fees, or a violation of the bill (or related regulations) or (2) a 
transfer, if the transfer is determined to be for the purpose of evading the requirements 
noted above. 
 
Upon revocation or surrender of a registration number right, the right must revert to MVA 
and the number may be re-auctioned. 
 
Current Law:  Special registration plates, which include an unusual feature such as an 
emblem or logo depicting an organization, are available for eligible vehicles with payment 
of an additional fee. Special registration plates are also transferable in some instances. 
MVA issues several types of special commemorative geographical, historical, natural 
resource, and environmental registration plates (such as the Chesapeake Bay and Maryland 
agriculture plates), as well as numerous organizational registration plates. 
 
MVA also currently offers 1910 Vintage Reproduction registration plates, which consist 
of black lettering on a yellow background.  
 
State Revenues:  TTF revenues increase as MVA collects the fees authorized by the bill 
for the Old Line Plate program. However, the ultimate impact depends on the number of 
vehicle owners who participate in each auction to obtain an Old Line Plate, and the price 
they are willing to pay, which is unknown and cannot be determined without experience 
under the bill. MVA advises that approximately 4.4 million vehicles are eligible for the 
special registration plate established by the bill.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, if 1,000 owners of vehicles obtain an Old Line Plate each 
year and pay an average final auction price of $275 per set of plates, TTF revenues would 
increase by $275,000 annually. Under this scenario, total revenues for TTF from auction 
fees over the five-year period would be approximately $1.4 million.  
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase for costs related to the production of the 
Old Line Plates and for MVA to hold auctions to issue the plates. However, the ultimate 
fiscal impact depends on the number of plates issued each year and how many auctions are 
held through the program to issues those plates, which cannot be determined without 
experience under the bill.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, MVA estimates the cost to produce each set of registration 
plates totals about $10 and, thus, under the illustrative example discussed above, TTF 
expenditures for plate production would increase by $10,000 annually. Additionally, MVA 
assumes the cost to hold an auction is approximately $27,500.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 68/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 352 (Senator Charles) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4