START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 3 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 3 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Nonresident Tuition - Exemption for Dependents of State or 
Local Public Safety Employees (Maryland Fallen Heroes Tuition Benefits Act) 
 
 
This bill requires that, notwithstanding the State or county in which the child resides, a 
financially dependent child of a State or local public safety employee who dies as a result 
of or in the course of performance of duties is exempt from paying out-of-state or 
out‑of‑county tuition at a public institution of higher education in the State. The 
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) must adopt regulations to implement 
the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact the number of individuals 
who qualify for in-state tuition at public four-year institutions of higher education, 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), and local community colleges. As a result, 
general fund expenditures through the Senator John A. Cade (Cade) and BCCC funding 
formulas as well as higher education revenues and expenditures are not materially affected. 
MHEC can adopt regulations to implement the bill with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  No material impact on community college revenues or expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 3/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Public Safety Employees 
 
Under current law pertaining to the Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor 
scholarships, a State or local public safety employee means a person who is employed in 
the State as (1) a career or volunteer member of a fire department, ambulance company or 
squad, or rescue company or squad; (2) a law enforcement officer; (3) a correctional 
officer; or (4) a member of the Maryland National Guard who was a resident of the State 
at the time of death. 
 
Tuition Eligibility Determinations 
 
For institutions within the University System of Maryland (USM), the Board of Regents 
sets tuition policies, including determining which students are eligible for resident 
(i.e., in‑state) tuition. The basic policy, USM Board of Regents Policy on Student 
Classification for Admission and Tuition Purposes (VIII‐2.70), requires students to be 
identified as permanent residents of Maryland to qualify for resident tuition, meaning they 
have lived continuously in the State for at least 12 months immediately prior to attendance 
at a USM institution. An individual who is residing in Maryland primarily for the purpose 
of attending an educational institution is not considered a permanent resident. The Board 
of Regents of Morgan State University (MSU) and the Board of Trustees of St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland (SMCM) set tuition policies for those institutions. The policies for 
the institutions are very similar to the USM policies. Both institutions require one year of 
residency in Maryland to qualify for in-state tuition rates.  
 
The USM Board of Regents Policy on Undergraduate Admissions (III-4.00) limits 
out‑of‑state undergraduate enrollment to no more than 30% of each institution’s 
total undergraduate enrollment, excluding the University of Maryland, Global Campus 
(UMGC) and students enrolled exclusively in distance education programs.  
 
Typically, there is a three-month residency requirement for community colleges. 
 
Tuition Exemptions 
 
There are in-state tuition exemptions (or waivers) for public school teachers if the courses 
are related to or needed for their employment, military personnel and their spouses and 
dependents in certain circumstances, AmeriCorps volunteers, returned Peace Corps 
volunteers, and certain undocumented immigrants who have resided in the State in certain 
circumstances.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 3/ Page 3 
Education Article § 15-106.7 also exempts children of State or local nonpublic safety 
employees who are eligible for a Conroy or Cryor scholarship in accordance with 
Education article § 18-601(d)(3)(iii) from paying the nonresident tuition rate at a public 
institution of higher education. However, Chapter 267 of 2020 amended statue relating to 
the Conroy and Cryor scholarships, which resulted in the renumbering of § 18-601(d) 
without subsequent updates to § 15-106.7. Nevertheless, USM Board of Regents policy on 
determination of students eligible for in-state tuition does still extend eligibility to students 
eligible for a scholarship under § 18-601(d)(3)(ii), which relates to children of public safety 
employees who sustain an injury in the line of duty that renders the public safety employee 
100% disabled. SMCM policies similarly extend eligibility to students eligible for a 
scholarship under § 18-601(d)(3)(ii). MSU policies for determination of in-state tuition 
status continue to cite § 18-601(d)(3)(iii) but specify that in-state tuition may be granted to 
the offspring of a public safety employee killed in the line of duty.  
 
Senator John A. Cade and Baltimore City Community College Funding Formulas  
 
The formula used for the distribution of funds to community colleges is known as the 
Cade Funding Formula. The State’s annual contribution to the Cade funding formula is 
determined by enrollment at community colleges and a percentage, set in statute, of the 
level of funding received by selected public four-year institutions. Specifically, the formula 
bases per student funding on a set statutory percentage of current year State appropriations 
per full-time equivalent students (FTES) at the selected four-year institutions, including 
noncapital appropriations from the Higher Education Investment Fund. The resulting 
community college per student amount is multiplied by the number of FTES enrolled in 
the colleges in the second preceding fiscal year or the or the three-year moving average, 
beginning with the second preceding year, to identify a total formula amount.  
 
The BCCC funding formula operates in the same fashion, except that the per student 
amount is multiplied by the number of FTES enrolled in the colleges in the 
second preceding fiscal year without consideration of a three-year moving average. The 
BCCC percentage, which is also set in statute, is higher than that for the Cade funding 
formula, resulting in a higher per FTES amount.  
 
The BCCC funding formulas have a hold harmless provision in current law that ensures 
each college receives at least as much State funding in total through the formula as in the 
prior fiscal year. The Cade formulas do not have a hold harmless provision.  
 
In-state Tuition 
 
Using the simple average, in-state tuition and fees proposed for fiscal 2027 are 
approximately $11,200. The difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees 
for fiscal 2027 ranges from about $30,148 for the University of Maryland, College Park 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 3/ Page 4 
Campus to $4,860 at UMGC. The difference between the rates at each campus, using the 
simple average, is almost $14,700.  
 
For fall 2025, in-county tuition and fees are approximately $4,900 at community colleges. 
As a State institution, BCCC has one in-state rate. Generally out-of-state rates at 
community colleges are two to three times the in-county rates. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that very few individuals are eligible for the 
exemption under the bill, as most qualifying students already receive in-state or in-county 
tuition under existing laws and policies (as explained above in Current Law), and the 
overall number of eligible students eligible under the bill is likely low (as discussed below). 
Generally, the bill establishes a direct, independent out-of-state and out-of-county tuition 
exemption for financially dependent child of a State or local public safety employee who 
dies as a result of or in the course of performance of duties regardless of scholarship 
eligibility. 
 
MHEC advises that, for fiscal 2025, the Conroy and Cryor scholarships have made awards 
to only two students who were the surviving spouse or child of a State or local public safety 
employee killed in the line of duty. Pursuant to § 3-507(e) of the Public Safety Article, the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy updated its annual report on Deaths 
Involving a Law Enforcement Officer in December 2025. That report identifies four deaths 
of law enforcement officers in the line of duty since 2021:  three deaths in 2021, one death 
in 2022, no deaths in 2023, and no deaths in 2024. Although the combined number of 
deaths across all eligible public safety employees is unknown, it is also assumed to be 
minimal. 
 
Tuition revenues at public institutions of higher education are likely not materially affected. 
Public four-year institutions have considerable autonomy over admissions and generally 
maintain fairly stable proportions of in-state and out-of-state students. The bill does not 
affect that autonomy. Therefore, despite the differences in tuition levels for in-state and 
out-of-state students, tuition revenues at most institutions are not materially affected. As 
long as there are no major adjustments to the proportion of students who qualify for 
in-state tuition, institutions can adjust admissions to avoid any significant loss of tuition 
revenue.  
 
Nevertheless, the fiscal impact of this bill is a potential minimal loss of tuition and fee 
revenues equal to the difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees for each 
eligible student who enrolls at a USM institution, MSU, or SMCM.  
 
As discussed below, this estimate anticipates that very few community college students 
qualify for and take advantage of in-state tuition under the bill. As a result, general fund 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 3/ Page 5 
expenditures through the Cade and BCCC funding formulas are not anticipated to be 
materially affected. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  More out-of-county and out-of-state individuals may qualify earlier 
for in-county tuition at a community college than under current law (three-month residency 
requirement). Nevertheless, this analysis assumes very few individuals qualify for and take 
advantage of the benefit. Thus, community college revenues are not anticipated to be 
materially impacted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1024 and HB 1517 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 212 (Senator Corderman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5