START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 12 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 12 
(Delegates Griffith and Grammer) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Juvenile Sex Offender Registry - Qualifying Offenses and Access 
 
 
This bill adds the following offenses under the Criminal Law Article to the list of sexual 
offenses for which a person adjudicated delinquent is required to be included in the juvenile 
sex offender registry:  § 3-307 (all third-degree sexual offenses – certain offenses already 
require registration); § 3-308 (fourth-degree sexual offense); § 3-309 (first‑degree 
attempted rape); § 3-310 (second-degree attempted rape); § 3-602 (sexual abuse of a 
minor); § 3-902 (visual surveillance with prurient intent), if the victim is a minor; and 
§ 11‑207 (child pornography), if the victim does not have knowledge of or does not consent 
to the production or distribution of the child pornography. The bill also (1) adds access to 
a court record by law enforcement or a local school superintendent or the superintendent’s 
designee for purposes of the juvenile sex offender registry as a specified exception to the 
general prohibition on access to juvenile court records; (2) authorizes the local school 
superintendent or the superintendent’s designee to access to the registry; (3) repeals a 
requirement that a person be at least age 14 at the time the delinquent act was committed 
in order to be included in the registry; and (4) specifies that registration requirements 
terminate when the juvenile registrant reaches age 18, if the juvenile court’s jurisdiction 
has otherwise been terminated.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for local school systems to provide 
out-of-school instruction to registrants, as discussed below. No effect on local revenues. 
This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 12/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Registry of Juvenile Sex Offenders  
 
The State maintains a registry of juvenile sex offenders that is accessible only by 
law enforcement personnel for law enforcement purposes. A person must be included in 
the registry of juvenile sex offenders if (1) the person has been adjudicated delinquent for 
an act that, if committed by an adult, would constitute a violation of specified sexual 
offenses in the Criminal Law Article, and (2) the person was a minor who was at least 
age 14 at the time the delinquent act was committed. When the juvenile court’s jurisdiction 
over the juvenile registrant terminates, the juvenile registrant must be removed from the 
registry.  
 
The qualifying offenses for inclusion in the juvenile sex offender registry are:   
 
 
§ 3-303 (first-degree rape), § 3-304 (second-degree rape), or § 3‑307(a)(1) or  
(2) (specified third-degree sexual offenses); or  
 
§ 3-305 (first-degree sexual offense) or § 3-306 (second-degree sexual offense) of 
the Criminal Law Article as those sections existed before October 1, 2017.  
 
Education of Registered Sex Offenders  
 
Subject to limited exceptions, § 11-722 of the Criminal Procedure Article prohibits a sex 
offender registrant or juvenile registrant from knowingly entering onto real property that is 
used for public or nonpublic elementary or secondary education or on which is located 
certain child care homes or a licensed child care institution, as specified by law. As a result, 
each local school board must develop and adopt a policy that enables a registered sex 
offender who is a student to receive an education. The State Board of Education must 
develop and adopt guidelines and a model policy to assist local school boards with the 
development of their respective policies.  
 
Registered sex offenders who are students may receive an education in any of the following 
locations:   
 
 
a location other than a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school by 
participating in (1) a Home and Hospital Teaching Program for Students or 
(2) a program approved by the local school board, as specified;  
 
a Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents; or  
 
a nonpublic educational program, as specified.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 12/ Page 3 
Home and Hospital Instruction 
 
Under State regulations, local school systems must make instructional services available 
to students who are unable to participate in their school due to a physical or emotional 
condition, including but not limited to kidney failure, cancer, asthma, cystic fibrosis, 
sickle cell anemia, depression, and bipolar disorder. Instructional services must be 
available to all students during convalescence or treatment time in a medical institution or 
therapeutic treatment center and at the student’s place of residence. Each local school 
system must determine the manner in which instructional services are delivered, develop 
safety procedures, and develop a review process to resolve any disagreement that arises. 
Instructional services must be delivered by an individual with at least a bachelor’s degree. 
Regulations further specify options for the delivery of instruction and requirements for the 
duration of instruction.  
 
Virtual Schools 
 
Chapter 804 of 2023 defines a virtual school as a public school established by a local board 
or multiple local boards that uses one or more technologies to deliver instruction to its 
students entirely or primarily online and in which students and instructors participate 
remotely from separate locations. It authorizes local school systems, subject to the approval 
of the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), to establish one virtual school 
for the elementary, middle, and high school grade bands. Chapter 804 includes additional 
requirements for teachers employed by virtual schools, students enrolled in virtual schools, 
and for curricula and services provided by virtual schools. MSDE can revoke approval of 
a virtual school under specified conditions.  
 
Confidentiality of Juvenile Court Records 
 
A court record pertaining to a child is confidential and its contents may not be divulged, 
by subpoena or otherwise, except by order of the court upon a showing of good cause, or 
as specified in §§ 7-303 (arrest for a reportable offense) and 22-309 (repealed – applied to 
juvenile services educational programs) of the Education Article. Access is also permitted 
for specified purposes that generally pertain to proceedings involving or services for the 
child.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The fiscal impact of the bill on local school systems varies by 
jurisdiction and depends on (1) the number of juvenile sex offender registrants within a 
school system, including individuals identified as registrants and individuals subject to 
registration as a result of the bill; (2) the additional length of time students remain on the 
juvenile sex offender registry under the bill (which subjects them to out‑of‑school 
instruction requirements); and (3) the ability of a school system to provide out‑of‑school 
instruction to these registrants with existing resources.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 12/ Page 4 
Generally, the bill facilitates local school systems’ compliance with statutes that prohibit 
juvenile registrants from attending in-person school by granting local superintendents 
access to view the juvenile registry. Because the registry of juvenile sex offenders is 
confidential and accessible only to law enforcement for law enforcement purposes, and 
juvenile court records are subject to strict confidentiality requirements, it is difficult for 
schools to know which students are technically prohibited from in-person attendance.  
 
Depending on existing resources, expenditures may increase for local school systems to 
provide out-of-school instruction to students identified as registrants or added to the 
registry under the bill and students who remain on the registry for longer time periods under 
the bill. Virtual learning, currently allowed under State law, may address compliance with 
the bill. There are 24 local education agencies in the State. For context, MSDE reported 
there were 10 elementary, 15 middle school, 18 high school, 11 all school levels, and 
19 any school level virtual programs offered by local education agencies in the State during 
the 2023-2024 school year.  
 
Frederick County Public Schools and St. Mary’s County Public Schools do not anticipate 
a fiscal impact from the bill. However, Baltimore City Public Schools advises that the bill’s 
expansion of registration-eligible offenses may place additional burdens on the school 
system to identify and staff alternative placements for students.  
 
Additional Comments:  While the bill adds violations of § 3-307(a)(3) through (a)(5) to 
the offenses for which juvenile sex offender registration is required, § 3-307(a)(4) and (5) 
require that the alleged perpetrator be at least age 21.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 952 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4