START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 47

P3, L6, N1 6lr0680
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Schindler, Behler, Fair, D. Jones, Kaufman, Ruth, Solomon, and
Woorman
Requested: August 11, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Commission on State and Local Government Real Property Bearing
3 Confederate Names – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission on State and Local Government Real
5 Property Bearing Confederate Names; and generally relating to the Commission on
6 State and Local Government Real Property Bearing Confederate Names.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – State Government
9 Section 9–4201 through 9–4208 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 42.
10 Commission on State and Local Government Real Property Bearing
11 Confederate Names”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – State Government

17 SUBTITLE 42. COMMISSION ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT REAL PROPERTY
18 BEARING CONFEDERATE NAMES.

19 9–4201.

20 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0047*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 47

1 (B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE COMMISSION ON STATE AND LOCAL
2 GOVERNMENT REAL PROPERTY BEARING CONFEDERATE NAMES.

3 (C) “CONFEDERATE NAME” MEANS ANY NAME THAT COMMEMORATES OR
4 REFERENCES ANY ASPECT OF THE STATES IN REBELLION OPERATING AS THE
5 CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA FROM 1861 THROUGH 1865 OR ANY PERSON
6 OR ENTITY THAT SERVED VOLUNTARILY WITH OR ON BEHALF OF THE
7 CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA IN ANY MILITARY OR CIVILIAN CAPACITY.

8 (D) “POLITICAL SUBDIVISION” MEANS:

9 (1) A COUNTY;

10 (2) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

11 (3) AN UNINCORPORATED TOWN;

12 (4) A SCHOOL DISTRICT;

13 (5) A SPECIAL DISTRICT; OR

14 (6) THE MARYLAND–NATIONAL CAPITAL PARK AND PLANNING
15 COMMISSION.

16 (E) “REAL PROPERTY” INCLUDES STREETS, BUILDINGS, PARKS, AND
17 SUBDIVISIONS.

18 9–4202.

19 (A) THERE IS A COMMISSION ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT REAL
20 PROPERTY BEARING CONFEDERATE NAMES.

21 (B) THE COMMISSION IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT IN THE EXECUTIVE
22 BRANCH OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

23 9–4203.

24 (A) (1) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF 24 MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE
25 GOVERNOR WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

26 (2) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT 1 REPRESENTATIVE FROM EACH
27 COUNTY.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 47 3

1 (B) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE A MEMBER FOR INCOMPETENCE OR
2 MISCONDUCT.

3 9–4204.

4 THE COMMISSION SHALL ELECT ANNUALLY A CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR FROM
5 AMONG ITS MEMBERS.

6 9–4205.

7 (A) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST QUARTERLY.

8 (2) IN ADDITION TO MEETING AT LEAST QUARTERLY, THE
9 COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT THE DISCRETION OF THE CHAIR OR THE GOVERNOR.

10 (B) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

11 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
12 COMMISSION; BUT

13 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
14 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

15 9–4206.

16 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL HIRE AN ARCHIVIST TO ASSIST THE
17 COMMISSION WITH ITS WORK.

18 (B) THE ARCHIVIST SHALL BE AN EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE ARCHIVES.

19 9–4207.

20 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL:

21 (1) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A FRAMEWORK TO IDENTIFY REAL
22 PROPERTY BEARING A CONFEDERATE NAME THAT IS OWNED BY THE STATE OR A
23 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION; AND

24 (2) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING THE REAL PROPERTY
25 THAT SHOULD BE RENAMED.

26 (B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2033, THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT ITS
27 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR, THE MAYOR AND CITY
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 47

1 COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY, THE GOVERNING BODY OF EACH COUNTY, AND, IN
2 ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

3 (C) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO AUTHORIZE THE
4 COMMISSION TO RENAME REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE OR A POLITICAL
5 SUBDIVISION.

6 9–4208.

7 (A) (1) THE COMMISSION MAY SEEK MONEY FROM THE FEDERAL
8 GOVERNMENT, FOUNDATIONS, AND PRIVATE SOURCES IN ADDITION TO STATE
9 FINANCING.

10 (2) THE COMMISSION MAY ACCEPT GIFTS, GRANTS, DONATIONS,
11 BEQUESTS, OR ENDOWMENTS FOR ANY OF ITS PURPOSES.

12 (B) MONEY RECEIVED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND
13 INCOME AND FEES DERIVED FROM EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS AND ACTIVITIES OF
14 THE COMMISSION ARE NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
15 PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

16 (C) MONEY MAINTAINED UNDER THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY
17 THE STATE, INCLUDING THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
19 1, 2027. It shall remain effective for a period of 7 years and, at the end of June 30, 2034,
20 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
21 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 4