START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 61

I1 6lr1140
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Lopez
Requested: October 9, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Financial Institutions – Definition of Student Financing Companies – Alteration

3 FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “student financing company” to exclude an
4 institution of postsecondary education for purposes of certain registration and
5 reporting requirements; and generally relating to student financing companies.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 10–101(a) and (i)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Financial Institutions
13 Section 12–1101
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 10–101.

20 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (i) (1) “Institution of postsecondary education” means a school or other
22 institution that offers an educational program in the State for individuals who are at least
23 16 years old and who have graduated from or left elementary or secondary school.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0061*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 61

1 (2) “Institution of postsecondary education” does not include:

2 (i) Any adult education, evening high school, or high school
3 equivalence program conducted by a public school system of the State; or

4 (ii) Any apprenticeship or on–the–job training program subject to
5 approval by the Apprenticeship and Training Council.

6 Article – Financial Institutions

7 12–1101.

8 (a) In this subtitle the following terms have the meanings indicated.

9 (b) (1) “Institution of postsecondary education” has the meaning stated in §
10 10–101 of the Education Article.

11 (2) “Institution of postsecondary education” includes an institution that:

12 (i) 1. Is not accredited by an accredited body recognized and
13 approved by the U.S. Department of Education; or

14 2. Is not authorized to operate in the State; and

15 (ii) Conducts education by correspondence, online, or in person.

16 (c) (1) “Student financing” means an extension of credit to a consumer,
17 contractual or otherwise, contingent or absolute, that is:

18 (i) Not made, insured, or guaranteed under Title IV of the federal
19 Higher Education Act of 1965;

20 (ii) Extended to a consumer expressly, in whole or in part, for
21 postsecondary educational expenses, regardless of whether the extension of credit is
22 provided by the institution of postsecondary education that the consumer attends; and

23 (iii) Not a loan secured by real property or a dwelling.

24 (2) “Student financing” includes:

25 (i) An extension of credit used to refinance or repay existing student
26 financing or federal student loan debt; and

27 (ii) Financial obligations in which the repayment amount is equal to
28 a predetermined percentage of a consumer’s future income.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 61 3

1 (d) (1) “Student financing company” means an entity engaged in the business
2 of securing, making, or extending student financing products, or any purchaser, assignee,
3 or holder of student financing products.

4 (2) “Student financing company” does not include, to the extent that State
5 regulation is preempted by federal law:

6 (i) A bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit
7 union;

8 (ii) A wholly owned subsidiary of a bank or credit union; [or]

9 (iii) An operating subsidiary where each owner is wholly owned by
10 the same bank or credit union; OR

11 (IV) AN INSTITUTION OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3