START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 35

L6, M4 6lr0693
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0816

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: August 14, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Local Government – Regulatory Powers – Regulation of Tree of Heaven

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of a county or municipality to adopt
4 certain ordinances to regulate trees of heaven; authorizing the governing body of a
5 county or municipality to establish a bounty program to incentivize the removal of
6 trees of heaven; and generally relating to local management of trees of heaven.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Local Government
9 Section 1–1318
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 Preamble

13 WHEREAS, Invasive species are nonnative plants and animals whose introduction
14 causes harm to human health, environmental harm, or economic harm – typically through
15 unchecked growth; and

16 WHEREAS, The tree of heaven is a nonnative, deciduous hardwood tree that is
17 considered an invasive species throughout North America because the species spreads
18 quickly and aggressively, crowding out native plants with dense greenery while secreting
19 a chemical into the soil that is toxic to surrounding plants; and

20 WHEREAS, The tree of heaven is the preferred habitat for the spotted lanternfly,
21 another invasive species that is causing economic damage to the agricultural community,
22 stressing native plant populations, and generally acting as a nuisance statewide; now,
23 therefore,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0035*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 35

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Local Government

4 1–1318.

5 (a) (1) In this section[, “invasive] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
6 MEANINGS INDICATED.

7 (2) “INVASIVE bamboo” means bamboo that is characterized by
8 aggressive spreading behavior, including bamboo species in the genus Phyllostachys.

9 (3) “TREE OF HEAVEN” MEANS THE AILANTHUS ALTISSIMA TREE
10 SPECIES.

11 (b) This section applies to all counties and municipalities.

12 (c) The governing body of a county or municipality, by ordinance, may regulate
13 invasive bamboo OR TREES OF HEAVEN, including by prohibiting a person from:

14 (1) selling invasive bamboo OR TREES OF HEAVEN;

15 (2) planting invasive bamboo OR TREES OF HEAVEN; [and]

16 (3) allowing invasive bamboo to grow on the property of the person without
17 proper upkeep and appropriate containment measures, including barriers or trenches; AND

18 (4) ALLOWING TREES OF HEAVEN TO GROW ON THE PERSON’S
19 PROPERTY.

20 (d) The governing body of a county or municipality may provide for the
21 enforcement of an ordinance adopted under this section by:

22 (1) requiring any damages caused by invasive bamboo OR TREES OF
23 HEAVEN to be mitigated; and

24 (2) establishing a civil fine.

25 (E) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY MAY ESTABLISH
26 A BOUNTY PROGRAM TO INCENTIVIZE THE REMOVAL OF TREES OF HEAVEN.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
28 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2