START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 63

F1, D5 6lr0761
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Szeliga, Arikan, Chisholm, Fisher, Grammer, M. Morgan, and
Nawrocki
Requested: September 4, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Interscholastic and Intramural Junior Varsity and Varsity Teams
3 and Locker Rooms – Designation Based on Sex
4 (Fairness in Girls’ Sports Act)

5 FOR the purpose of requiring certain interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and
6 varsity athletic teams or sports sponsored by certain schools and certain locker
7 rooms to be expressly designated based on biological sex; prohibiting certain entities
8 from taking certain adverse actions against a school for maintaining separate
9 interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and varsity athletic teams or sports, or
10 locker rooms for students of the female sex; providing that certain individuals have
11 the right to bring a civil action under certain circumstances; and generally relating
12 to interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and varsity teams and sports and
13 locker rooms in public and nonpublic schools.

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Education
16 Section 7–118
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Education

22 7–118.

23 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0063*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 63

1 INDICATED.

2 (2) “LOCKER ROOM” MEANS A DEDICATED SPACE WHERE A STUDENT
3 CAN CHANGE CLOTHES AND STORE BELONGINGS AND WHERE PARTIAL OR FULL
4 DISROBING IS EXPECTED.

5 (3) “STUDENT OF THE FEMALE SEX” MEANS A STUDENT WHOSE
6 BIOLOGICAL SEX IS FEMALE.

7 (4) “STUDENT OF THE MALE SEX” MEANS A STUDENT WHOSE
8 BIOLOGICAL SEX IS MALE.

9 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

10 (1) PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS; AND

11 (2) NONPUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS WHOSE STUDENT ATHLETES OR
12 ATHLETIC TEAMS COMPETE AGAINST STUDENT ATHLETES OR ATHLETIC TEAMS
13 FROM PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.

14 (C) (1) AN INTERSCHOLASTIC OR INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR
15 VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAM OR SPORT THAT IS SPONSORED BY A PUBLIC OR
16 NONPUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL SHALL BE EXPRESSLY DESIGNATED AS ONE OF THE
17 FOLLOWING BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX:

18 (I) A BOYS’, MALE, OR MEN’S TEAM OR SPORT;

19 (II) A GIRLS’, FEMALE, OR WOMEN’S TEAM OR SPORT; OR

20 (III) A COEDUCATIONAL OR MIXED TEAM OR SPORT.

21 (2) AN INTERSCHOLASTIC OR INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR
22 VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAM OR SPORT DESIGNATED FOR GIRLS, FEMALES, OR WOMEN
23 MAY NOT INCLUDE STUDENTS OF THE MALE SEX.

24 (D) (1) A PUBLIC SCHOOL OR NONPUBLIC SCHOOL UNDER SUBSECTION
25 (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL EXPRESSLY DESIGNATE A LOCKER ROOM AS ONE OF THE
26 FOLLOWING BASED ON BIOLOGICAL SEX:

27 (I) A BOYS’, MALE, OR MEN’S LOCKER ROOM; OR

28 (II) A GIRLS’, FEMALE, OR WOMEN’S LOCKER ROOM.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 63 3

1 (2) A LOCKER ROOM THAT IS USED BY AN INTERSCHOLASTIC OR
2 INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAM DESIGNATED FOR GIRLS, FEMALES,
3 OR WOMEN MAY NOT BE USED BY STUDENTS OF THE MALE SEX.

4 (E) A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, A LICENSING OR ACCREDITING
5 ORGANIZATION, OR AN ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION MAY NOT ACCEPT
6 A COMPLAINT, CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION, OR TAKE ANY OTHER ADVERSE ACTION
7 AGAINST A SCHOOL FOR MAINTAINING SEPARATE INTERSCHOLASTIC OR
8 INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAMS OR SPORTS OR
9 LOCKER ROOMS DESIGNATED FOR STUDENTS OF THE FEMALE SEX.

10 (F) (1) (I) A STUDENT WHO IS DEPRIVED OF AN ATHLETIC
11 OPPORTUNITY OR SUFFERS ANY DIRECT OR INDIRECT HARM AS A RESULT OF A
12 VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE SCHOOL THE
13 STUDENT ATTENDS.

14 (II) A STUDENT WHO IS SUBJECT TO RETALIATION OR OTHER
15 ADVERSE ACTION BY A SCHOOL OR AN ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION
16 AS A RESULT OF REPORTING A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION TO AN EMPLOYEE OR
17 REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SCHOOL, ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION, OR
18 ANY STATE OR FEDERAL AGENCY WITH OVERSIGHT OF SCHOOLS IN THE STATE MAY
19 BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE SCHOOL OR ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR
20 ORGANIZATION.

21 (III) A SCHOOL THAT SUFFERS ANY DIRECT OR INDIRECT HARM
22 FROM A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, A LICENSING OR ACCREDITING ORGANIZATION,
23 OR AN ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF
24 THIS SECTION MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY,
25 LICENSING OR ACCREDITING ORGANIZATION, OR ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR
26 ORGANIZATION.

27 (2) A CIVIL ACTION INITIATED UNDER THIS SECTION MUST BE
28 INITIATED WITHIN 2 YEARS AFTER THE HARM OCCURRED.

29 (3) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO PREVAILS IN A CIVIL ACTION UNDER THIS
30 SECTION MAY RECOVER:

31 (I) MONETARY DAMAGES, INCLUDING DAMAGES FOR ANY
32 PSYCHOLOGICAL, EMOTIONAL, AND PHYSICAL HARM SUFFERED;

33 (II) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COSTS; AND

34 (III) ANY OTHER RELIEF, INCLUDING AN INJUNCTION, AS THE
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 63

1 COURT MAY DETERMINE APPROPRIATE.

2 (G) THIS SECTION MAY BE KNOWN AND CITED AS THE FAIRNESS IN GIRLS’
3 SPORTS ACT.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
5 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
6 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the provision shall be construed to give the
7 provision the maximum effect permitted by law unless the provision is held to be absolutely
8 invalid.

9 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
10 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
11 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other
12 provisions or any other application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid
13 provision or application, and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared
14 severable.

15 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
16 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4