START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 9

E4 6lr1252
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 114

By: Delegates Lopez and Kerr
Requested: October 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 3–1–1 Systems – Expansion Program and Oversight Board – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland 3–1–1 Oversight Board in the Maryland
4 Information Network; establishing the 3–1–1 Program to use certain artificial
5 intelligence to answer certain questions and route certain calls in certain counties;
6 requiring the expansion of the 3–1–1 Program to all of the counties in Maryland on
7 or before a certain date; and generally relating to 3–1–1 systems.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Public Safety
10 Section 1–3A–01 through 1–3A–05 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 3A. 3–1–1
11 Nonemergency Community Information and Referral Systems”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – State Finance and Procurement
16 Section 3.5–801(a) and (c)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Public Safety

22 SUBTITLE 3A. 3–1–1 NONEMERGENCY COMMUNITY INFORMATION AND REFERRAL
23 SYSTEMS.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0009*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 9

1 1–3A–01.

2 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (B) “ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3.5–801
5 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

6 (C) “BOARD” MEANS THE MARYLAND 3–1–1 OVERSIGHT BOARD
7 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 1–3A–02 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

8 (D) “CHATBOT” MEANS A COMPUTER PROGRAM AVAILABLE THROUGH A
9 PHONE NUMBER, A WEBSITE, OR AN APPLICATION THAT SIMULATES HUMAN
10 CONVERSATION THROUGH TEXT OR VOICE, USING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO
11 RESPOND TO TYPED QUESTIONS USING INFORMATION FROM CURATED,
12 AGENCY–APPROVED SOURCES SUCH AS GOVERNMENT WEBSITES, SERVICE
13 CATALOGS, ORDINANCES, FORMS, AND GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM
14 LAYERS.

15 (E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE 3–1–1 PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER §
16 1–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

17 (F) “3–1–1 SYSTEM” MEANS A TELEPHONE SERVICE OR OTHER
18 TECHNOLOGY USED TO ACCESS A LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE LINE, DESIGNED
19 FOR REPORTING AND RESOLVING COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICE
20 ISSUES ON A NONEMERGENCY BASIS.

21 (G) “VOICEBOT” MEANS A COMPUTER PROGRAM AVAILABLE THROUGH A
22 PHONE NUMBER THAT SIMULATES HUMAN CONVERSATION USING ARTIFICIAL
23 INTELLIGENCE TECHNOLOGY THAT:

24 (1) RESPONDS TO VOCAL QUESTIONS OVER THE PHONE USING
25 INFORMATION FROM CURATED, AGENCY–APPROVED SOURCES SUCH AS
26 GOVERNMENT WEBSITES, SERVICE CATALOGS, ORDINANCES, FORMS, AND
27 GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM LAYERS; AND

28 (2) ROUTES CALLS TO APPROPRIATE DESTINATIONS.

29 1–3A–02.

30 (A) THERE IS A MARYLAND 3–1–1 OVERSIGHT BOARD IN THE MARYLAND
31 INFORMATION NETWORK.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 9 3

1 (B) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF:

2 (1) TWO MEMBERS OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY
3 THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

4 (2) TWO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY
5 THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

6 (3) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

7 (I) A PERSON WITH EXPERTISE IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE;

8 (II) A PERSON WITH EXPERTISE IN GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
9 SYSTEMS; AND

10 (III) A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC TO SERVE AS THE
11 CHAIR OF THE BOARD; AND

12 (4) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM EACH OF THE FOLLOWING:

13 (I) THE MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK;

14 (II) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
15 TECHNOLOGY;

16 (III) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY
17 MANAGEMENT;

18 (IV) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF AGING;

19 (V) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF DISABILITIES;

20 (VI) THE MARYLAND 9–1–1 BOARD;

21 (VII) THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES;

22 (VIII) THE MARYLAND MUNICIPAL LEAGUE;

23 (IX) A COUNTY IN THE STATE THAT IS NOT PARTICIPATING IN
24 THE PROGRAM UNDER § 1–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND DOES NOT HAVE AN
25 EXISTING 3–1–1 SYSTEM;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 9

1 (X) A COUNTY IN THE STATE THAT IS NOT PARTICIPATING IN
2 THE PROGRAM UNDER § 1–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND HAS AN EXISTING 3–1–1
3 SYSTEM;

4 (XI) A COUNTY IN THE STATE THAT IS PARTICIPATING IN THE
5 PROGRAM UNDER § 1–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND DOES NOT HAVE AN EXISTING
6 3–1–1 SYSTEM; AND

7 (XII) A COUNTY IN THE STATE THAT IS PARTICIPATING IN THE
8 PROGRAM UNDER § 1–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND HAS AN EXISTING 3–1–1
9 SYSTEM.

10 (C) THE TERMS OF THE MEMBERS DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B)(1), (2),
11 AND (4)(IX) THROUGH (XII) OF THIS SECTION SHALL TERMINATE AFTER THE BOARD
12 SUBMITS THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER § 1–3A–05(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

13 (D) THE BOARD SHALL MEET AT LEAST FOUR TIMES PER CALENDAR YEAR.

14 (E) FOR PURPOSES OF THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT, A PROJECT SITE VISIT OR
15 EDUCATIONAL FIELD TOUR MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED A MEETING OF THE BOARD IF
16 NO ORGANIZATIONAL BUSINESS IS CONDUCTED.

17 (F) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

18 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
19 BUT

20 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
21 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

22 (G) THE MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK SHALL PROVIDE STAFF TO
23 THE BOARD.

24 1–3A–03.

25 (A) THE BOARD SHALL:

26 (1) DESIGNATE COUNTIES TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM;

27 (2) ESTABLISH EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR THE PROGRAM;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 9 5

1 (3) REVIEW VENDOR APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED TO THE BOARD BY
2 THE MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK UNDER § 1–3A–04(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE
3 AND SELECT A VENDOR;

4 (4) ENSURE 3–1–1 SYSTEMS ALIGN WITH BEST PRACTICES FOR
5 TECHNOLOGY, ACCESSIBILITY, AND EQUITY;

6 (5) APPROVE AND COORDINATE STATEWIDE MARKETING STRATEGIES
7 FOR THE PROGRAM UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

8 (6) IMPLEMENT THE PROGRAM; AND

9 (7) DEVELOP A SET OF UNIFIED STATEWIDE DATA STANDARDS FOR
10 3–1–1 SYSTEMS.

11 (B) MARKETING STRATEGIES APPROVED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE:

12 (1) ACCESSIBLE;

13 (2) MULTILINGUAL; AND

14 (3) CULTURALLY COMPETENT.

15 1–3A–04.

16 (A) THE BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH A 3–1–1 PROGRAM.

17 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO EVALUATE AND EXPAND THE USE
18 OF 3–1–1 SYSTEMS IN THE STATE.

19 (C) THE BOARD SHALL DESIGNATE TWO COUNTIES THAT HAVE 3–1–1
20 SYSTEMS AND TWO COUNTIES THAT DO NOT HAVE 3–1–1 SYSTEMS TO PARTICIPATE
21 IN THE PROGRAM.

22 (D) THE BOARD SHALL REQUIRE THE MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK
23 TO:

24 (1) SOLICIT REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS FROM VENDORS FOR
25 TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMS AND OTHER SERVICES NECESSARY TO RUN 3–1–1
26 SYSTEMS FOR THE PROGRAM; AND

27 (2) SUBMIT A LIST OF POSSIBLE VENDORS TO THE BOARD.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 9

1 (E) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30, 2027, THE BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH A
2 CHATBOT IN EACH COUNTY DESIGNATED BY THE BOARD UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF
3 THIS SECTION.

4 (2) EACH CHATBOT SHALL INCLUDE:

5 (I) MULTILINGUAL SUPPORT;

6 (II) INTEGRATION WITH GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM
7 DATA FOR ACCURATE ROUTING; AND

8 (III) CLEAR ESCALATION PROTOCOLS TO ROUTE COMPLEX
9 REQUESTS TO LIVE AGENTS.

10 (3) (I) EACH COUNTY PARTICIPATING IN THE PROGRAM SHALL
11 DESIGNATE THE SOURCES A CHATBOT MAY USE IN RESPONDING TO QUESTIONS.

12 (II) 1. THE VENDOR OF THE 3–1–1 SYSTEM CHOSEN TO HOST
13 A CHATBOT SHALL ANALYZE THE PERFORMANCE OF THE CHATBOT BASED ON USER
14 FEEDBACK REGARDING ACCURACY OF CHATBOT RESPONSES.

15 2. A. THE VENDOR SHALL INVESTIGATE AN ANSWER
16 THAT A USER DESIGNATES AS INACCURATE.

17 B. IF THE SOURCE IS DETERMINED TO BE INACCURATE,
18 THE AGENCY OPERATING THE SOURCE WEBPAGE SHALL UPDATE IT TO BECOME
19 ACCURATE.

20 (F) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, THE BOARD SHALL
21 ESTABLISH A VOICEBOT IN EACH PARTICIPATING COUNTY.

22 (2) EACH VOICEBOT SHALL INCLUDE:

23 (I) MULTILINGUAL SUPPORT;

24 (II) THE ABILITY TO TRANSFER CALLS TO 9–1–1, 2–1–1, AND
25 9–8–8, AS NEEDED;

26 (III) INTEGRATION WITH GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM
27 DATA FOR ACCURATE ROUTING; AND

28 (IV) CLEAR ESCALATION PROTOCOLS TO ROUTE COMPLEX
29 REQUESTS TO LIVE AGENTS.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 9 7

1 (3) THE VENDOR OF THE 3–1–1 SYSTEM CHOSEN TO HOST A VOICEBOT
2 SHALL ANALYZE THE PERFORMANCE OF THE VOICEBOT IN THE SAME WAY AS THE
3 CHATBOT UNDER SUBSECTION (E)(3)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

4 (G) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE BOARD SHALL IMPLEMENT THE
5 PROGRAM IN EACH COUNTY IN THE STATE ACCORDING TO THE IMPLEMENTATION
6 PLAN SUBMITTED UNDER § 1–3A–05(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7 1–3A–05.

8 (A) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2027, THE BOARD, IN
9 CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK, SHALL SUBMIT A
10 REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
11 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE PROGRESS OF THE
12 PROGRAM.

13 (2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
14 INCLUDE:

15 (I) CALL DEFLECTION TRACKING BASED ON THE REDUCTION IN
16 9–1–1 CALLS FOR THAT TIME PERIOD;

17 (II) USER SATISFACTION;

18 (III) ACCESSIBILITY OF THE 3–1–1 SYSTEM;

19 (IV) COSTS SAVED BY A PARTICIPATING COUNTY, IF ANY;

20 (V) AN EVALUATION OF THE INTEGRATION OF THE CHATBOTS
21 AND VOICEBOTS INTO EACH COUNTY; AND

22 (VI) RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT.

23 (B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
24 MARYLAND INFORMATION NETWORK, SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR
25 AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
26 GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT:

27 (1) EVALUATES THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM
28 INCLUDING:

29 (I) COST EFFECTIVENESS OF THE CHATBOT AND VOICEBOT;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 9

1 (II) EQUITY IN SERVICE ACCESS;

2 (III) CHALLENGES OF INTEGRATING THE CHATBOT AND
3 VOICEBOT INTO COUNTY SYSTEMS;

4 (IV) USER SATISFACTION; AND

5 (V) CALL VOLUME DATA FOR 9–1–1 IN THE PROGRAM
6 COUNTIES; AND

7 (2) CREATES A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO EXPAND THE PROGRAM TO
8 EACH COUNTY IN THE STATE.

9 Article – State Finance and Procurement

10 3.5–801.

11 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

12 (c) “Artificial intelligence” means a machine–based system that:

13 (1) can, for a given set of human–defined objectives, make predictions,
14 recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments;

15 (2) uses machine and human–based inputs to perceive real and virtual
16 environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an
17 automated manner; and

18 (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8