START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 64

F1 6lr1490
HB 53/25 – APP (PRE–FILED) CF SB 170

By: Delegates Fair, Miller, Pasteur, Patterson, Stinnett, and Wu
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Task Force on Education Funding and Student Population Growth

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Task Force on Education Funding and Student
4 Population Growth to analyze challenges related to student enrollment counts,
5 student population growth, and education funding; and generally relating to the
6 Task Force on Education Funding and Student Population Growth.

7 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
8 That:

9 (a) There is a Task Force on Education Funding and Student Population Growth.

10 (b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

11 (1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
12 the Senate;

13 (2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
14 House; and

15 (3) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

16 (i) one representative of the State Department of Education;

17 (ii) one representative of the Maryland Association of Boards of
18 Education;

19 (iii) one representative of the Maryland State Education Association;

20 (iv) one representative of the Free State PTA;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0064*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 64

1 (v) one representative of the Maryland Association of Counties;

2 (vi) one representative of the Maryland Association of School
3 Personnel Administrators;

4 (vii) one representative of the Public School Superintendents’
5 Association of Maryland;

6 (viii) one representative of the general public; and

7 (ix) one representative of the Office of the Comptroller.

8 (c) The Governor shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

9 (d) The Office of the Governor shall provide staff for the Task Force.

10 (e) A member of the Task Force:

11 (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

12 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
13 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

14 (f) The Task Force shall:

15 (1) analyze challenges related to the delay in student enrollment counts
16 and its effect on school funding;

17 (2) analyze the connection between growing student populations and the
18 provision of school funding; and

19 (3) make recommendations regarding improvements to the provision of
20 school funding.

21 (g) On or before December 15, 2026, the Task Force shall report its findings and
22 recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
23 Government Article, the General Assembly.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2027, this
26 Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
27 further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2