START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 21 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 21 
(Delegate Allen) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Social Media Platforms - Vloggers and Video Content Featuring Minors (Child 
Influencers Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a vlogger that features the vlogger’s minor child in the vlogger’s video 
content on social media to compensate the child under specified circumstances by paying 
into a trust for the child’s benefit. An adult who was featured in a vlogger’s video content 
as a child on or after October 1, 2026, may request that the content be permanently deleted, 
and upon that request, a social media platform must take all reasonable steps to do so. A 
minor who is required to be compensated under the bill must obtain a work permit or 
special permit under current law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations or finances of the circuit 
courts.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “vlogger” is an individual or business entity that creates video content 
to be posted on a social media platform in exchange for compensation, and a “child” is a 
minor for whom the vlogger is the parent or guardian or if the vlogger is a business entity, 
a minor whose parent or legal guardian has an interest in the business entity.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 21/ Page 2 
A vlogger that features the vlogger’s child in the vlogger’s video content must compensate 
the child if at any time within the previous 12‑month period (1) the vlogger qualified for 
compensation from a social media platform based on the video content’s number of views 
received or the vlogger actually received compensation of at least $0.10 per view for any 
of the vlogger’s video content, and (2) the child was featured for at least 30% of the 
total duration of all content posted within any 30‑day period.  
 
A vlogger that is required to compensate one or more children under the bill must pay into 
separate trusts, each trust for the benefit of a single child on attaining 18 years of age, as 
specified in the bill.  
 
A contract between a vlogger and a social media platform for the creation of video content 
that would reasonably be anticipated to feature a child must include notification to the 
social media platform of the child’s rights under the bill.  
 
Current Law:  Work that is performed in a business that a parent or guardian of the minor 
owns or operates is exempt from Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law and from requirements 
for minor work permits and special permits (described below). Thus, a parent or guardian 
is not required to compensate their child or obtain a work permit for work performed in a 
business that the parent or guardian owns or operates.  
 
Work Permits and Special Permits 
 
Generally, a minor under the age of 14 may not be employed or allowed to be employed, 
and individuals between the ages of 14 and 18 may not work without a permit, subject to 
specified exemptions. Except under conditions specified in statute, a minor between the 
age of 14 and 18 may not work in about a dozen hazardous professions delineated in statute; 
additional occupations are restricted for minors younger than age 16.  
 
A parent or guardian of a minor may apply for a work permit by completing an online 
application and, after reviewing the application, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry 
may issue the permit if permissible.  
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may issue a special permit for a minor of any 
age to be employed as an entertainer, model, or performer. If the commissioner is satisfied 
that the employment will not be detrimental to the minor’s health or welfare, the minor will 
be adequately supervised, and the minor’s education will not be neglected, the 
commissioner must issue the special permit. The special permit must be notarized with the 
signatures of the employer and the minor’s parent or guardian.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 21/ Page 3 
Statute includes additional requirements related to the working hours of minors that 
generally limit the number of hours and time of day during which a minor may be 
employed.  
 
A person who interferes with the commissioner’s enforcement of the statute or knowingly 
gives false information to the commissioner is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. A person who 
knowingly employs or allows a minor to be employed in violation of the law is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $10,000, and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year.  
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business that is a vlogger that features the vlogger’s minor 
child in the vlogger’s video content must compensate the child and obtain a work or special 
permit for the child.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1453 of 2025 and HB 645 and SB 1162 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3