START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 77

I3 6lr1444
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Woods
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Consumer Protection – Sale and Resale of Event Tickets – Registration and
3 Regulation

4 FOR the purpose of requiring, to resell a ticket in the State, certain ticket resellers to
5 register annually with the Division of Consumer Protection of the Office of the
6 Attorney General; requiring registrants and secondary ticket exchanges to maintain
7 and report to the Division certain information relating to ticket sales of registrants;
8 prohibiting a reseller from selling or offering to sell a ticket for more than a certain
9 price; prohibiting a secondary ticket exchange from charging a service fee in excess
10 of a certain amount; requiring a ticket issuer, a secondary ticket exchange, or a
11 reseller to provide a certain refund to a ticket purchaser within a certain number of
12 days; prohibiting a person from restricting the transfer or resale of a ticket that was
13 made available to the general public for purchase except under certain
14 circumstances; requiring a ticket issuer or a secondary ticket exchange to take
15 commercially and technologically feasible steps to implement and maintain certain
16 technology; establishing that a violation of this Act is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive
17 trade practice subject to enforcement and penalty provisions under the Maryland
18 Consumer Protection Act; and generally relating to consumer protection and the sale
19 and resale of event tickets.

20 BY repealing
21 Article – Commercial Law
22 Section 13–310.1
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2025 Replacement Volume)

25 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
26 Article – Commercial Law
27 Section 13–301(14)(xlvii)
28 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0077*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 77

1 (2025 Replacement Volume)

2 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
3 Article – Commercial Law
4 Section 13–301(14)(xlviii)
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2025 Replacement Volume)

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Commercial Law
9 Section 13–301(14)(xlix); and 14–5101 through 14–5112 to be under the new subtitle
10 “Subtitle 51. Ticket Resale Consumer Protection and Transparency Act”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That Section(s) 13–310.1 of Article – Commercial Law of the Annotated Code of Maryland
15 be repealed.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
17 as follows:

18 Article – Commercial Law

19 13–301.

20 Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

21 (14) Violation of a provision of:

22 (xlvii) Title 14, Subtitle 50 of this article; [or]

23 (xlviii) Section 13–411.1(c)(2) of the Transportation Article; or

24 (XLIX) TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 51 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

25 SUBTITLE 51. TICKET RESALE CONSUMER PROTECTION AND TRANSPARENCY
26 ACT.

27 14–5101.

28 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
29 INDICATED.

30 (B) “CONSUMER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 77 3

1 (C) “DIVISION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

2 (D) “REGISTRANT” MEANS A PERSON REGISTERED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
3 TO RESELL A TICKET.

4 (E) (1) “RESALE” MEANS THE SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT SALE OF A
5 TICKET.

6 (2) “RESALE” INCLUDES A SALE BY ANY MEANS INCLUDING IN
7 PERSON, BY TELEPHONE, BY MAIL, BY E–MAIL, BY FACSIMILE, OR THROUGH A
8 WEBSITE OR OTHER ELECTRONIC MEANS.

9 (F) “RESELLER” MEANS A PERSON ENGAGED IN THE RESALE OF TICKETS.

10 (G) “SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE” MEANS AN ELECTRONIC
11 MARKETPLACE THAT ENABLES A PERSON TO SELL, PURCHASE, AND RESELL
12 TICKETS.

13 (H) (1) “SPECULATIVE TICKET” MEANS A TICKET THAT IS NOT IN THE
14 ACTUAL OR CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION OF A RESELLER AT THE TIME OF SALE,
15 ADVERTISEMENT, OR LISTING.

16 (2) “SPECULATIVE TICKET” INCLUDES A TICKET SOLD BY A
17 RESELLER THAT AT THE TIME OF RESALE:

18 (I) IS NOT IN THE PHYSICAL POSSESSION OF THE RESELLER;

19 (II) IS NOT OWNED BY THE RESELLER; OR

20 (III) IS NOT UNDER CONTRACT TO BE TRANSFERRED TO THE
21 RESELLER.

22 (I) “TICKET” MEANS PHYSICAL, ELECTRONIC, OR OTHER EVIDENCE THAT
23 GRANTS THE POSSESSOR OF THE EVIDENCE LICENSE TO ENTER A PLACE OF
24 ENTERTAINMENT FOR ONE OR MORE EVENTS AT A SPECIFIED DATE AND TIME.

25 (J) (1) “TICKET ISSUER” MEANS A PERSON THAT, DIRECTLY OR
26 INDIRECTLY, ISSUES INITIAL TICKETS FOR AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT.

27 (2) “TICKET ISSUER” INCLUDES:

28 (I) A MUSICIAN OR MUSICAL GROUP;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 77

1 (II) AN OPERATOR OF A VENUE;

2 (III) A SPONSOR OR A PROMOTER OF AN ENTERTAINMENT
3 EVENT;

4 (IV) A SPORTS TEAM PARTICIPATING IN AN ENTERTAINMENT
5 EVENT;

6 (V) A SPORTS LEAGUE WHOSE TEAMS ARE PARTICIPATING IN
7 AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT;

8 (VI) A THEATER COMPANY;

9 (VII) A MARKETPLACE OPERATED FOR CONSUMERS TO MAKE AN
10 INITIAL PURCHASE OF TICKETS; AND

11 (VIII) AN AGENT OF ANY OF THE PERSONS LISTED IN ITEMS (I)
12 THROUGH (VII) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

13 14–5102.

14 (A) (1) A RESELLER THAT SELLS OR OFFERS TO SELL AT LEAST 50
15 TICKETS IN A CALENDAR YEAR SHALL REGISTER ANNUALLY WITH THE DIVISION TO
16 RESELL A TICKET IN THE STATE.

17 (2) IF A RESELLER LISTS A SINGLE TICKET ACROSS MULTIPLE
18 PLATFORMS, THE TOTAL NUMBER OF LISTINGS FOR THE TICKET SHALL COUNT
19 TOWARD THE REGISTRATION THRESHOLD IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

20 (B) ANY ENTITY UNDER COMMON OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN
21 INDIVIDUAL SHALL BE CONSIDERED A SINGLE RESELLER FOR PURPOSES OF THE
22 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION.

23 (C) A RESELLER SHALL APPLY FOR REGISTRATION USING AN APPLICATION
24 FORM PROVIDED BY THE DIVISION THAT INCLUDES:

25 (1) THE APPLICANT’S FULL LEGAL NAME AND ANY ALIASES OR
26 USERNAMES USED TO RESELL TICKETS;

27 (2) THE APPLICANT’S CONTACT INFORMATION, INCLUDING A
28 PHYSICAL STREET ADDRESS, AN E–MAIL ADDRESS, AND A TELEPHONE NUMBER;

29 (3) THE APPLICANT’S SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 77 5

1 (4) THE APPLICANT’S EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER AND
2 CONTACT INFORMATION FOR ANY EMPLOYER;

3 (5) ANY ASSOCIATED ENTITY INVOLVED IN THE APPLICANT’S RESALE
4 OF TICKETS; AND

5 (6) ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DIVISION.

6 (D) THE DIVISION SHALL:

7 (1) MAINTAIN A LIST OF ALL REGISTRANTS THAT INCLUDES
8 INFORMATION ON EACH REGISTRANT’S VIOLATIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF ANY,
9 WITHIN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 5 YEARS;

10 (2) PUBLISH THE LIST ON THE DIVISION’S PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE
11 WEBSITE; AND

12 (3) UPDATE THE LIST AT LEAST ONCE EVERY 30 DAYS.

13 (E) THE DIVISION MAY NOT PUBLICLY DISCLOSE INFORMATION PROVIDED
14 BY AN APPLICANT FOR A REGISTRATION UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(3) OF THIS
15 SECTION.

16 (F) (1) EACH REGISTRANT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DIVISION A REPORT
17 FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 6–MONTH PERIOD:

18 (I) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER JULY 1, 2027, AND ON OR BEFORE
19 EACH JULY 1 THEREAFTER; AND

20 (II) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER JANUARY 1, 2028, AND ON OR
21 BEFORE EACH JANUARY 1 THEREAFTER.

22 (2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
23 SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

24 (I) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF TICKETS THE REGISTRANT SOLD
25 DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD;

26 (II) THE ORIGINAL PURCHASE PRICE OF EACH INITIAL TICKET
27 PURCHASED BY THE REGISTRANT THAT THE REGISTRANT SOLD DURING THE
28 REPORTING PERIOD; AND
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 77

1 (III) THE FINAL RESALE PRICE OF EACH TICKET THE
2 REGISTRANT SOLD DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD.

3 (G) (1) A REGISTRANT SHALL OBTAIN AND MAINTAIN A SURETY BOND OF
4 AT LEAST $10,000.

5 (2) THE SURETY BOND SHALL COVER COMPENSATION FOR LOST
6 FUNDS BY A CONSUMER, INCLUDING TRAVEL EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE
7 CONSUMER IF THE REGISTRANT FAILS TO DELIVER A PURCHASED TICKET OR
8 ENGAGES IN A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

9 (3) THE DIVISION MAY ADJUST THE SURETY BOND AMOUNT FOR A
10 REGISTRANT BASED ON THE REGISTRANT’S SALES VOLUME AND CONSUMER
11 COMPLAINT HISTORY.

12 (4) A REGISTRANT SHALL SUBMIT EVIDENCE OF THE SURETY BOND
13 TO A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE BEFORE LISTING ANY TICKET FOR RESALE.

14 (H) THE DIVISION MAY REVOKE OR SUSPEND THE REGISTRATION OF A
15 REGISTRANT FOR ANY VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR A PERIOD OF:

16 (1) AT LEAST 1 YEAR; BUT

17 (2) NOT LONGER THAN 5 YEARS.

18 14–5103.

19 (A) A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE SHALL:

20 (1) MAINTAIN RECORDS OF ALL REGISTRANTS THAT USE THE
21 SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE AND VERIFY THAT EACH REGISTRANT MEETS THE
22 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 14–5102 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

23 (2) REPORT TO THE DIVISION ANY UNREGISTERED OR
24 NONCOMPLIANT RESELLERS SELLING OR OFFERING TO SELL A TICKET ON THE
25 SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE; AND

26 (3) MAINTAIN RECORDS OF ALL TICKET SALES ON THE SECONDARY
27 TICKET EXCHANGE, INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF TICKETS AND THE PRICE OF EACH
28 TICKET SOLD OR RESOLD.

29 (B) (1) EACH SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
30 DIVISION FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 6–MONTH PERIOD A REPORT:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 77 7

1 (I) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER JULY 1, 2027, AND ON OR BEFORE
2 EACH JULY 1 THEREAFTER; AND

3 (II) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER JANUARY 1, 2028, AND ON OR
4 BEFORE EACH JANUARY 1 THEREAFTER.

5 (2) A REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
6 SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

7 (I) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF TICKETS THE REGISTRANT SOLD ON
8 THE SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD;

9 (II) THE ORIGINAL PURCHASE PRICE PAID BY THE REGISTRANT
10 OF EACH INITIAL TICKET THAT THE REGISTRANT SOLD DURING THE REPORTING
11 PERIOD; AND

12 (III) THE FINAL RESALE PRICE OF EACH TICKET THE
13 REGISTRANT SOLD DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD.

14 14–5104.

15 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGES,
16 TICKET ISSUERS, AND RESELLERS.

17 (B) THE LISTING FOR A TICKET AND EACH STEP OF A TRANSACTION TO
18 PURCHASE A TICKET SHALL:

19 (1) CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSE THE TOTAL PRICE OF
20 THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES OTHER THAN SHIPPING COSTS THAT
21 ARE NOT DETERMINABLE AT A STEP IN THE TRANSACTION;

22 (2) PROVIDE AN ITEMIZED LISTING OF ALL CHARGES THAT
23 CONSTITUTE THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES;
24 AND

25 (3) IDENTIFY THE SEAT NUMBER AND ZONE OR SECTION OF THE
26 TICKET, TO THE EXTENT APPLICABLE TO THE SEAT AND VENUE.

27 (C) (1) THE TOTAL PRICE OF A TICKET UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF
28 THIS SECTION MAY BE INCREASED IN A NONINITIAL STEP OF A TRANSACTION BY THE
29 AMOUNT OF REASONABLE SHIPPING COSTS FOR PHYSICALLY DELIVERED TICKETS.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 77

1 (2) THE SHIPPING COSTS ALLOWED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
2 SUBSECTION MAY VARY WITH THE PURCHASER’S LOCATION RELATIVE TO THE
3 SHIPMENT’S LOCATION OF ORIGIN AND THE DELIVERY METHOD SELECTED BY THE
4 PURCHASER.

5 (3) THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES, TAXES,
6 AND SHIPPING COSTS, SHALL BE CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSED PRIOR
7 TO FINAL PURCHASE OF THE TICKET.

8 14–5105.

9 (A) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A FEE THAT A SECONDARY
10 TICKET EXCHANGE MAY CHARGE FOR THE SERVICE OF PROVIDING A MARKETPLACE
11 FOR THE RESALE OF A TICKET.

12 (2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
13 PARAGRAPH, THE TOTAL PRICE AT WHICH A RESELLER MAY SELL OR OFFER TO SELL
14 A TICKET MAY NOT EXCEED THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE INITIAL TICKET, INCLUDING
15 ALL FEES AND TAXES IN CONNECTION WITH THE INITIAL TICKET, PLUS 10% OF THE
16 TOTAL PRICE.

17 (II) IF INITIAL TICKETS WERE PURCHASED FOR A SERIES OF
18 EVENTS, SUCH AS SEASON TICKETS FOR A SPORTS TEAM, THE TOTAL RESALE PRICE
19 OF A TICKET FOR A SINGLE EVENT MAY NOT EXCEED THE TOTAL PRICE OF A
20 COMPARABLE SINGLE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES, PLUS 10% OF THE
21 TOTAL PRICE.

22 (B) A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE MAY NOT CHARGE FOR THE SERVICE
23 OF PROVIDING A MARKETPLACE FOR THE RESALE OF A TICKET A FEE THAT EXCEEDS
24 10% OF THE TOTAL PRICE, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES, OF THE INITIAL
25 TICKET.

26 14–5106.

27 A RESELLER MAY NOT SELL OR OFFER TO SELL A SPECULATIVE TICKET.

28 14–5107.

29 (A) A TICKET ISSUER, SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE, OR RESELLER THAT
30 DIRECTLY ENGAGES IN A SALES TRANSACTION WITH A PURCHASER FOR THE
31 PURCHASE OF A TICKET SHALL PROVIDE THE PURCHASER WITH A FULL REFUND OF
32 THE TOTAL AMOUNT PAID BY THE PURCHASER, INCLUDING THE PRICE OF THE
33 TICKET AND ANY FEES AND TAXES, IF:
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 77 9

1 (1) THE TICKET PURCHASED IS COUNTERFEIT;

2 (2) THE EVENT FOR WHICH THE TICKET WAS PURCHASED IS
3 CANCELED; OR

4 (3) THE TICKET FAILS TO CONFORM TO THE DESCRIPTION AS
5 ADVERTISED OR REPRESENTED TO THE PURCHASER BY THE SELLER.

6 (B) A TICKET ISSUER, SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE, OR RESELLER SHALL
7 PROVIDE A REFUND REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN 10
8 DAYS AFTER:

9 (1) THE TICKET ISSUER, SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE, OR
10 RESELLER HAS KNOWLEDGE THAT:

11 (I) THE TICKET PURCHASED IS COUNTERFEIT; OR

12 (II) THE TICKET FAILS TO CONFORM TO THE DESCRIPTION AS
13 ADVERTISED OR REPRESENTED TO THE PURCHASER BY THE SELLER; OR

14 (2) THE EVENT FOR WHICH THE TICKET WAS PURCHASED IS
15 CANCELED.

16 14–5108.

17 (A) SUBJECT TO RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY A TICKET ISSUER IN
18 ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PERSON MAY NOT
19 PROHIBIT OR RESTRICT THE TRANSFER OR RESALE OF A TICKET THAT WAS MADE
20 AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC FOR PURCHASE UNLESS:

21 (1) THE PERSON CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSES TO THE
22 CONSUMER THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF TRANSFERABILITY; AND

23 (2) THE CONSUMER ACKNOWLEDGES RECEIPT OF THE DISCLOSURE
24 BEFORE FINAL PURCHASE OF THE TICKET.

25 (B) A PERSON MAY:

26 (1) ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN, AND ENFORCE RESTRICTIONS
27 CONCERNING CONDUCT, BEHAVIOR, AGE, OR PUBLIC HEALTH OR SAFETY AT A
28 VENUE OR AN EVENT; AND
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 77

1 (2) SET LIMITS ON THE QUANTITY OF TICKETS AN INDIVIDUAL MAY
2 PURCHASE.

3 14–5109.

4 A TICKET ISSUER AND A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE SHALL TAKE
5 COMMERCIALLY AND TECHNOLOGICALLY FEASIBLE STEPS TO IMPLEMENT AND
6 MAINTAIN TECHNOLOGY DESIGNED TO PREVENT A MACHINE, DEVICE, COMPUTER
7 PROGRAM, OR COMPUTER SOFTWARE WITH OR WITHOUT HUMAN ASSISTANCE FROM
8 BYPASSING RESTRICTIONS DESIGNED TO LIMIT THE NUMBER OF TICKETS THAT CAN
9 BE PURCHASED BY AN INDIVIDUAL ON A PRIMARY OR SECONDARY TICKET
10 EXCHANGE.

11 14–5110.

12 A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE MAY NOT PROVIDE A MARKETPLACE FOR
13 THE SALE OR RESALE OF A TICKET THAT VIOLATES THIS SUBTITLE.

14 14–5111.

15 A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE IS:

16 (1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
17 THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

18 (2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS
19 CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE.

20 14–5112.

21 THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CITED AS THE TICKET RESALE CONSUMER
22 PROTECTION AND TRANSPARENCY ACT.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
24 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 10