START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 96 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 96 
(Delegate Phillips) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission - Membership - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill adds two members to the Baltimore County School Board Nominating 
Commission, one appointed by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal 
Employees Local 3, Council 434 and one appointed by the Citizens Advisory Council for 
Gifted and Talented Education. The bill also (1) replaces the membership of a member 
appointed by the Baltimore County Chamber of Commerce with a member appointed by 
the Greater Baltimore County Chamber of Commerce (the former’s successor 
organization) and (2) specifies that the initial member appointed by the Greater Baltimore 
County Chamber of Commerce must serve the remainder of the term of the member 
appointed by the Baltimore County Chamber of Commerce before terminating as specified. 
Lastly, the bill staggers member terms by specifying members whose terms must terminate 
at the end of September 30, 2028, and other members whose terms must terminate at the 
end of September 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Adding additional members to the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission does not materially affect Baltimore County finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 96/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
The Baltimore County Board of Education  
 
The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of 12 members, including 4 at-large 
members appointed by the Governor; 7 nonpartisan members each elected from  
1 of 7 school board districts; and 1 student member. The Baltimore County Board of 
Education is 1 of 4 hybrid school boards in the State with both appointed and elected 
members. There are 20 elected school boards in the State. Appendix – Local Boards of 
Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of 
the 24 local boards of education. 
 
The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission  
 
The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission consists of 19 members, 
which must reflect the diversity of Baltimore County. The Governor, in consultation with 
the Baltimore County Executive, must appoint 8 members, 1 from each legislative district 
in Baltimore County. The county executive must appoint 1 member from the county at 
large, and 10 specified organizations must each appoint 1 member. The county executive 
must designate a member as chair, and the Baltimore County Public School System must 
provide staff for the commission. 
 
For each nomination for a vacancy on the county board, the commission must submit a list 
of names to the Governor. Absent an extraordinary circumstance, the Governor must 
appoint a member to the county board from the list provided by the commission. If the 
Governor elects not to appoint a member from a list submitted by the commission, the 
Governor must return the list and request that the commission submit a list of additional 
qualified candidates. Before the commission begins interviewing candidates for the 
appointment to the county board, the commission must publish the names of all candidates 
on the commission’s website. 
 
When the commission considers the selection of multiple nominees to recommend to the 
Governor as qualified candidates for appointment, the commission must hold at least  
three public hearings, each in a different councilmanic district. However, when only a 
single vacancy occurs on the county board, the commission must only hold at least  
one public meeting at either the councilmanic district in which the vacancy occurred when 
the vacancy occurs in a councilmanic seat or in the county board’s administrative offices 
when the vacancy occurs in an at-large seat. Regardless of the number of candidates 
considered, the commission must make live video streams and a complete and unedited 
archived video recording of each public meeting available on its website. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 96/ Page 3 
Chapter 356 of 2024 requires that a commission meeting must be open to the public if it 
involves action on a candidate for appointment to the county board. However, a 
commission meeting that involves an interview of or a deliberation about a candidate for 
appointment to the county board must be held without the public in attendance and must 
be recorded. The commission must provide a copy of a meeting recording for public 
inspection within 48 hours after receiving a request for the recording. 
 
The commission may retain and reactivate the application of a candidate for a vacancy on 
the county board for up to two years from the date the commission submitted the list of 
nominees to the Governor for the vacancy for which the applicant was initially considered. 
In order to reactivate an application, the commission must (1) notify and request consent 
from applicants within 14 days of the new vacancy and (2) receive consent from the 
applicant within 14 days of the applicant receiving notification. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 98 (Senator Sydnor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 96/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. All 24 boards have either student members 
or student representatives who regularly present at board meetings; however, only 8 boards 
allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority to vote on matters 
relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with voting student 
members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to operating and 
capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership 
of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2026 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Anne Arundel 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore City 
12 
3 or 4 years A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (1-year term) 
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed by Governor from county at large 
7 elected from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed by Governor from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 96/ Page 5 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Harford 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed by County Executive from county 
at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (1-year term) 
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Kent 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Prince George’s 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (1-year term) 
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Somerset2 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 96/ Page 6 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Washington3 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Wicomico4 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
4 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, 1-year term) 
 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed and elected board:  (1) in Baltimore County, members are 
appointed by the Governor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission; (2) in Caroline County, members are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate; (3) in Baltimore City, members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names 
provided by the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel; and (4) in Harford County, 
members are appointed by the county executive with the advice and consent of the county council. 
2 Although not in statute, the Somerset County Board of Education reports that there are three nonvoting 
student representatives who give presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the 
three regular high schools in the county. 
3Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
4 Chapter 429 of 2025 codified at least one nonvoting student member on the Wicomico County Board of 
Education. The Wicomico County Board of Education includes four student representatives who give 
presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the four high schools in the county. 
At each meeting, one of the four student representatives sits with the regular board members on the dais for 
the full meeting, while other student board members come forward to speak as needed. 
 
Source:  Sections 3‑101 through 3‑1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6