START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 16

E5 6lr0856
HB 1156/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0857

By: Delegate Phillips
Requested: September 16, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Correctional Services – Maryland Parole Commission – Members and Hearing
3 Examiners

4 FOR the purpose of altering the number of members of the Maryland Parole Commission;
5 altering the appointing authority and method of appointment of parole
6 commissioners; repealing the authority of the Commission to appoint and utilize
7 hearing examiners; and generally relating to the Maryland Parole Commission.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Correctional Services
10 Section 7–202, 7–204, 7–205(a), 7–207, 7–302, 7–303, and 7–305
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 BY repealing
14 Article – Correctional Services
15 Section 7–306
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
19 Article – Correctional Services
20 Section 7–307
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2025 Replacement Volume)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Correctional Services

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0016*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 16

1 7–202.

2 (a) (1) The Commission consists of [ten] AT LEAST 15 BUT NOT MORE THAN
3 20 members.

4 (2) (I) [With the approval of the] SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (III)
5 OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE Governor [and the advice and consent of the Senate, the
6 Secretary] shall appoint the members of the Commission FROM AMONG NOMINEES
7 CHOSEN BY A PANEL CONSISTING OF:

8 1. THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
9 POLICE TRAINING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION;

10 2. THE PUBLIC DEFENDER OF MARYLAND;

11 3. THE PRESIDENT OF THE MARYLAND STATE’S
12 ATTORNEYS’ ASSOCIATION;

13 4. THREE SERVICE PROVIDERS FROM THE FIELDS OF
14 MENTAL HEALTH, SUBSTANCE USE TREATMENT, VOCATIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL
15 TRAINING, OR COMMUNITY ORGANIZING, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR;

16 5. THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION;

17 6. THE PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
18 SOCIAL WORKERS – MARYLAND CHAPTER, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

19 7. THREE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC,
20 APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; AND

21 8. ONE PRISONERS’ RIGHTS ADVOCATE, CHOSEN BY THE
22 GOVERNOR.

23 (II) THE PANEL SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR THE NAMES
24 OF AT LEAST THREE QUALIFIED NOMINEES FOR EACH COMMISSIONER VACANCY TO
25 BE FILLED.

26 (III) THE REQUIREMENT FOR NOMINATION BY THE PANEL
27 UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH APPLIES ONLY TO AN INITIAL TERM AS COMMISSIONER
28 AND NOT TO ANY SUBSEQUENT CONSECUTIVE TERM OF A SITTING COMMISSIONER
29 WHOSE INITIAL APPOINTMENT TO OFFICE WAS MADE PURSUANT TO PANEL
30 NOMINATION.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 16 3

1 (b) Each commissioner shall:

2 (1) be appointed without regard to political affiliation;

3 (2) be a resident of the State; and

4 (3) have training and experience in law, sociology, psychology, psychiatry,
5 education, social work, or criminology.

6 (c) Each commissioner:

7 (1) shall devote full time to the duties of the Commission; and

8 (2) may not have any other employment that conflicts with the
9 commissioner’s devotion of full time to the duties of the Commission.

10 (d) (1) The term of a commissioner is 6 years.

11 (2) At the end of a term, a commissioner continues to serve until a successor
12 is appointed and qualifies.

13 (3) A commissioner who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for
14 the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

15 (e) (1) With the approval of the Governor, the Secretary may remove a
16 commissioner for disability, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office.

17 (2) Before removing a commissioner, the Secretary shall:

18 (i) give the commissioner written notice of the charges against the
19 commissioner; and

20 (ii) hold a public hearing on the charges.

21 (f) [(1) If a commissioner is unable to perform the commissioner’s duties
22 because of sickness, incapacity, or disqualification, the Secretary may appoint a hearing
23 examiner to the Commission to perform those duties until that commissioner is able to
24 resume those duties or until a new commissioner is appointed and qualifies.

25 (2) A hearing examiner appointed under this subsection is entitled to the
26 same compensation as a commissioner.

27 (3) A hearing examiner appointed under this subsection may not
28 participate in a proceeding before the Commission in which the hearing examiner
29 participated as a hearing examiner.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 16

1 (g)] With the approval of the Governor, the Secretary shall designate a
2 chairperson of the Commission from among its members.

3 7–204.

4 (a) [(1)] The Commission shall appoint the staff necessary to perform the duties
5 of the Commission.

6 [(2)] (B) The activities of the staff may not duplicate or conflict with the
7 functions and services of the Division of Parole and Probation.

8 [(3)] (C) Except as otherwise provided by law, the staff is subject to the
9 provisions of Title 6, Subtitle 4 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

10 [(b) (1) (i) The Secretary may appoint the hearing examiners necessary to
11 conduct parole release hearings under paragraph (2) of this subsection, as provided in the
12 State budget.

13 (ii) Each hearing examiner shall:

14 1. be appointed without regard to political affiliation;

15 2. be a resident of the State; and

16 3. have training and experience in law, sociology, psychology,
17 psychiatry, education, social work, or criminology.

18 (iii) A hearing examiner is entitled to compensation in accordance
19 with the State budget.

20 (2) A hearing examiner or a commissioner acting as a hearing examiner
21 may hear cases for parole release that are not required to be heard by the Commission
22 under § 7–205(a)(3) of this subtitle.]

23 7–205.

24 (a) The Commission has the exclusive power to:

25 (1) authorize the parole of an individual sentenced under the laws of the
26 State to any correctional facility in the State;

27 (2) negotiate, enter into, and sign predetermined parole release
28 agreements as provided under subsection (b) of this section;

29 (3) hear cases for parole or administrative release [in which:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 16 5

1 (i) the Commissioner of Correction, after reviewing the
2 recommendation of the appropriate managing official, objects to a parole;

3 (ii) the incarcerated individual was convicted of a homicide;

4 (iii) the incarcerated individual is serving a sentence of life
5 imprisonment;

6 (iv) the parole hearing is open to the public under § 7–304 of this title;

7 (v) the incarcerated individual fails to meet the requirements of the
8 administrative release process established under § 7–301.1 of this title;

9 (vi) a victim requests a hearing as provided under § 7–301.1 of this
10 title; or

11 (vii) the Commission finds that a hearing for administrative release
12 is necessary under § 7–301.1 of this title];

13 (4) [hear exceptions to recommendations of a hearing examiner or a
14 commissioner acting as a hearing examiner;

15 (5) review summarily all recommendations of a hearing examiner or a
16 commissioner acting as a hearing examiner to which an exception has not been filed;

17 (6)] hear a case for parole in absentia when an individual who was
18 sentenced in this State to serve a term of imprisonment is in a correctional facility of a
19 jurisdiction other than this State;

20 [(7)] (5) hear cases of parole revocation;

21 [(8)] (6) if delegated by the Governor, hear cases involving an alleged
22 violation of a conditional pardon; and

23 [(9)] (7) determine conditions for administrative release under § 7–301.1
24 of this title.

25 7–207.

26 (a) [(1)] Subject to the approval of the Secretary, the Commission shall adopt
27 regulations governing its policies and activities under this title.

28 [(2)] (B) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 10–101(g)(2)(i) of the State
29 Government Article, regulations adopted under [paragraph (1) of this subsection]
30 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION shall comply with Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the State
31 Government Article.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 16

1 [(b) The Commission may adopt regulations governing:

2 (1) the conduct of proceedings before it or the hearing examiners; and

3 (2) the review and disposition of written exceptions to the recommendation
4 of a hearing examiner.]

5 7–302.

6 The Commission [or the Commission’s hearing examiners] shall hear cases for
7 parole release:

8 (1) at least once each month at each correctional facility in the Division of
9 Correction; and

10 (2) as often as necessary at other correctional facilities in the State at
11 which incarcerated individuals eligible for parole consideration are confined.

12 7–303.

13 (a) Before any hearing on parole release, the Commission shall give the
14 incarcerated individual adequate and timely written notice of:

15 (1) the date, time, and place of the hearing; and

16 (2) the factors that the Commission [or hearing examiner] will consider in
17 determining whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole.

18 (b) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the
19 notice also shall indicate that, before the hearing, the incarcerated individual or the
20 incarcerated individual’s representative may, on request, examine any document that the
21 Commission [or hearing examiner] will use in determining whether the incarcerated
22 individual is suitable for parole.

23 (ii) A document, or a portion of it, is not available for examination, if
24 the Commission determines that:

25 1. the document or portion contains a diagnostic opinion;

26 2. the incarcerated individual’s knowledge of the document
27 or portion would disrupt seriously a program of rehabilitation;

28 3. the document or portion contains sources of information
29 obtained on a promise of confidentiality; or

30 4. the document or portion is otherwise privileged.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 16 7

1 (iii) If the Commission determines that a document or a portion of it
2 is not available for examination, the Commission shall notify the incarcerated individual
3 that:

4 1. the document or portion is not available for examination;
5 and

6 2. on request and if appropriate, the Commission will provide
7 the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative with the
8 substance of any information contained in the document or portion.

9 (2) The Commission shall delete the address and phone number of the
10 victim or the victim’s designated representative from a document before the incarcerated
11 individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative examines the document.

12 7–305.

13 Each [hearing examiner and] commissioner determining whether an incarcerated
14 individual is suitable for parole, and the Commission before entering into a predetermined
15 parole release agreement, shall consider:

16 (1) the circumstances surrounding the crime;

17 (2) the physical, mental, and moral qualifications of the incarcerated
18 individual;

19 (3) the progress of the incarcerated individual during confinement,
20 including the academic progress of the incarcerated individual in the mandatory education
21 program required under § 22–102 of the Education Article;

22 (4) a report on a drug or alcohol evaluation that has been conducted on the
23 incarcerated individual, including any recommendations concerning the incarcerated
24 individual’s amenability for treatment and the availability of an appropriate treatment
25 program;

26 (5) whether, taking into account the totality of the circumstances including
27 the age of the incarcerated individual, there is reasonable probability that the incarcerated
28 individual, if released on parole, will not recidivate;

29 (6) whether release of the incarcerated individual on parole is compatible
30 with public safety;

31 (7) an updated victim impact statement or recommendation prepared
32 under § 7–801 of this title;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 16

1 (8) any recommendation made by the sentencing judge at the time of
2 sentencing;

3 (9) any information that is presented to a commissioner at a meeting with
4 the victim;

5 (10) any testimony presented to the Commission by the victim or the victim’s
6 designated representative under § 7–801 of this title; and

7 (11) compliance with the case plan developed under § 7–301.1 of this subtitle
8 or § 3–601 of this article.

9 [7–306.

10 (a) (1) The chairperson of the Commission shall assign hearing examiners, or
11 commissioners acting as hearing examiners, as required to hear cases for parole.

12 (2) Each proceeding before a hearing examiner shall be conducted in
13 accordance with this section.

14 (b) The Commission shall keep a record of each hearing conducted by a hearing
15 examiner.

16 (c) A hearing examiner shall determine if an incarcerated individual is suitable
17 for parole in accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this
18 subtitle.

19 (d) (1) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner shall inform the
20 incarcerated individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation for parole or denial of
21 parole.

22 (2) Within 21 days after the hearing, the hearing examiner shall give to
23 the Commission, the Commissioner of Correction, and the incarcerated individual a written
24 report of the hearing examiner’s findings and recommendation for parole or denial of parole.

25 (3) The Commissioner of Correction or the incarcerated individual may file
26 with the Commission written exceptions to the report of a hearing examiner no later than
27 5 days after the report is received.

28 (e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, one commissioner assigned
29 by the chairperson of the Commission shall review summarily the recommendation of the
30 hearing examiner.

31 (2) (i) The Commission, on its own initiative or on the filing of an
32 exception, may schedule a hearing on the record by the entire Commission or by a panel of
33 at least two commissioners assigned by the chairperson of the Commission.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 16 9

1 (ii) The Commission or panel shall render a written decision on the
2 appeal.

3 (iii) The decision of the Commission or panel is final.

4 (3) If an exception is not filed and the Commission does not act on its own
5 initiative within the 5–day appeal period established under subsection (d)(3) of this section,
6 the recommendation of the hearing examiner is approved.]

7 7–307.

8 (a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the chairperson of
9 the Commission shall assign at least two commissioners to hear cases for parole release as
10 a panel.

11 (2) Each proceeding before a Commission panel shall be conducted in
12 accordance with this section.

13 (b) (1) (i) A Commission panel that consists of two commissioners shall
14 determine, by unanimous vote, whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole
15 in accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

16 (ii) If the two–commissioner panel is unable to reach a unanimous
17 decision, the chairperson of the Commission shall convene a three–commissioner panel as
18 soon as practicable to rehear the case.

19 (2) A Commission panel that consists of three commissioners shall
20 determine, by majority vote, whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole in
21 accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

22 (c) For an incarcerated individual who has been sentenced to life imprisonment
23 after being convicted of a crime committed on or after October 1, 2021, at least six
24 affirmative votes are required to approve the incarcerated individual for parole, based on
25 consideration of the factors specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

26 (d) (1) The Commission panel shall inform the incarcerated individual and the
27 appropriate correctional authority of the Commission’s decision as soon as possible.

28 (2) If parole is denied, the Commission shall give the incarcerated
29 individual a written report of its findings within 30 days after the hearing.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
31 Assembly that any funds budgeted for hearing examiner salaries as of the effective date of
32 this Act be re–budgeted for parole commissioner salaries.

33 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
34 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 16
END OF PAGE 10