START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 51 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 51 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Strategic Digital Asset Reserve Act of Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Digital Asset Reserve Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund 
administered by the State Treasurer that is not subject to reversion requirements under 
§ 7‑302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. The fund may only be used to invest 
in cryptocurrency. The State Treasurer must hold the fund separately, as specified, and the 
Comptroller must account for the fund. The purpose of the fund is to retain money seized 
and forfeited to the State from specified gambling violations under § 13-104 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article and to serve as a reserve asset for the State through investment 
in cryptocurrency.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances, as discussed 
below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Cryptocurrency” is a decentralized digital asset that utilizes a blockchain 
ledger that is secured by cryptographic technology and has a market capitalization of at 
least $500 billion.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 51/ Page 2 
In addition to money seized and forfeited to the State, the fund also consists of (1) money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (2) interest earnings; and (3) any other money 
from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund.  
 
The State Treasurer must invest money of the fund in the same manner as other State money 
is invested. Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund. Expenditures 
from the fund may only be made in accordance with the State budget. Cryptocurrency 
acquired as an investment must be held by (1) the State Treasurer through a secure platform 
that is created to store, manage, and safeguard digital assets for institutions or  
(2) a qualified custodian as determined by the State Treasurer.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Forfeiture of Money Seized by the State from Gambling Violations 
 
Section 13-102 of the Criminal Procedure Article specifies that money is prima facie 
contraband if a law enforcement officer in the State seizes the money in connection with 
an arrest for (1) unlawfully playing or operating a bookmaking scheme; (2) unlawfully 
betting on a horse race, athletic event, lottery, or game; or (3) using an unlawful gaming 
table or gaming device.  
 
If money from these gambling violations is seized by a State authority (which specifically 
does not include the Police Department of Baltimore City), all rights in, title to, and interest 
in the money seized must immediately vest in and to the State and the State Treasurer has 
financial authority of the seized funds.  
 
If money is seized by a county or municipal police or sheriff’s department, the money 
seized must immediately vest in and to the respective local government and the local 
treasurer or director of finance has financial authority of the seized funds.  
 
Pending final disposition, the financial authority must account for and deposit seized 
money in an interest-bearing bank account or invest the seized money in accordance with 
Title 17 of the Local Government Article (i.e., State investment policy).  
 
State Investment Policy 
 
Chapters 143 and 144 of 2024 repealed provisions relating to the type of asset classes that 
the State Treasurer may invest and reinvest specified unexpended or surplus funds in and 
required the State Treasurer to adopt regulations that specify the asset classes in which the 
State Treasurer may invest or reinvest funds according to the State investment policy. 
The Acts also specified that these investments must be made in accordance with the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 51/ Page 3 
limitations for the asset classes and thresholds established in regulations adopted by the 
State Treasurer. 
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 25.03.04) outline the types of securities and maximum 
thresholds for each of the securities that the State Treasurer is authorized to invest public 
money. The purpose of the State investment policy stated in these regulations is to ensure 
that public money is invested in a manner that will (1) provide the highest investment return 
with the maximum security while meeting the anticipated daily cash flow requirements of 
the State and each local government unit, and (2) conform to all State laws governing the 
investment of public money. Cryptocurrency is not a permitted investment in the State 
investment policy.  
 
Title 17 of the Local Government Article requires local governments to invest public 
money in a manner consistent with the State investment policy established through 
regulations by the State Treasurer.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires money from illegal gambling activities that is seized 
and forfeited to the State to be invested by the State Treasurer in the Maryland Digital 
Asset Reserve Fund. The State Treasurer advises it would need to update its State 
investment policy and corollary regulations to include cryptocurrency as an authorized 
asset class for investments but could do so with existing budgeted resources. However, the 
State Treasurer further advises its current securities custodian would likely not be able to 
handle digital assets. Therefore, the State Treasurer could incur one-time costs of 
approximately $10,000 to contract with an industry-specific custodian to hold digital 
currencies, as well as an additional annual fee of approximately 3% to 5% of assets under 
management.  
 
The State Treasurer’s estimates above are contingent on the Maryland Digital Asset 
Reserve Fund being funded. However, the Department of State Police advises it has not 
seized or forfeited any funds that qualify as illegal gambling proceeds or activities. Such 
activities are typically done at the federal level by the Internal Revenue Service and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, not the State. In addition, the Maryland State Lottery and 
Gaming Control Agency and the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission do not 
engage in activities related to the enforcement of gambling violations or the management 
of seized funds from such cases. Finally, under current law, any illegal gambling proceeds 
seized by a local authority would vest in and to the respective local government, not the 
State. Therefore, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) does not anticipate future 
funding from State seizures and forfeitures from illegal gambling activities.  
 
In addition to money seized and forfeited to the State, the bill also authorizes the fund to 
consist of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (2) interest earnings; and 
(3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. However, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 51/ Page 4 
no funding is provided to the fund in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced, and DLS is not 
aware of any other money from any other source that would be accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. 
 
Additional Comments:  As of January 2026, Bitcoin is the only digital asset having a 
market value of at least $500 billion that meets the definition of cryptocurrency under the 
bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1389 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4