START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 14 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 14 
(Delegate Foley) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Bullying, Harassment, or Intimidation - 
Information Collection and Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each local school board to post annually in a prominent location on its 
website information about the number of incidents of bullying, harassment, or intimidation 
reported to the State Board of Education under current law that were determined to be 
motivated by an actual or perceived personal characteristic of an individual or a group. The 
information posted on the website must be disaggregated by the motivating personal 
characteristic. The bill requires corresponding changes be made to a reporting form 
required under current law to allow the information to be disaggregated by motivating 
characteristic. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can update 
existing forms, policies, and guidance with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Local school systems can post the required data on their websites 
using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Bullying, harassment, or intimidation” is intentional conduct, including 
verbal, physical, or written conduct, or an intentional electronic communication that:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 14/ Page 2 
 
creates a hostile educational environment by substantially interfering with a 
student’s educational benefits, opportunities, or performance, or with a student’s 
physical or psychological well-being, and is:   
 
motivated by an actual or a perceived personal characteristic including race, 
national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
religion, ancestry, physical attributes, socioeconomic status, familial status, 
or physical or mental ability or disability; 
 
sexual in nature, as specified; or 
 
threatening or seriously intimidating; and 
 
occurs on school property, at a school activity or event, or on a school bus; or 
substantially disrupts the orderly operation of a school. 
 
Incidents of bullying, harassment, or intimidation may be reported to a local school board 
by a student, parent, guardian, close relative, or school staff member. Information reported 
in the forms is confidential and may not be redisclosed except as specified under federal 
law, and it may not be made a part of student’s permanent educational record. MSDE must 
create a standard form to report such incidents, as specified (for incidents believed to have 
been motivated by personal characteristics, the bill requires the form to indicate the 
personal characteristics, if known, that are believed to have motivated the incident). 
 
Local school boards must submit summaries of forms they receive to the State Board of 
Education by January 31 of each year. In turn, MSDE must submit a report by March 31 
each year to specified committees of the General Assembly that includes a summary of the 
information included in the victim of bullying, harassment, or intimidation report forms 
filed with the local school boards the previous year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 14/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3