START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 28

F2 6lr0910
HB 1138/25 – APP (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0911

By: Delegates Fair, Miller, Pasteur, Patterson, Schindler, Stinnett, and Wu
Requested: September 19, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Private Career Schools – Advertising

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Secretary of Higher Education to allow certain private
4 career schools to advertise certain information and collect certain contact
5 information before receiving a certificate of approval from the Maryland Higher
6 Education Commission to operate a private career school in the State; and generally
7 relating to private career schools.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 10–101(a) and (j)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Education
15 Section 11–212
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Education

21 10–101.

22 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0028*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 28

1 (j) “Private career school” means a privately owned and privately operated
2 institution of postsecondary education other than an institution of higher education that
3 furnishes or offers to furnish programs, whether or not requiring a payment of tuition or
4 fee, for the purpose of training, retraining, or upgrading individuals for gainful employment
5 as skilled or semiskilled workers or technicians in recognized occupations or in new and
6 emerging occupations.

7 11–212.

8 (A) THE SECRETARY MAY APPROVE A REQUEST FROM AN APPLICANT FOR A
9 PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL TO ADVERTISE AND COLLECT CONTACT INFORMATION
10 FROM POTENTIAL NEW STUDENTS BEFORE THE PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL RECEIVES
11 A CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL TO OPERATE.

12 (B) A PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL APPROVED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
13 THIS SECTION:

14 (1) SHALL:

15 (I) ADVERTISE ONLY INFORMATION RELATING TO THE
16 OPENING OF THE PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL, INCLUDING THE ANTICIPATED DATE OF
17 OPENING, PROGRAMS OF INSTRUCTION, AND THE APPLICATION PROCESS; AND

18 (II) INCLUDE, IN ANY ADVERTISEMENT, A DISCLOSURE THAT
19 THE CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL TO OPERATE THE PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL IS
20 PENDING APPROVAL; AND

21 (2) MAY NOT COLLECT ANY FEES OR ENTER INTO AN ENROLLMENT
22 AGREEMENT WITH POTENTIAL STUDENTS.

23 (C) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS PROVIDING FOR THE
24 PROCESS TO APPROVE A PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL TO ADVERTISE UNDER THIS
25 SECTION.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
27 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2