START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 98 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 98 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Inheritance Tax - Beneficiaries of Limited Means - Installment Payments 
 
 
This bill requires a register of wills, on request by a beneficiary of limited means, to allow 
an installment payment plan for inheritance tax due if payment of the tax on the due date 
would require the sale of the eligible real property. A beneficiary of limited means may 
apply for the installment payment plan by filing with the register an application on the form 
and in the manner that the register requires. The register must specify the installment 
payment schedule and the amount of any installment payments authorized. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026, and applies to all decedents dying on or after July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While overall inheritance tax revenues are not materially affected, revenue 
collections are potentially delayed beginning in FY 2027, thus reducing general fund 
revenues in the near term, as discussed below. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for 
the registers of wills may increase by an indeterminate amount in FY 2027 only for  
one-time programming, as discussed below. General fund revenues decrease by a 
corresponding amount. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Beneficiary of limited means” is defined as an individual entitled to 
property of a decedent if the individual’s federal adjusted gross income does not exceed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 98/ Page 2 
$125,000, or $250,000 for spouses filing a joint return or for a surviving spouse or head of 
household as defined in § 2 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
 
“Eligible real property” is defined as real property that (1) passes from the decedent to a 
beneficiary of limited means and (2) is the primary residence of the beneficiary of limited 
means or is agricultural land that the beneficiary of limited means maintains as agricultural 
land. 
 
Current Law:  The inheritance tax is imposed on the privilege of receiving property that 
has a taxable situs in the State and passes from a decedent to a collateral beneficiary 
(i.e., a person other than a lineal relative or sibling of the decedent). Property that passes 
to “direct” or lineal beneficiaries or siblings of the decedent is exempt from the tax. The 
law also provides for several additional exemptions to the inheritance tax. 
 
The tax is imposed on property that passes at or after the death of an individual by will or 
under Maryland’s laws of intestacy, by trust, or otherwise. The tax applies to all property 
in which the decedent had an interest that may be passed on to heirs, including joint 
tenancies, remainder interests, property transferred in contemplation of death, or property 
transferred during life over which the decedent retained any dominion. The inheritance tax 
rate of 10% is applied to the “clear value” (fair market value minus expenses) of the 
property that passes from a decedent. 
 
Section 7-218 of the Tax-General Article authorizes the Comptroller to allow an alternative 
payment schedule for the inheritance tax, not exceeding a five-year period, if payment of 
the tax on the due date would require the sale of a small business (as defined) or any interest 
in a small business that passes from a decedent. However, the provision makes no reference 
to the registers of wills, which are otherwise statutorily charged with administering and 
collecting the inheritance tax. Currently, the Comptroller’s Office has no procedures with 
respect to alternative payment schedules for the inheritance tax. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect the overall amount of 
inheritance tax collections, though it may result in a reduction in interest and penalty 
revenues. However, the timing of inheritance tax revenue collections may be delayed 
beginning in fiscal 2027, thus reducing general fund revenues in the near term. The precise 
effect on general fund revenues depends on the volume and timing of installment payments 
under the bill. The registers of wills have previously advised the Department of Legislative 
Services that most estates do not include agricultural property, and most of the estates that 
do are not subject to the inheritance tax due to available exemptions. As a point of 
reference, the December 2025 revenue forecast assumes inheritance tax revenues of  
$101.8 million in fiscal 2026 and $103.8 million in fiscal 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 98/ Page 3 
The registers of wills advise that they do not currently possess the system capability to 
administer installment payment plans. The registers retain a portion of inheritance tax 
collections to defray expenses; thus, nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for the 
registers of wills increase in fiscal 2027 only for one-time programming costs, and  
general fund revenues decrease by a corresponding amount. A precise cost estimate is not 
available at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 245 of 2025, HB 100 of 2024, and HB 100 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Register of Wills; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
gj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3