START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 73

F1 6lr1404
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Toles
Requested: October 28, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools – Water Safety and Swimming Course – Established

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Education to develop curriculum content
4 standards for a course on water safety and swimming for public school students in
5 certain grades; requiring county boards of education to implement the water safety
6 and swimming course for students in certain grades in certain schools in the county;
7 requiring each county board to ensure the provision of reasonable accommodations
8 necessary to provide students with disabilities equal opportunity to participate, to
9 the fullest extent possible, in the water safety and swimming course; and generally
10 relating to a course on water safety and swimming in public schools.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Education
13 Section 7–455
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 7–455.

20 (A) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2027, THE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL
21 DEVELOP CURRICULUM CONTENT STANDARDS FOR A COURSE ON WATER SAFETY
22 AND SWIMMING FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS IN KINDERGARTEN THROUGH
23 GRADE 8.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0073*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 73

1 (B) (1) BEGINNING IN THE 2027–2028 SCHOOL YEAR, EACH COUNTY
2 BOARD SHALL IMPLEMENT A COURSE ON WATER SAFETY AND SWIMMING BASED ON
3 THE CURRICULUM CONTENT STANDARDS DEVELOPED BY THE STATE BOARD UNDER
4 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IN EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL FOR STUDENTS IN
5 KINDERGARTEN THROUGH GRADE 8.

6 (2) A COUNTY BOARD MAY AWARD AN ELECTIVE PHYSICAL
7 EDUCATION CREDIT TO STUDENTS FOR SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THE COURSE.

8 (C) A PUBLIC SCHOOL MAY PARTNER WITH A LOCAL PARKS AND
9 RECREATION AGENCY TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO THE NECESSARY WATER AND
10 SWIMMING FACILITIES FOR THE COURSE OFFERED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
11 SECTION.

12 (D) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL ENSURE THE PROVISION OF REASONABLE
13 ACCOMMODATIONS NECESSARY TO PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES EQUAL
14 OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN THE WATER
15 SAFETY AND SWIMMING COURSE.

16 (E) THE STATE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
17 SECTION.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
19 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2