START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 3

F2 6lr0766
HB 1517/25 – HRU (PRE–FILED) CF SB 212

By: Delegates Schindler, Beauchamp, Miller, Pasteur, Ziegler, and Woorman
Requested: September 4, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Nonresident Tuition – Exemption for Dependents of State or
3 Local Public Safety Employees
4 (Maryland Fallen Heroes Tuition Benefits Act)

5 FOR the purpose of exempting financially dependent children of certain State or local
6 public safety employees from paying out–of–state or out–of–county tuition at a public
7 institution of higher education in the State; and generally relating to nonresident
8 tuition exemptions for financially dependent children of State or local public safety
9 employees.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Education
12 Section 15–106.12
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – Education
17 Section 18–601(a)(1) and (5)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Education

23 15–106.12.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0003*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 3

1 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “STATE OR LOCAL PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE” HAS
2 THE MEANING STATED IN § 18–601 OF THIS ARTICLE.

3 (B) NOTWITHSTANDING THE STATE OR COUNTY IN WHICH THE CHILD
4 RESIDES, A FINANCIALLY DEPENDENT CHILD OF A STATE OR LOCAL PUBLIC SAFETY
5 EMPLOYEE WHO DIES AS A RESULT OF OR IN THE COURSE OF PERFORMANCE OF
6 DUTIES IS EXEMPT FROM PAYING OUT–OF–STATE OR OUT–OF–COUNTY TUITION AT
7 A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE.

8 (C) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS
9 SECTION.

10 18–601.

11 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

12 (5) “State or local public safety employee” means a person who is employed
13 in the State as:

14 (i) A career or volunteer member of a:

15 1. Fire department;

16 2. Ambulance company or squad; or

17 3. Rescue company or squad;

18 (ii) A law enforcement officer;

19 (iii) A correctional officer; or

20 (iv) A member of the Maryland National Guard who was a resident
21 of this State at the time of death.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2