START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 29 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 29 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
County Boards of Education - Post College and Career Readiness Pathways - 
Payment of Costs 
 
 
This bill authorizes a local school system to develop and establish income eligibility 
guidelines and procedures for payment of costs for the competitive entry college 
preparatory post-college and career readiness (post-CCR) pathway available to high school 
students. Guidelines must specify that a student with a family income below 400% of the 
federal poverty level must be provided access to the competitive entry college preparatory 
post‑CCR pathway at no cost to the student or the student’s parents or guardians. The bill 
also makes a technical clarification to consistently refer to parents or guardians in 
reference to the cost of access to specified post-CCR pathways. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not alter State education aid funding formulas. No effect 
on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures may decrease, potentially significantly, 
due to not having to cover post-CCR pathway program fees for some students, but a reliable 
estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. No effect on revenues as the bill does not alter 
education aid formulas. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 29/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (the Blueprint) legislation (including Chapter 771 of 
2019, Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021, and Chapter 33 of 2022) established new programs, 
updated education funding formulas, and, among other provisions, included mechanisms 
for holding units of State and local government accountable for implementing 
the Blueprint. 
 
State and local government units responsible for implementing an element of the Blueprint 
must develop implementation plans consistent with a specified Comprehensive 
Implementation Plan that describe the goals, objectives, and strategies that will be used to 
improve student achievement and meet the Blueprint recommendations for each segment 
of the student population. 
 
College and Career Readiness Standard 
 
The State Board of Education (SBE) was required to adopt a CCR standard as specified in 
English language arts, mathematics, and, when practicable, science. The Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) was required to develop and begin to implement a plan 
to publicize the standards by January 1, 2022. 
 
It is the goal of the State that students enrolled in public school meet the CCR standard 
before the end of grade 10 and no later than the time the student graduates from high school. 
It is also the goal of the State that each student enrolled in public school, regardless of the 
student’s race, ethnicity, gender, address, socioeconomic status, or the language spoken in 
the student’s home, have equitable access to CCR and meet the CCR standard at an equal 
rate. 
 
Each student must be assessed no later than grade 10 by a method adopted by SBE to 
determine whether the student meets the CCR standard. Meeting the CCR standard initially 
required a student to achieve the equivalent of a score of 4 or 5 in the mathematics and 
English portions of the Partnership for Assessment for College and Career Readiness  
grade 10 assessments, on the Maryland Comprehensive Assessment Program (MCAP)  
grade 10 assessments, or any successor assessments. Statute required MSDE to conduct an 
empirical study of the interim CCR standard to determine whether the standard adequately 
measured students’ readiness for college or careers. After completion of the required 
empirical study, the CCR standard was required to reflect the results of the study. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 29/ Page 3 
On January 23, 2024, SBE adopted a new CCR standard, informed by the study’s results. 
Proficiency under the new CCR standard can be demonstrated in two ways. The 
first method is for a student who has earned a high school grade point average (GPA) of 
3.00 or higher. Such a student must also earn a grade of A, B, or C in Algebra I, or score 
proficient or above on the Algebra I MCAP. The second method entails a student scoring 
proficient or above on both the English Language Arts 10 and the Algebra I MCAP.  
 
These standards were expanded in the State board’s adoption of a March 2025 CCR 
Standard Policy Document. The policy document specifies that, beginning with the 
graduating class of 2030‑2031, the Math Mastery option of the CCR standard is altered to 
define math mastery as at least either (1) earning a final course grade of A,B, or C in both 
Algebra I and II; (2) scoring proficient or above on the integrated Algebra statewide 
assessment; or (3) earning a final course grade of A, B, or C in an Advanced Mathematics 
Pathways course in which integrated Algebra is a prerequisite. The updated policy 
document also outlines a number of alternative CCR measures students may meet to be 
considered CCR ready, including meeting either: 
 
 
Earning a one-year high school GPA of 3.00 or higher in their 11th grade or 12th 
grade year (with a grade of A, B, or C in a high school level math course); 
 
Earning an A, B, or C in two dual enrollment or dual credit courses (one math and 
one Engligh language arts course); 
 
Meeting performance thresholds on at least two advanced academics (Advanced 
Placement or International Baccalaureate programs) at any points in the student’s 
high school career (one math and one English language arts, science, or social 
studies); 
 
Meeting College and Career Readiness Benchmarks on the SAT, PSAT, or ACT; 
 
Obtaining a score of “at Target” on both the math and English language arts 
Dynamic Learning Maps Alternate Assessments (for students determined eligible 
in accordance with the student’s individualized education program teams); 
 
Earning silver or better on the ACT WorkKeys National Career Readiness 
Certificate assessment; 
 
Earn a State-approved Industry-Recognized Credential, aligned with a career and 
technology education (CTE) or Comprehensive Arts pathway; 
 
Completing a high school level of a registered apprenticeship program; or  
 
Earning a score of at least 50 on the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery. 
 
Post College and Career Ready Pathways 
 
Each local board of education must provide all students who meet the CCR standard with 
access to specific post-CCR pathways at no cost (including fees) to them or their parents 
(emphasis added). These pathways include (1) a competitive entry college preparatory 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 29/ Page 4 
program chosen by the local board of education, as specified; (2) a program that allows a 
student, through an early college program or dual enrollment at a student’s high school and 
an institution of higher education to earn an associate degree or at least 60 credits toward 
a bachelor’s degree; and (3) a robust set of CTE programs, as specified, that allow a student 
to complete specified credentials or apprenticeships. 
 
A public high school must provide access to these programs directly or through another 
public school in the county. A student meeting the CCR standard must enroll in at least 
one post-CCR pathway, with counseling and advising services offered to help each student 
choose at least one pathway aligning with the student’s goals. SBE must adopt regulations 
that guarantee, to the extent practicable, statewide uniformity in the quality of the 
post‑CCR pathways, meeting the specified CCR pathway requirements, and granting 
high school graduation credit for the CCR pathway programs. 
 
College and Career Ready Funding 
 
In addition to funding for non‑CCR and CCR students provided within the foundation 
formula, funding is provided for students who have met the CCR standard adopted by SBE. 
Per‑pupil funding, covered by both State and local shares, begins at $517 in fiscal 2022 
and is adjusted for inflation each subsequent year. Post-CCR funding is based on the 
number of students in grades 9 through 12 who have met the post-CCR standard. For 
fiscal 2026, this per-pupil funding is providing local school systems with an estimated total 
of $31.8 million in State funds and $31.8 million in local funding to facilitate provision of 
post-CCR pathways to students through the Blueprint funding formula. Fiscal 2027 
funding will be $594 for each student in grades 9 through 12 meeting the CCR standard in 
spring 2025.  
 
Each fiscal year, the State must distribute the State share of the CCR program amount to 
each local board of education. The local board of education must distribute to each school 
the minimum school funding amount for CCR, which is 75% of the per-pupil amount.  
 
Dual Enrollment 
 
A public institution of higher education may not charge tuition to a dually enrolled student. 
A public school system must pay 75% of the cost of tuition for a public institution of higher 
education for its students. If there is an agreement before July 1, 2020, between a public 
school and a public institution of higher education in which the public institution charges 
less than 75% of tuition to a dually enrolled student, the local board must pay the cost of 
tuition under the existing agreement. The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Revisions 
(Chapter 55) expanded dual enrollment to include noncredit courses leading to an 
industry-recognized certificate or license. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 29/ Page 5 
Federal Poverty Level 
 
In 2025, the federal poverty level for a family of four is $33,000, so 400% of that level is 
$132,000.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill authorizes, but does not require, a local school board to 
require students who meet the CCR standard and have family incomes above 400% of the 
federal poverty level to pay fees associated with the International Baccalaureate Diploma 
Program, the Cambridge AICE Diploma Program, or a comparable program consisting of 
Advanced Placement courses specified by the College Board (i.e., the competitive entry 
college preparatory pathway programs). To the extent that a local school system institutes 
such a requirement, and to the extent that eligible students opt for one of these 
post‑CCR programs, local school system expenditures decrease due to not paying related 
fees for those students. A reliable estimate is not feasible because it cannot be known which 
school systems elect to adopt such policies, or how many eligible students opt for those 
post-CCR pathway programs in those counties. The savings may be significant in some 
local school systems that elect to adopt guidelines authorized by the bill. 
 
The bill has no effect on the post-CCR dual enrollment or CTE pathways, which remain 
free of charge to all students, as specified by current law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1262 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 343 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s 
County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5