START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 82 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 82 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Recordation and Transfer Taxes - Exemption for Related Business Entities - 
Common Law Trusts 
 
 
This bill alters an exemption from the recordation tax and State and county transfer tax for 
transfers between related business entities to include transfers involving common law 
trusts. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to instruments of writing recorded 
on or after July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State transfer tax revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 depending on the 
number of property transfers under the bill that occur each year. The number of affected 
transfers that may occur each year cannot be reliably estimated. General fund revenues 
decrease as a result of commissions not being collected. State expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local recordation and transfer tax revenues decrease beginning in FY 2027 
depending on the number of property transfers under the bill that occur each year. The 
number of affected transfers that may occur each year cannot be reliably estimated. Local 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A trustee is currently prohibited from transferring real property via a deed 
from a trust to a limited liability company (LLC) that is wholly owned by that trust. In 
general, the transfer of real property to an LLC that is formed strictly to hold real property, 
which is commonly referred to as a “special purpose entity,” and is intended to limit 
liability to the ultimate owners is a common strategy used when structuring real estate 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 82/ Page 2 
ownership. Under current law, common law trusts are not able to utilize this mechanism 
which limits a trustee’s ability to protect trust assets in the same manner that non-trust 
entities are able to protect their assets through the use of special purpose entities. Under 
the bill, a common law trust will be able to transfer real property from the trust to subsidiary 
LLCs that are wholly owned by the trust. This provides common law trusts the same 
protections afforded similarly situated entities in Maryland. In general, the powers of a 
common law trust are not derived from statutory law but rather come from a trust 
agreement. A common law trust is formed by agreement between owners of a property or 
business and a trustee or group of trustees. The trustees hold legal title to all property of 
the business and manage its affairs. 
 
Recordation Taxes 
 
The recordation tax base is composed of the following:  (1) instruments conveying title to 
real property – the actual consideration paid; (2) instruments that create or give notice of a 
security interest in real property – the principal amount of debt secured; and (3) instruments 
that create or give notice of a security interest in personal property – the principal amount 
of debt secured. 
 
Recordation taxes are also imposed on the transfer of real property with a value of  
$1.0 million or more when the transfer is achieved through the sale of a “controlling 
interest” in a specified corporation, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability 
partnership, or other form of unincorporated business. Controlling interest is defined as 
more than 80% of the total value of the stock or the interest in capital and profits. 
Recordation taxes are generally imposed on an “indemnity mortgage” in the same manner 
as if the guarantor were primarily liable for the guaranteed loan, unless the recordation tax 
is paid on another instrument of writing that secures the payment of the guaranteed loan or 
the indemnity mortgage secures a guarantee of repayment of a loan for less than  
$3.0 million. An indemnity mortgage includes any mortgage, deed of trust, or other security 
interest in real property that secures a guarantee of repayment of a loan for which the 
guarantor is not primarily liable. Legislation passed during the 2013 session specifies the 
manner in which indemnity mortgages are subject to recordation taxes. 
 
Counties and Baltimore City are authorized to set their own recordation tax rates, which 
are expressed as an amount per $500 of the consideration payable or principal amount of 
the debt secured. Although the counties have broad authority to set their recordation tax 
rates, some State‑mandated rates exist. Articles of merger and articles of consolidation filed 
with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation, for example, are taxed at  
$1.65 per $500. For fiscal 2026, recordation tax rates range from $2.50 per $500 of 
transaction in Baltimore and Howard counties to $7.00 per $500 of transaction in  
Charles and Frederick counties. In Montgomery County, specified surcharges are imposed 
on transactions valued at more than $500,000. A majority of counties have tax rates set 
between $3.00 and $5.00. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 82/ Page 3 
State and Local Transfer Taxes 
 
The State, Baltimore City, and 18 counties currently impose a transfer tax. Local transfer 
tax rates range from 0.5% in 8 counties (Allegany, Caroline, Cecil, Charles, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, Washington, and Worcester) to 1.5% in Baltimore City and 
Baltimore County. In Anne Arundel County, a 0.5% surcharge is imposed on  
specified transactions valued at $1.0 million or more, resulting in a 1.5% tax rate. 
Montgomery County imposes various rates depending on the value of the property. 
Five counties (Calvert, Carroll, Frederick, Somerset, and Wicomico) do not impose a local 
transfer tax. 
 
Of the charter and commission counties that impose a transfer tax, some incorporate the 
exemptions applicable to the State transfer tax, while exemptions in other counties are 
independently defined. In code counties, all the exemptions from the State transfer tax 
apply to the local transfer tax. Some State‑mandated exemptions are applicable to all 
counties, including transfers between spouses and former spouses pursuant to a property 
settlement or divorce decree. All counties are authorized to exempt a portion of the 
consideration payable on owner-occupied residential property. Counties may also provide 
an exemption for first-time homebuyers. Certain rate limitations apply to the imposition of 
a local transfer tax on agricultural land, as set forth in the Annotated Code. 
 
The State transfer tax rate is 0.5% of the consideration payable for an instrument of writing 
conveying title to, or a leasehold interest in, real property (0.25% for first‑time Maryland 
homebuyers). In some jurisdictions, a local property transfer tax may be imposed on 
instruments transferring title to real property. A distinction is made in the local codes 
between instruments transferring title such as a deed and certain leaseholds and instruments 
securing real property such as a mortgage. 
 
Exemptions from the transfer tax are generally the same as the exemptions from 
recordation taxes and include conveyances to a government, including the United States, 
State, or a municipality in the State, or public agency; conveyances involving related 
corporations; and transfers between spouses, relatives, or specified domestic partners. 
 
The clerks of the circuit court in several jurisdictions collect a number of different taxes 
and fees, including local recordation and transfer taxes. The Administrative Office of the 
Courts reports that the clerk of the circuit court collects local recordation and transfer taxes 
in the following nine counties:  Allegany, Calvert, Dorchester, Garrett, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, and Washington. In the remaining jurisdictions, 
county governments collect these taxes. 
 
Additional information on local recordation and transfer taxes is provided in the 
County Revenue Outlook Report and the Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. A 
copy of both reports is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 82/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  State special fund revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2027. The 
amount of the revenue decrease due to the transfer tax exemption depends on the number 
of property transfer exemptions resulting from the bill that occur each year and the amount 
of consideration associated with each transfer. The number of these transfers that may 
occur each year cannot be reliably estimated. As a point of reference, the State transfer tax 
on a transaction valued at $250,000 is $1,250. 
 
The clerks of the circuit court who collect recordation and transfer taxes are entitled to a 
commission of between 3.0% and 5.0% of all public monies collected, which, unless 
otherwise specified, are remitted to the State’s general fund. The exemption proposed by 
the bill will reduce the amount of transfer taxes collected by the clerks of the circuit court 
and thereby the amount of commission revenue remitted to the general fund. The amount 
of the general fund revenue decrease cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local recordation and transfer tax revenues decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2027 depending on the number of property transfer exemptions resulting from the 
bill that occur each year. The amount of the revenue decrease due to the exemption depends 
on the number of property transfers pursuant to the bill that occur and the amount of 
consideration associated with each transfer. The number of affected transfers that may 
occur in any year cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 33 (Senator West) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Administrative Office of the 
Courts; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4