START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 34

L3 6lr1275
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 189

By: Delegates Bouchat, Fair, Moon, and Schindler
Requested: October 21, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Municipalities – Open Drainage Inlets – Required Grating Systems
3 (Mason’s Law)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a municipality to construct or install a certain approved
5 grating system on a new or existing open drainage inlet within the municipality; and
6 generally relating to open drainage inlets in municipalities.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Local Government
9 Section 4–112
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Local Government

15 4–112.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) (I) “APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM” MEANS A COVER PLACED
19 OVER THE OPENING OF AN OPEN DRAINAGE INLET IN ORDER TO ALLOW
20 STORMWATER RUNOFF TO ENTER THE DRAINAGE INLET WHILE PREVENTING LARGE
21 DEBRIS FROM ENTERING THE DRAINAGE INLET.

22 (II) “APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM” INCLUDES:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0034*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 34

1 1. A STANDARD YARD INLET;

2 2. A RAISED GRATE YARD INLET;

3 3. A TRASH RACK GRATING, PROVIDED THAT THE RACK
4 HAS AT LEAST FOUR SIDES, EACH OF WHICH IS AT LEAST AS LARGE AS THE DIAMETER
5 OF THE SURFACE OPENING; AND

6 4. FOR NEW DRAINAGE INLETS, A PRECAST CONCRETE
7 BOX INCORPORATED INTO THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE DRAINAGE INLET.

8 (3) “OPEN DRAINAGE INLET” MEANS A STRUCTURE WITH A SURFACE
9 OPENING THAT:

10 (I) HAS A DIAMETER OF 12 INCHES OR MORE; AND

11 (II) IS DESIGNED TO COLLECT AND DRAIN STORMWATER
12 RUNOFF.

13 (B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
14 MUNICIPALITY SHALL:

15 (I) INCORPORATE AN APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM INTO THE
16 CONSTRUCTION OF ANY NEW OPEN DRAINAGE INLET WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY;
17 AND

18 (II) INSTALL AN APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM ON ANY EXISTING
19 OPEN DRAINAGE INLET WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY.

20 (2) AN APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM CONSTRUCTED OR INSTALLED
21 UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE SECURED TO THE INLET END OF THE OPEN
22 DRAINAGE INLET, OR THE CONCRETE STRUCTURE BUILT TO HOUSE THE DRAINAGE
23 INLET, IN A MANNER THAT PREVENTS THE APPROVED GRATING SYSTEM FROM
24 BEING REMOVED WITHOUT THE APPROPRIATE TOOLS OR BY THE FORCE OF FLOOD
25 WATER.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before June 1, 2027,
27 each municipality in the State shall install an approved grating system on any existing
28 open drainage inlet within the municipality in accordance with § 4–112 of the Local
29 Government Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

30 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 34 3
END OF PAGE 3