START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 78 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 78 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Taxes - Authority of Counties to Establish Subclasses and Set Separate 
Rates for Land and Improvements to Land 
 
   
This bill authorizes Baltimore City and county governments to establish, by law, separate 
subclasses of real property consisting of land and improvements to land and to set a 
separate real property tax rate for each. If Baltimore City or a county government 
establishes separate real property tax rates for land and improvements to land:  (1) the tax 
rates for land and improvements to land do not have to be equal; and (2) each of the separate 
tax rates must apply uniformly throughout the taxing jurisdiction to all real property within 
the subclass to which the tax rate applies. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies 
to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2027. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Significant increase in expenditures at the State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation (SDAT) for computer system modifications, data storage, and personnel 
beginning in FY 2027. Under one set of assumptions, State expenditures increase by 
approximately $39.1 million in FY 2027 and by $8.1 million in FY 2031. Of this amount, 
general fund expenditures increase by approximately $24.3 million in FY 2027 and by 
$0.8 million in FY 2031. Special fund expenditures and special fund revenues (county 
reimbursements) increase by approximately $14.8 million in FY 2027 and by $7.3 million 
in FY 3031.  
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues (Baltimore City and county governments) may 
be affected depending on the assessed value of land and improvements in each county and 
the real property tax rates that may be set by each jurisdiction for land and improvements. 
Local government expenditures may increase by a significant amount to reimburse SDAT 
for computer system modifications, data storage, and personnel costs beginning in 
FY 2027. Under one set of assumptions, county expenditures increase by $14.8 million in 
FY 2027 and by $7.3 million in FY 2031.   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 78/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses may be affected 
depending on the real property tax rates that may be set by Baltimore City or county 
governments.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local property tax rates are set annually by local governments and are 
applied to the county and municipal assessable bases. Generally, State law does not restrict 
the setting of property tax rates, enabling local governments to set rates at the level required 
to fund governmental services. Under the Maryland Constitution, the General Assembly 
retains the authority to set maximum limits on the rate of property taxes in municipalities 
(subject to approval at a local referendum) and in code home rule counties. However, the 
Department of Legislative Services is unaware of any instances in which this authority has 
ever been exercised. Furthermore, local government statutes may limit the tax rates that 
may be set. 
 
The local property tax rate is established by each county, Baltimore City, or municipality 
expressed as an amount per $100 of assessed value. The county property tax rate may be 
supplemented by special property tax levies for special districts. Thus, local governments 
have the final authority for determining how much property tax revenue is generated. 
 
Property Classification for Assessment Purposes 
 
Title 8 of the Tax Property Article establishes the methods of property valuation and 
assessments and lists those classifications of property created by the General Assembly. 
For assessment purposes, property is divided into two classes – real property and personal 
property. Real property is divided into 11 subclasses, and personal property is divided into 
7 subclasses. The State only imposes a property tax on real property, whereas county 
governments impose separate tax rates for real and personal property. Several county 
governments do not impose a personal property tax on business property.  
 
Prior to fiscal 2025, Baltimore City and county governments were not authorized to set 
separate property tax rates among different subclasses of property. However, Chapter 277 
of 2024 authorized Baltimore City and county governments, beginning July 1, 2024, to 
establish, by law, a subclass of real property consisting of vacant lots or improved property 
cited as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building 
violation notice. Baltimore City and county governments are authorized to set a special 
property tax rate for properties within this subclass. An annual reporting requirement was 
included for jurisdictions that enact a special property tax rate. In addition, Chapter 170 
of 2025 authorizes Baltimore City to impose the city’s regular property tax rate and a 
special tax rate for specified vacant property on real property that would otherwise be 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 78/ Page 3 
exempt from taxation, if the real property is (1) a vacant lot or (2) improved property cited 
as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building violation 
notice. 
 
Unlike Baltimore City and county governments, municipalities have broader discretion to 
impose property tax rates on different classes of property. Municipalities may impose 
property taxes on those classes of property that it selects to be subject to the municipal 
property tax. In addition, municipalities retain the authority to classify property for local 
purposes and to impose different tax treatment on those classes. Furthermore, 
municipalities have the express power to exempt classes of property from taxation. 
Moreover, because municipalities may select the classes of property to be taxed and may 
set special rates for any class of property that is subject to the municipal property tax, 
municipalities retain the authority to levy different tax rates on selected classes of property. 
 
Assessment of Real Property 
 
Each year, SDAT is required to value one-third of all real property based on an inspection 
prior to the date of finality. Real property is valued and assessed once every three years. 
Prior to June 1, 2018, statute required that the assessments be based on a physical 
inspection; however, Chapter 651 of 2018 repealed the requirement that the department 
value all real property based on an exterior physical inspection of the real property. Instead, 
the department must value real property based on a review of each property in each 
three‑year cycle. The review by the department must include a physical inspection of a 
property if (1) the value of improvements to the property is being initially established; 
(2) the value of substantially completed improvements is being established; (3) the 
property is the subject of a recent sale, and the inspection is deemed necessary by the 
department for purposes of market analysis; (4) the property owner requests a physical 
inspection as part of an active appeal; (5) the department is notified by a county finance 
officer that a substantially completed improvement has been made that adds at least 
$1.0 million in value to the property; or (6) the department determines that a physical 
inspection is appropriate. 
 
In any year of a three-year cycle, real property must be revalued if any of the following 
factors causes a change in the value of the real property:  (1) the zoning classification is 
changed at the initiative of the owner or anyone having an interest in the property; (2) a 
change in use or character occurs; (3) substantially completed improvements are made that 
add at least $100,000 in value to the property; (4) an error in calculation or measurement 
of the real property caused the value to be erroneous; (5) a residential use assessment is 
terminated; or (6) a subdivision occurs. 
 
Any increase in full cash value (market value) is phased in equally over the next 
three years. All property is assessed at 100% of full cash value. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 78/ Page 4 
SDAT must prepare, install, and maintain a complete record of properties, with appropriate 
indexes and cross indexes, and a system of appraisal aids for each county that consist of 
(1) property location maps and (2) records of new construction, sales, building costs and 
private appraisals. 
 
Background:   
 
Land Value Taxation 
 
Land value taxation is not widely used in the United States. However, several U.S. 
jurisdictions and some foreign countries do have experience with land value taxation. Land 
value taxation is currently used in 12 cities and towns in Pennsylvania. The largest of these 
is Allentown, which has a population of approximately 125,000. Other major cities in 
Pennsylvania that use land value taxation are Scranton (population 76,000) and Harrisburg 
(population 50,000). The other 9 cities or towns in Pennsylvania that use land value 
taxation all have populations of 22,000 or less, with most having populations of less than 
10,000. All of these cities and towns tax land at a higher rate than structures, rather than 
exempting structures completely. 
 
Four cities in Virginia are authorized by state statute to implement a land value tax, but 
none has enacted the tax at the local level. The Virginia cities authorized to implement a 
land value tax are Richmond (population 229,000), Roanoke (population 98,000),  
Fairfax (population 25,000), and Poquoson (population 13,000). 
 
Connecticut authorized up to three municipalities to implement a land value tax on a pilot 
basis. Two municipalities submitted land value tax plans to the state, but neither city 
ultimately enacted the tax at the local level. The pilot program ended in 2020 without 
implementation of the tax. 
 
Land value taxation has been proposed previously in Maryland. In 1994, legislation 
authorizing municipalities to implement land value taxation passed the General Assembly 
but was vetoed by Governor William D. Schaefer. A subsequent opinion by the 
Attorney General concluded that municipalities already have the power to implement land 
value taxation, but none have done so to date. Legislation related to land value taxation 
was also introduced in the 1996, 1997, 2004, and 2005 sessions of the General Assembly. 
All the bills received an unfavorable report by the committee of jurisdiction, except in 
2004, when no action was taken.    
 
The largest U.S. jurisdictions to have adopted the land value tax, the state of Hawaii and 
the city of Pittsburgh, subsequently repealed it. In addition, eight cities and towns in 
Pennsylvania that adopted land value taxation after it was first authorized by the state in 
1913 later repealed it. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 78/ Page 5 
Potential Advantages of Land Value Taxation 
 
The following are cited as potential advantages of land value taxation: 
 
 
Increased Development:  Some studies suggest that land value taxation may 
increase construction of new buildings.  
 
Fairness:  In theory, the land value tax is fairer than the traditional property tax. 
This is because only the value of the land is taxed, and land value is generated 
primarily by public investments in infrastructure and other services that are not due 
to the efforts of the property owner. Land value taxation therefore recaptures for 
public use some of the value of property that is created by the public. Improvements, 
on the other hand, which are constructed through investment by the property owner, 
are not taxed under a land value tax. The land value tax therefore rewards private 
property owners who invest in their properties, which is socially beneficial. Land 
value taxation promotes the productive use of land. 
 
Economic Efficiency:  Because the supply of land is fixed, taxing land does not 
reduce the amount of land and alter economic behavior. This is different from most 
other taxes, such as those on income or sales, which tend to reduce the amount of 
whatever is taxed and affect economic decisions. 
 
Promoting Smart Growth:  Because improvements are not taxed, land value taxation 
incentivizes construction of new buildings and dense development in urban centers. 
Land value taxation discourages holding on to vacant or underutilized land for 
purposes of speculation and not doing anything with it, which is a problem 
especially in some economically distressed areas. Increased development in urban 
areas reduces the demand for development in outlying areas and helps preserve open 
space. 
 
Potential Disadvantages of Land Value Taxation 
 
 
Winners and Losers:  Land value taxation will produce “winners” who will pay less 
taxes and “losers” who will pay more. Owners of property for which the land makes 
up a larger portion of total value will pay more under a land value tax. For example, 
owners of land intensive businesses such as auto dealers and surface parking lots 
and owners of modest homes on large lots would pay more. Owners of property 
with expensive improvements, such as high-rise buildings, would pay less. 
One study of a potential land value tax in three Virginia communities found that the 
tax burden on residential property would decrease and the tax burden on business 
would increase, but much depends on land use patterns and property characteristics 
in a particular community.  
 
Volatility:  Land values rise and fall much faster than the value of improvements. 
This means that during a real estate boom, property owners’ tax bills will rise more 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 78/ Page 6 
quickly if the tax is based primarily or exclusively on the value of the land. During 
a real estate downturn, government revenue would drop more dramatically under a 
land value tax, creating budget problems.  
 
Difficulty Producing Accurate Separate Assessments for Land and Improvements:  
Accurately determining separate values for land and improvements for individual 
properties is difficult. There is no one widely accepted method for doing this. In 
Maryland, SDAT is already required by law to separately assess land and 
improvements. 
 
Overdevelopment and Gentrification:  Land value taxation encourages larger, 
newer, more expensive buildings. This could lead to displacement of people of 
limited income, elderly, and longtime residents who occupy older, less expensive 
housing. Land value taxation could encourage unwanted redevelopment of historic 
buildings and neighborhoods. In suburban and rural areas, land value taxation may 
lead to unwanted development of agricultural land or other open space.  
 
Difficulty Maintaining Revenue Neutrality:  Maintaining revenue neutrality when 
adopting land value taxation requires a tax rate on land that is much higher than it 
is currently. According to SDAT, land typically makes up 20% to 40% of the total 
value of real property.   
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SDAT reports that while the department is currently required to value 
land and improvements separately, the department only reports one combined value to 
county governments for billing purposes. Because county governments are not authorized 
to set separate property tax rates for land and improvements, SDAT does not maintain and 
provide separate databases that can be used for property tax billing purposes. Except for 
specified vacant property, county governments are not authorized to set different property 
tax rates for different subclasses of real property. As a result, the bill could result in 
significant expenditure increases for the department so that counties can designate new 
subclasses of real property for land and improvements and potentially impose separate tax 
rates for each. Based on current projections, total State expenditures could increase by 
approximately $39.1 million in fiscal 2027, as follows: 
 
Positions 
48.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$3,395,006 
Computer Programming and Modification 
35,256,268 
Operating Expenses 
       473,756 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$39,125,030 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Chapter 604 of 2025 increased the local cost share amount, from 50% to 90%, that 
Baltimore City and county governments are required to pay SDAT for costs associated 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 78/ Page 7 
with real property valuation, business personal property valuation, and information 
technology beginning in fiscal 2026. As a result, based on the above estimate, total State 
expenditures could increase by $39.1 million in fiscal 2027 and by $8.1 million in 
fiscal 2031. Of this amount, general fund expenditures (for non-county reimbursable costs) 
increase by approximately $24.3 million in fiscal 2027 and by $0.8 million in fiscal 2031. 
Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $14.8 million in fiscal 2027 and by 
$7.3 million in fiscal 2031. Special fund revenues (from county reimbursements) increase 
by a similar amount. 
 
Computer-related expenditures discussed below are based on the costs associated with 
current SDAT computer hardware and software projects. The actual costs associated with 
the bill could vary accordingly.  
 
Computer Modification Costs 
 
The bill requires significant modifications to the department’s computer systems to allow 
for dual rate taxation system for land and improvements. These costs include modifying 
the systems needed to convey tax information to counties, calculating property tax credits, 
and storing property data, which include the following:  
 
 
creating a three-year phase in for land and improvement that is separate from the 
current total phase in value; 
 
creating a separate land and improvement taxable portion for partially exempt 
property; 
 
calculating homestead property tax credits for land and improvements; 
 
updating reports so that tax base reports include land and improvement totals 
separately; 
 
altering the enterprise zone tax credit calculation program to separate land from 
improvements; and  
 
increasing the data storage system to account for a doubling of the annual file sizes.  
 
In addition, altering Maryland’s property taxation system to a dual tax rate system would 
also affect SDAT’s real property division, including the need to hire additional assessors 
to assist in assessing real property and to handle appeals. If the department were to hire 
one additional residential assessor and one commercial assessor for each county 
assessment office, total expenditures could increase by approximately $3.9 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
SDAT also reports that the department is in the process of converting its property 
assessment AAVS property assessment system to the MAAVS system, which is a computer 
assessed mass appraisal system specifically tailored to meet the requirements specified in 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 78/ Page 8 
the Tax-Property Article, including:  (1) property valuation; (2) property classifications; 
(3) property transfers; (4) various notices; (5) appeals; (6) valuation changes out of cycle; 
(7) exemptions; (8) agricultural use assessments; (9) agricultural transfer tax calculation; 
and (10) damaged property. The department reports that this conversion project is budgeted 
for $10.0 million. It is assumed that the changes required under the bill could cost at least 
that much. 
 
Tax Credit System Modification 
 
The department’s tax credit software will also require adjustments to incorporate multiple 
tax rates on the same property. The tax credit software that is currently managed by vendor 
Ernst and Young (EY) will have to be adjusted to calculate both the homestead and 
homeowners’ property tax credits on properties with separate rates for the land and the 
improvements, whereas previously credits were only calculated on the total assessed value 
of the property. It is estimated that new software would have to store both tax rates for each 
property, calculate credits on the land and the improvements separately, and generate tax 
rolls based on these calculations. It is assumed that each jurisdiction’s software that 
interacts with the SDAT systems will need to be upgraded as well. SDAT advises that the 
EY procurement has cost more than $20 million over several fiscal years. It is assumed that 
the changes required by the bill could be about the same.  
 
SDAT advises that the department could incur additional costs associated with the 
computer hardware and software changes including the following, which are based on 
existing projects: 
 
 
Program Manager contract - $1,347,205 
 
Mainframe Developer contract - $1,036,368 
 
Technical Writer contract - $191,360 
 
Tax Administration Software (Manatron) - $2,722,695 
 
In addition, the department advises that current operations and maintenance costs are 
determined by hours dedicated to maintaining the software. However, it is unclear if 
doubling the size of the program would also double the number of hours billed for 
maintaining it. As a point of reference, SDAT is expected to pay $7.2 million for 
maintenance and operations for their property tax credit system for fiscal 2026 and 2027. 
 
Data Storage 
 
Finally, SDAT advises that changing to a dual tax rate system for land and improvements 
will require increased data storage capabilities so that both land and improvement data can 
be stored separately. This will double the amount of storage capability needed by the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 78/ Page 9 
department. SDAT currently maintains 15 servers to store property tax files going back for 
five years. These files include tax rates, property values, other property information, 
homestead status, as well as other assessment information on millions of real property 
accounts in the State for multiple years. The department advises that if it is necessary to 
purchase an additional 15 servers to store additional property tax data, the cost will be 
approximately $150,000, plus based on current costs, an additional $3.0 million for 
maintenance costs.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues for Baltimore City and county 
governments may be affected depending on the assessed value of land and improvements 
as well as the real property tax rates that may be set by each jurisdiction for land and 
improvements, which cannot be determined at this time.    
 
Based on the project’s estimated cost increases at SDAT to allow for separate tax rates for 
land and improvements, county expenditures increase by $14.8 million in fiscal 2027 and 
by $7.3 million in fiscal 2031 to reimburse SDAT for the information technology and real 
property staffing costs needed to allow for new subclasses of real property and separate tax 
rates for land and improvements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9