START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 18 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 18 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Transportation Network Companies - Transportation Network Operators - 
Minimum Payments for Passenger Trips 
 
 
This bill requires a transportation network company (TNC) to compensate operators for 
passenger trips originating in the State according to specified minimums. The bill also 
requires, beginning July 1, 2027, an adjustment to the per-mile and per-minute minimums 
for inflation, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Public Service Commission (PSC) may 
increase, as discussed below; special fund revenues increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
expenditures for the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) may increase minimally 
beginning as early as FY 2027, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase minimally for any local jurisdictions that 
use rideshare services, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Beginning July 1, 2026, a TNC must pay each operator:   
 
 
a minimum of $1.66 per mile and $0.40 per minute; 
 
an additional $1.18 per mile if an operator is using a wheelchair accessible vehicle; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 18/ Page 2 
 
at least $5.00 per passenger trip, regardless of trip duration or mileage; and 
 
at least 80% of any cancellation fee charged by the TNC if a passenger trip is 
canceled after booking. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, and each July 1 thereafter, the minimum amount a TNC must pay 
each operator per mile and per minute must be increased annually by the percentage growth 
in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI‑U) or a successor index 
published by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The increase is determined by comparing 
the average of the index for the 12 months ending on the June 30 immediately preceding 
the year for which the minimum amount per mile and per minute is being calculated to the 
average of the index for the immediately preceding 12 months. If there is no growth or a 
decline in the CPI‑U, the minimum per‑mile and per‑minute rates remain unchanged. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Transportation Network Services Framework 
 
Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation network 
services that encompasses TNCs (i.e., companies such as Uber and Lyft) and transportation 
network operators (i.e., the drivers), including licensing, criminal history records checks, 
insurance requirements, and assessments. A TNC may not operate in the State unless PSC 
has issued a permit to the company. Generally, a transportation network operator may not 
provide transportation network services unless PSC has authorized the operator to operate 
on a provisional basis or has issued a valid temporary or permanent transportation network 
operator’s license to provide transportation network services. 
 
Neither statute nor regulations require TNCs to pay operators a minimum per mile, per 
minute, or per trip amount, nor do they mandate payment of a portion of a cancellation fee. 
Compensation arrangements are generally determined by the companies themselves, 
subject to PSC oversight of licensing and vehicle approval. 
 
“Transportation network company” means a company that operates in the State using a 
digital network to connect passengers to transportation network operators or transportation 
network partners for transportation network services. 
 
“Transportation network operator,” “transportation network partner,” or “transportation 
network driver” means an individual who:   
 
 
has been issued a transportation network operator’s license or is otherwise 
authorized, by PSC to provide transportation network services; 
 
receives, through TNC’s digital network application, a connection to a potential 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 18/ Page 3 
passenger to transport the passenger between points chosen by the passenger in 
exchange for the payment of a fee to the TNC; and 
 
uses a motor vehicle that is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the 
individual and is approved for use in providing transportation network services by 
PSC. 
 
Weekly Fare and Earnings Summary requirements 
 
Chapter 506 of 2025 requires TNCs to provide each operator with a weekly fare and 
earnings summary, including:   
 
 
the total fares collected by the TNC for the transportation network services provided 
by the company’s operators in a given week;  
 
the total amount of any additional fees that were charged to passengers by the TNC 
for the transportation network services provided by the company’s operators in a 
given week;  
 
the total amount the operator earned that week;  
 
the total amount the operator earned from the total fares collected that week, 
expressed as a percentage of the total fares collected; and  
 
the total amount the operator earned from the additional fees collected that week, 
expressed as a percentage of the total additional fees charged. 
 
By February 1 each year, each TNC must submit specified information on its fares, its 
operators, and their earnings to the PSC. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Public Service Commission 
 
There are approximately 175,000 transportation network operators in the State. PSC 
anticipates receiving a significant number of complaints from operators alleging 
inaccuracy in their payments from TNCs under the bill and advises that it likely needs to 
hire two administrative specialists to process complaints, one staff attorney to represent 
PSC in complaint cases, and one public utility law judge to hear the cases. Costs associated 
with those positions total approximately $341,000 in fiscal 2027, increasing to 
approximately $457,000 by fiscal 2031. While the Department of Legislative Services 
concurs that PSC may need additional staff if the complaint volume is significant, without 
actual experience under the bill, the extent to which PSC must hire staff is unclear. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC may increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027 to the extent that the commission must hire additional administrative and/or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 18/ Page 4 
legal staff. Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service 
companies that it regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase 
correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
Maryland Transit Administration 
 
MTA advises that the bill may affect its Call-A-Ride program as well as its service provider 
contracts, both of which utilize TNCs to provide rideshare services. Under the Call-A-Ride 
program, customers may reach the $40 limit on MTA reimbursement sooner, resulting in 
shorter fully funded trips. The extent to which additional costs may result in additional 
expenditures for MTA is unclear at this time; however, TTF expenditures for MTA 
increase minimally beginning as early as fiscal 2027 to the extent that additional costs are 
incurred. 
 
Other State and Local Agencies that may use Rideshare Services 
 
Other State and local agencies may use rideshare services for various programs or 
employee travel. Those agencies are affected in a similar manner as MTA. However, any 
increase in costs is not expected to be significant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Transportation network operators potentially benefit from the 
minimum compensation levels established by the bill. TNCs, which are responsible for 
compensating the operators, are generally not small businesses. Other small businesses 
may pay more for transportation network services. 
 
Additional Comments:  The annual inflation calculation specified in the bill is unclear. 
This analysis assumes that the intent of the bill is to increase the minimum amounts by the 
annual rate of inflation each year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 18/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5