START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 21

C2 6lr0955
HB 1453/25 – ECM (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Allen
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Social Media Platforms – Vloggers and Video Content Featuring Minors
3 (Child Influencers Protection Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a vlogger who creates video content that is posted on a social
5 media platform and features a certain child to compensate the child under certain
6 circumstances; establishing requirements on social media platforms relating to
7 deleting video content featuring children; applying certain requirements related to
8 the labor of minors to children compensated by vloggers; and generally relating to
9 minors featured in social media content.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Business Regulation
12 Section 19–1001 through 19–1004 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Social
13 Media Vloggers”
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Labor and Employment
18 Section 3–203(4)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2025 Replacement Volume)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Business Regulation

24 SUBTITLE 10. SOCIAL MEDIA VLOGGERS.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0021*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 21

1 19–1001.

2 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (B) “CHILD” MEANS, WITH RESPECT TO A VLOGGER:

5 (1) A MINOR FOR WHOM THE VLOGGER IS A PARENT OR GUARDIAN; OR

6 (2) IF THE VLOGGER IS A BUSINESS ENTITY, A MINOR WHOSE PARENT
7 OR LEGAL GUARDIAN HAS AN INTEREST IN THE BUSINESS ENTITY.

8 (C) “FEATURE” MEANS TO USE THE LIKENESS OR NAME OF AN INDIVIDUAL
9 OR TO CAUSE AN INDIVIDUAL TO BE THE SUBJECT OF A NARRATIVE.

10 (D) “VLOGGER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL OR A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT
11 CREATES VIDEO CONTENT TO BE POSTED ON A SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM IN
12 EXCHANGE FOR COMPENSATION.

13 19–1002.

14 A VLOGGER THAT FEATURES A CHILD IN THE VLOGGER’S VIDEO CONTENT
15 SHALL COMPENSATE THE CHILD IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 19–1003 OF THIS SUBTITLE
16 IF AT ANY TIME WITHIN THE PREVIOUS 12–MONTH PERIOD:

17 (1) (I) THE VLOGGER QUALIFIED FOR COMPENSATION FROM A
18 SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM BASED ON THE NUMBER OF VIEWS ANY OF THE VLOGGER’S
19 VIDEO CONTENT RECEIVED; OR

20 (II) THE VLOGGER ACTUALLY RECEIVED COMPENSATION OF AT
21 LEAST 10 CENTS PER VIEW FOR ANY OF THE VLOGGER’S VIDEO CONTENT; AND

22 (2) THE CHILD WAS FEATURED FOR AT LEAST 30% OF THE TOTAL
23 DURATION OF ALL CONTENT POSTED WITHIN ANY 30–DAY PERIOD.

24 19–1003.

25 A VLOGGER REQUIRED TO COMPENSATE ONE OR MORE CHILDREN UNDER §
26 19–1002 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL PAY INTO SEPARATE TRUSTS, EACH TRUST FOR
27 THE BENEFIT OF A SINGLE CHILD ON ATTAINING THE AGE OF 18 YEARS, AS FOLLOWS:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 21 3

1 (1) IF THE VLOGGER IS REQUIRED TO COMPENSATE ONE CHILD, THE
2 PERCENTAGE OF GROSS EARNINGS ATTRIBUTABLE TO CONTENT IN WHICH THE
3 CHILD WAS FEATURED SHALL BE PAID INTO THE TRUST FOR THE CHILD; AND

4 (2) IF THE VLOGGER IS REQUIRED TO COMPENSATE MORE THAN ONE
5 CHILD, THE PERCENTAGE OF GROSS EARNINGS ATTRIBUTABLE TO CONTENT IN
6 WHICH AT LEAST ONE OF THOSE CHILDREN WAS FEATURED SHALL BE DIVIDED
7 EQUALLY AMONG THE CHILDREN AND PAID INTO THE SEPARATE TRUST FOR EACH
8 CHILD.

9 19–1004.

10 (A) AN ADULT WHO WAS FEATURED IN VIDEO CONTENT OF A VLOGGER AS A
11 CHILD ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2026, MAY REQUEST THE PERMANENT DELETION
12 OF THE CONTENT.

13 (B) A SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM THAT RECEIVES A DELETION REQUEST
14 UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL TAKE ALL REASONABLE STEPS TO
15 PERMANENTLY DELETE ALL CONTENT FOR WHICH THE REQUEST WAS MADE.

16 (C) A CONTRACT BETWEEN A VLOGGER AND A SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORM
17 FOR THE CREATION OF VIDEO CONTENT THAT WOULD REASONABLY BE
18 ANTICIPATED TO FEATURE A CHILD SHALL INCLUDE NOTIFICATION TO THE SOCIAL
19 MEDIA PLATFORM OF THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD UNDER THIS SECTION.

20 Article – Labor and Employment

21 3–203.

22 This subtitle does not apply to an activity that a minor performs if the activity:

23 (4) is limited to:

24 (i) farm work that is performed on a farm;

25 (ii) domestic work that is performed in or about a home;

26 (iii) work that is performed in a business that a parent of the minor
27 or a person standing in place of the parent owns or operates, OTHER THAN WORK
28 PERFORMED BY A MINOR WHO IS REQUIRED TO BE COMPENSATED BY A VLOGGER
29 UNDER TITLE 19, SUBTITLE 10 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE;

30 (iv) caddying on a golf course;

31 (v) instructing on an instructional sailboat;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 21

1 (vi) delivery of newspapers to consumers;

2 (vii) making an evergreen wreath in or about a home;

3 (viii) work performed as a counselor, assistant counselor, or instructor
4 in a youth camp certified under the Maryland Youth Camp Act; or

5 (ix) work that is performed as an unpaid volunteer in a charitable or
6 nonprofit organization, if:

7 1. a parent of the minor or a person standing in the place of
8 the parent consents in writing; and

9 2. for hazardous work in a volunteer fire department or
10 company or volunteer rescue squad, the minor:

11 A. is at least 16 years old; and

12 B. has completed or is taking a course of study about
13 firefighting or rescue.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
15 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4