START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 17 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 17 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Estates and Trusts - Venue for Administrative and Judicial Probate and 
Application of Inheritance Tax 
 
 
This bill expands the bases upon which a determination can be made that a given county is 
the proper venue for administrative or judicial probate of the estate of a decedent 
(deceased person) who was not domiciled in the United States. The bill also establishes 
that – for purposes of the inheritance tax, which is imposed on property with a taxable situs 
(location, for legal purposes) in the State – the situs of intangible personal property 
(e.g., financial holdings or interests that lack a physical existence) is the domicile of the 
decedent. The bill’s venue provisions apply to estates opened on or after July 1, 2026. The 
inheritance tax provisions apply to decedents dying on or after July 1, 2026. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027; however, any 
decrease appears likely to be minimal, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected.     
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 17/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Venue for Administrative or Judicial Probate 
 
 
Determining Venue – Decedent not Domiciled in the United States 
 
Under provisions governing the determination of venue for administrative or judicial 
probate (the management and distribution of a decedent’s estate), the bill expands the basis 
for determination of proper venue of a given county if a decedent was not domiciled in the 
United States. In addition to the existing basis for determination of proper venue in a county 
if the decedent was not domiciled in the United States – the petitioner believing the county 
to be where the largest part in value of the property of the decedent in the State was located 
at the time of death – the bill allows for a determination of proper venue in the county in 
which the petitioner believes: 
 
 
any cause of action in favor of the decedent arose; 
 
the personal representative (executor or administrator of the estate) resides or has 
the personal representative’s principal place of business; 
 
one or more interested persons, legatees, heirs, or beneficiaries reside; or 
 
a financial institution, that is subject to the jurisdiction of the State and with which 
the decedent had a contractual agreement, may be sued. 
 
 
Situs of Property in Determining Venue 
 
For purposes of determining venue for the administration of the estate of a decedent who 
was not domiciled in Maryland, the bill clarifies that the situs of real property (as well as 
the situs of tangible personal property, as established under current statute) is its location.  
 
The bills also establishes that the situs of intangible personal property is not altered by the 
opening of an estate under the provisions (above) governing the determination of venue 
where a decedent is not domiciled in the United States.  
 
Inheritance Tax – Intangible Personal Property of a Nonresident Decedent 
 
The bill establishes that, for the purposes of the inheritance tax (which, under current law, 
is imposed on the privilege of receiving property that passes from a decedent and has a 
taxable situs in the State) the situs of intangible personal property is the domicile of the 
decedent.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 17/ Page 3 
The bill correspondingly repeals an exemption from the inheritance tax for the receipt of 
personal property, other than tangible personal property, that passes from a nonresident 
decedent who, at the time of death, is a resident of a state or foreign country whose law, on 
the date of the decedent’s death, (1) does not impose death taxes on the receipt of similar 
personal property of a Maryland resident or (2) contains a reciprocal exemption from death 
taxes similar to Maryland’s exemption. 
 
Current Law:           
 
Venue for Administrative or Judicial Probate  
 
 
Determining Venue 
 
Venue for administrative or judicial probate is in the county in which the decedent was 
domiciled at the time of death, or, if the decedent was not domiciled in Maryland, the 
county in which the petitioner believes the largest part in value of the property of the 
decedent in Maryland was located at the time of death. 
 
 
Situs of Property in Determining Venue 
 
For the purpose of determining venue for the administration of the estate of a decedent who 
was not domiciled in Maryland at the time of death, the situs of tangible personal property 
is its location.  
 
The situs of intangible personal property is the location of the instrument evidencing a debt, 
obligation, stock, or chose in action. If there is no instrument, the residence of the debtor 
governs.  
 
The situs of an interest in property held in trust is any county where the trustee may be 
sued.  
 
Inheritance Tax  
 
 
Generally 
 
The inheritance tax is imposed on the privilege of receiving property that has a taxable 
situs in the State and passes from a decedent to a collateral beneficiary (i.e., a person other 
than a lineal relative or sibling of the decedent). The inheritance tax rate of 10% is applied 
to the “clear value” (fair market value minus expenses) of the property that passes from a 
decedent. Property that passes to “direct” or lineal beneficiaries or siblings of the decedent 
is exempt from the tax. The law also provides for several additional exemptions from the 
inheritance tax.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 17/ Page 4 
 
Reciprocal Exemption for Intangible Personal Property of a Nonresident Decedent 
 
Among the exemptions from the inheritance tax is an exemption of the receipt of personal 
property, other than tangible personal property, that passes from a nonresident decedent if, 
at the time of death, the decedent is a resident of a state or foreign country whose law 
(1) does not impose death taxes on the receipt of similar personal property of a Maryland 
resident or (2) contains a reciprocal exemption from death taxes similar to the Maryland 
exemption.  
 
 
Payment of Inheritance Tax by a Foreign Personal Representative 
 
Under provisions of the Estates and Trusts Article, a foreign personal representative 
administering an estate of a nonresident decedent which has property that is located in the 
State and that is subject to inheritance tax must file specified information with the register 
of wills, who then fixes the amount of inheritance tax due. Maryland Rule 6-501 establishes 
a form on which a foreign personal representative provides the information, and the form 
requires information on real and leasehold property owned by the decedent in Maryland 
and tangible personal property in Maryland owned by the decedent and taxable in Maryland 
(including the market value of the property at the decedent’s date of death).  
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027, to the 
extent that the bill’s establishment that the situs of intangible personal property for 
purposes of the inheritance tax is the domicile of the decedent causes intangible personal 
property of a nonresident decedent that otherwise is subject to Maryland inheritance tax to 
no longer be subject to Maryland inheritance tax. Any decrease in general fund revenues, 
however, appears likely to be minimal.  
 
The fact that there is an inheritance tax exemption in statute for intangible personal 
property of a nonresident decedent whose home state or country does not tax similar 
property of Maryland resident decedents (or has a similar reciprocal exemption), indicates 
that there may be some circumstances in which intangible personal property of a 
nonresident decedent can be determined to have a taxable situs in the State and be subject 
to inheritance tax if the nonresident’s home state or country does tax similar property of 
Maryland resident decedents and does not have a reciprocal exemption similar to 
Maryland’s.  
 
However, it appears that any decrease in general fund revenues resulting from the bill’s 
change is likely to be minimal, based on (1) the registers of wills’ indication that the bill 
does not have a fiscal impact; (2) the fact that the foreign personal representative form 
under Maryland Rule 6-501 does not appear to account for circumstances in which 
intangible personal property of a nonresident decedent could be subject to inheritance tax; 
and (3) the fact that there appears to be limited factual circumstances in which Maryland 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 17/ Page 5 
inheritance tax might apply to intangible personal property of a nonresident decedent under 
current statute.  
 
Registers of wills’ salaries and office expenses are paid from fees and inheritance tax 
revenues collected by the registers, with the remainder of the revenues deposited in the 
State general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 277 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Orphans’ Court of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5