START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 76

F1 6lr1469
HB 157/25 – APP (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Griffith
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Local School Systems – School Safety – Grant Allocations

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the reallocation of certain school safety grants to local
4 school systems that have fully expended their grant allocation and demonstrate
5 unmet need within the same fiscal year; and generally relating to school safety grant
6 allocations.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 7–1508(e)(2)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Education
14 Section 7–1508(g)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Education

20 7–1508.

21 (e) (2) Beginning with the 2019–2020 school year, and each school year
22 thereafter, before the school year begins, each local school system shall, in accordance with
23 the plan developed under subsection (d)(2) of this section, file a report identifying:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0076*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 76

1 (i) The public schools in the local school system’s jurisdiction that
2 have a school resource officer assigned to the school; and

3 (ii) If a public school in the local school system’s jurisdiction is not
4 assigned a school resource officer, the adequate local law enforcement coverage that will be
5 provided to the public school.

6 (g) (1) For fiscal year 2020 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor shall
7 include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $10,000,000 for the purpose of
8 providing grants to local school systems and local law enforcement agencies to assist in
9 meeting the requirements of subsection (e) of this section.

10 (2) Grants provided under this subsection [shall]:

11 (I) SHALL be made to each local school system based on the number
12 of schools in each school system in proportion to the total number of public schools in the
13 State in the prior year; AND

14 (II) MAY BE REALLOCATED TO LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS THAT
15 HAVE FULLY EXPENDED THEIR ALLOCATION AND DEMONSTRATE NEED WITHIN THE
16 SAME FISCAL YEAR.

17 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2