START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 80

N1 6lr0689
HB 1257/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 13, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Landlord and Tenant – Residential Leases – Fee Disclosures

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a landlord to provide certain information to prospective
4 tenants about fees imposed on tenants and prohibiting a landlord from imposing a
5 mandatory fee that was not disclosed; authorizing a tenant to file a claim against a
6 landlord for a violation of this Act; authorizing a local jurisdiction to adopt certain
7 local laws; and generally relating to residential leases and fee disclosures for tenants.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Real Property
10 Section 8–212.5
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Real Property

16 8–212.5.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
18 INDICATED.

19 (2) “DWELLING UNIT” MEANS THAT PORTION OF A BUILDING THAT IS
20 DESIGNATED, INTENDED, OR ARRANGED FOR USE OR OCCUPANCY AS A RESIDENCE
21 BY ONE OR MORE PERSONS, INCLUDING A RENTED ROOM IN A SINGLE–FAMILY
22 HOUSE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0080*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 80

1 (3) “FEE” MEANS A CHARGE, A COST, OR A MONETARY OBLIGATION
2 OTHER THAN RENT.

3 (4) “MANDATORY FEE” MEANS A COMPULSORY FEE IMPOSED ON A
4 TENANT AS A CONDITION OF TENANCY.

5 (5) (I) “OPTIONAL FEE” MEANS A VOLUNTARY FEE THAT A TENANT
6 MAY ELECT TO PAY A LANDLORD FOR BENEFITS OR SERVICES RELATED TO THE
7 TENANCY.

8 (II) “OPTIONAL FEE” INCLUDES A FEE FOR PARKING, STORAGE,
9 OR PETS.

10 (B) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO:

11 (I) A LEASE SIGNED OR RENEWED ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1,
12 2026; AND

13 (II) A LANDLORD THAT OFFERS FOUR OR MORE DWELLING
14 UNITS FOR RENT.

15 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

16 (I) CHARGES IMPOSED ON A TENANT FOR THE PAYMENT OF
17 WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR ELECTRIC UTILITIES;

18 (II) COSTS, FINES, OR FEES FOR MINOR VIOLATIONS OF A LEASE
19 AGREEMENT, OR OTHER IRREGULAR COSTS INCURRED AS A RESULT OF A TENANT’S
20 ACTIONS, SUCH AS A CHARGE FOR A REPLACEMENT KEY OR A PENALTY FOR A
21 VIOLATION OF THE BYLAWS OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY IF THE
22 DWELLING UNIT IS LOCATED IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; OR

23 (III) THE WITHHOLDING OF ANY PORTION OF A SECURITY
24 DEPOSIT AT THE END OF A TENANCY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 8–203 OF THIS
25 SUBTITLE.

26 (C) (1) A LANDLORD SHALL, IN WRITING, PROVIDE A PROSPECTIVE
27 TENANT WITH AN ITEMIZED LIST THAT CLEARLY IDENTIFIES ALL FEES THAT A
28 LANDLORD MAY IMPOSE ON THE PROSPECTIVE TENANT AND INCLUDES THE
29 FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

30 (I) THE BASIS FOR THE FEE;

31 (II) THE AMOUNT OF THE FEE;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 80 3

1 (III) WHETHER THE FEE IS A MANDATORY FEE OR AN OPTIONAL
2 FEE; AND

3 (IV) WHEN THE FEE IS DUE, INCLUDING WHETHER THE FEE IS
4 LUMP SUM, MONTHLY, OR PERIODIC IN SOME OTHER WAY.

5 (2) A LANDLORD MAY NOT IMPOSE A MANDATORY FEE ON A TENANT
6 THAT IS NOT DISCLOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

7 (D) A LEASE PROVISION THAT IS IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE
8 VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE.

9 (E) (1) A TENANT MAY BRING AN ACTION AGAINST A LANDLORD FOR A
10 VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION THAT OCCURRED:

11 (I) ON OR AFTER FEBRUARY 1, 2027; AND

12 (II) DURING THE TENANCY OR UP TO 2 YEARS AFTER THE
13 TENANCY EXPIRED.

14 (2) IF A COURT DETERMINES THAT A LANDLORD VIOLATED A
15 PROVISION OF THIS SECTION, THE COURT MAY AWARD DAMAGES EQUAL TO THREE
16 TIMES THE AMOUNT OF ACTUAL DAMAGES THAT RESULTED FROM THE VIOLATION
17 AND REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

18 (F) (1) A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY ENACT LOCAL LAWS
19 CONSISTENT WITH THIS SECTION.

20 (2) ANY LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE THAT IS COMPARABLE IN
21 SUBJECT MATTER TO THIS SECTION SHALL SUPERSEDE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
22 SECTION TO THE EXTENT THAT THE LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE IS MORE STRINGENT
23 OR PROVIDES STRONGER PROTECTION TO A TENANT OR BROADER APPLICABILITY
24 THAN THIS SECTION.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
26 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3