START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 53 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 53 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law – Nondomesticated Animal Prohibitions – Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters existing provisions that prohibit importing into the State, offering for sale, 
trading, bartering, possessing, breeding, or exchanging various live nondomesticated 
animals (see Current Law), by (1) adding zebras, kangaroos, wallaroos, and wallabies to 
the list of prohibited live nondomesticated animals, subject to an exception for a person 
who possesses one or more of those animals on or before October 1, 2026; (2) limiting an 
exception for nonresidents traveling between locations outside the State so that a 
nonresident may only be in the State with an animal for 48 hours or less instead of 10 days 
or less; and (3) removing an exception for a nondomesticated animal serving as an 
assistance animal for a person with a severe mobility-limiting disability. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Prohibitions – Zebras, Kangaroos, Wallaroos, and Wallabies 
 
The bill adds zebras, kangaroos, wallaroos, and wallabies to a list of live nondomesticated 
animals that may not be imported into the State, offered for sale, traded, bartered, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 53/ Page 2 
possessed, bred, or exchanged (subject to exceptions for certain licensed individuals or 
entities and certain others). However, the bill does not prohibit a person who has lawful 
possession of a zebra, kangaroo, wallaroo, or wallaby on or before October 1, 2026, from 
continuing to possess the animal if the person provides written notification to the local 
animal control authority by December 1, 2026. 
 
Limitation of Exception for Nonresidents Traveling Through the State 
 
An exception to the above-mentioned prohibitions, that applies to a nonresident of the State 
who is in the State for 10 days or less for the purpose of traveling between locations outside 
of the State, is modified to only apply to a nonresident that is in the State for 48 hours or 
less (instead of 10 days or less). 
 
Removal of Exception for an Assistance Animal 
 
The bill removes an exception from the prohibition against possession of a listed 
nondomesticated animal that allows a person – who has a disability that severely limits 
mobility – to possess a listed nondomesticated animal if it is (1) specially trained to perform 
tasks for the person and (2) dedicated to improving the person’s quality of life. 
 
Current Law:  A person may not import into the State, offer for sale, trade, barter, possess, 
breed, or exchange a live:   
 
 
fox, skunk, raccoon, or bear; 
 
caiman, alligator, or crocodile; 
 
nondomestic cat or hybrid of a nondomestic cat and a domestic cat if the hybrid 
weighs over 30 pounds; 
 
nondomestic dog or hybrid of a nondomestic dog and a domestic dog; 
 
nonhuman primate, including a lemur, monkey, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, 
marmoset, loris, or tamarin; or 
 
specified species of poisonous snake. 
 
A person who violates the prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to (1) if an 
individual, a fine of up to $1,000 and (2) if not an individual, a fine of up to $10,000. The 
prohibitions may be enforced by (1) any State or local law enforcement officer or (2) the 
local animal control authority for the jurisdiction where the violation occurs. 
 
Various exceptions to the prohibitions apply to specified licensed individuals or entities, 
including research facilities and animal exhibitors (such as zoos and circuses), and certain 
others. One of the exceptions is for a nonresident who is in the State for 10 days or less for 
the purpose of traveling between locations outside the State. There is also an exception to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 53/ Page 3 
the prohibition against possession of a listed animal for a person with a disability that 
severely limits mobility, if the animal is (1) specially trained to perform tasks for the owner 
and (2) dedicated to improving the person’s quality of life. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore, 
Frederick, 
and 
Somerset 
counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3