START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 81

R5, E2 6lr1541
HB 635/25 – JUD & ENT (PRE–FILED) CF SB 55

By: Delegate Phillips
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary and Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motor Vehicles – Police Stops – Secondary Enforcement and Excludable
3 Evidence

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a police officer to document all reasons for a traffic stop or
5 other stop on a citation or police report resulting from the stop; establishing that
6 certain evidence obtained during a traffic stop or other stop in violation of certain
7 provisions of law may be excluded as evidence in certain proceedings; authorizing a
8 police officer to enforce certain provisions of the Maryland Vehicle Law only as a
9 secondary action; applying certain provisions of this Act retroactively; and generally
10 relating to police stops.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Criminal Procedure
13 Section 2–109
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Transportation
18 Section 13–401, 13–411, 13–701, 21–1111, 22–203(b), 22–204(f), 22–403, and
19 22–406(i)(2)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
23 Article – Transportation
24 Section 22–406(i)(1)
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0081*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 81

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Criminal Procedure

4 2–109.

5 (a) At the commencement of a traffic stop or other stop, absent exigent
6 circumstances, a police officer shall:

7 (1) display proper identification to the stopped individual; and

8 (2) provide the following information to the stopped individual:

9 (i) the officer’s name;

10 (ii) the officer’s identification number issued by the law enforcement
11 agency the officer is representing;

12 (iii) the name of the law enforcement agency the police officer is
13 representing; and

14 (iv) the reason for the traffic stop or other stop.

15 (b) A POLICE OFFICER SHALL DOCUMENT ALL REASONS FOR A TRAFFIC
16 STOP OR OTHER STOP ON ANY CITATION OR POLICE REPORT RESULTING FROM THE
17 STOP.

18 (C) A police officer’s failure to comply with subsection (a) of this section:

19 (1) may be grounds for administrative disciplinary action against the
20 officer; and

21 (2) may [not] serve as the basis for the exclusion of evidence under the
22 exclusionary rule.

23 [(c)] (D) A police officer may not prohibit or prevent a citizen from recording the
24 police officer’s actions if the citizen is otherwise acting lawfully and safely.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
26 as follows:

27 Article – Transportation

28 13–401.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 81 3

1 (a) This section applies to any vehicle required to be registered under this title.

2 (b) (1) If a vehicle is not registered, a person may not drive the vehicle on a
3 highway in this State.

4 (2) (i) If a person is convicted of a violation of this subsection that
5 involved the use of an off–highway recreational vehicle on a highway, the court shall notify
6 the Administration of the violation.

7 (ii) The Chief Judge of the District Court, in conjunction with the
8 Administration, shall establish uniform procedures for reporting convictions described in
9 this paragraph.

10 (c) If a vehicle is not registered, the owner of the vehicle may not knowingly allow
11 the vehicle to be driven on a highway in this State.

12 (d) (1) If the required registration fee for a vehicle has not been paid, a person
13 may not drive the vehicle on a highway in this State.

14 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
15 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
16 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

17 (e) (1) If the required registration fee for a vehicle has not been paid, the owner
18 of the vehicle may not knowingly allow the vehicle to be driven on a highway in this State.

19 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
20 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
21 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

22 (f) If the registration of a vehicle is canceled, a person may not drive the vehicle
23 on a highway in this State.

24 (g) If the registration of a vehicle is canceled, the owner of the vehicle may not
25 knowingly allow the vehicle to be driven on a highway in this State.

26 (h) If the registration of a vehicle is suspended, a person may not drive the vehicle
27 on a highway in this State.

28 (i) If the registration of a vehicle is suspended, the owner of the vehicle may not
29 knowingly allow the vehicle to be driven on a highway in this State.

30 (j) If the registration of a vehicle is revoked, a person may not drive the vehicle
31 on a highway in this State.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 81

1 (k) If the registration of a vehicle is revoked, the owner of the vehicle may not
2 knowingly allow the vehicle to be driven on a highway in this State.

3 13–411.

4 (a) On a vehicle for which two registration plates are required, one plate shall be
5 attached on the front and the other on the rear of the vehicle.

6 (b) On a vehicle for which one registration plate is required, the plate shall be
7 attached on the:

8 (1) Front of the vehicle for a Class F (tractor) vehicle; and

9 (2) Rear of the vehicle for every other vehicle.

10 (c) (1) At all times, each registration plate shall be:

11 (i) Maintained free from foreign materials, including registration
12 plate covers as defined in § 13–411.1 of this subtitle, and in a condition to be clearly legible;
13 and

14 (ii) Securely fastened to the vehicle for which it is issued:

15 1. In a horizontal position;

16 2. In a manner that prevents the plate from swinging; and

17 3. In a place and position to be clearly visible.

18 (2) For a violation involving the placement of an object framing or
19 bordering the edges of a registration plate, a police officer may enforce this subsection only
20 as a secondary action when the police officer detains a driver of a motor vehicle for a
21 suspected violation of another provision of the Code.

22 (d) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by the Maryland Vehicle Law, as to
23 any vehicle required to be registered under this title, a person may not drive the vehicle on
24 any highway in this State, unless there is attached to the vehicle and displayed on it, as
25 required in this title:

26 (1) A registration plate or plates issued for the vehicle by the
27 Administration for the current registration period; and

28 (2) Any validation tab issued for the vehicle under this subtitle.

29 (e) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by the Maryland Vehicle Law, as to
30 any vehicle required to be registered under this title, the owner of the vehicle may not
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 81 5

1 permit the vehicle to be driven on any highway in this State, unless there is attached to
2 and displayed on the vehicle, as required in this title:

3 (1) A registration plate or plates issued by the Administration for the
4 current registration period; and

5 (2) Any validation tab issued for the vehicle under this subtitle.

6 (f) (1) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by the Maryland Vehicle Law,
7 a vehicle used or driven in this State may not display on either its front or rear any expired
8 registration plate issued by any state.

9 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
10 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
11 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

12 (g) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by the Maryland Vehicle Law, a
13 person may not display or permit to be displayed on any vehicle used or driven in this State
14 any registration plate issued for another vehicle or to a person other than the owner of the
15 vehicle.

16 (h) (1) A vehicle registered as a historic or antique vehicle (Class L) in this
17 State or in another state, when used or driven in this State, may display vintage
18 registration plates as an indication of the historic or antique nature of the vehicle. Except
19 as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the place on the vehicle provided for the
20 display of registration plates may only be used for the display of current registration plates
21 in accordance with subsections (a) through (c) of this section, and any vintage registration
22 plates which are used shall be displayed elsewhere on the vehicle.

23 (2) If the Administration authorizes the display of vintage registration
24 plates in lieu of current registration plates, as provided in § 13–936.1 of this title, the
25 vintage registration plates shall be displayed as required under subsections (a) through (c)
26 of this section. However, the current registration plates shall be kept in the vehicle at all
27 times.

28 (i) It is the duty of every police officer to report to the Administration all vehicles
29 operated in violation of this section. The Administration shall verify whether the owner of
30 a reported vehicle has complied with this section.

31 (J) A POLICE OFFICER MAY NOT STOP A MOTOR VEHICLE FOR DISPLAYING
32 AN EXPIRED REGISTRATION BEFORE THE FIRST DAY OF THE FOURTH MONTH
33 FOLLOWING THE ORIGINAL EXPIRATION DATE OF THE REGISTRATION.

34 13–701.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 81

1 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, as to any vehicle required to be
2 registered under this title, a person may not drive the vehicle on any highway in this State,
3 unless the vehicle displays current registration plates and a current registration card is
4 carried as required in this title.

5 (b) Except as otherwise provided in this title, as to any vehicle required to be
6 registered under this title, an owner of the vehicle may not knowingly permit the vehicle to
7 be driven on a highway in this State, unless the vehicle displays current registration plates
8 and a current registration card is carried as required in this title.

9 (C) (1) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SECTION ONLY AS A
10 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
11 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

12 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY NOT STOP A MOTOR VEHICLE FOR
13 DISPLAYING AN EXPIRED REGISTRATION BEFORE THE FIRST DAY OF THE FOURTH
14 MONTH FOLLOWING THE ORIGINAL EXPIRATION DATE OF THE REGISTRATION.

15 21–1111.

16 (a) A person may not drop, throw, or place on a highway any glass bottle, glass,
17 nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
18 vehicle on the highway.

19 (b) Any person who drops, throws, or places or permits to be dropped, thrown, or
20 placed on a highway any destructive, hazardous, or injurious material immediately shall
21 remove it or cause it to be removed.

22 (c) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway also shall
23 remove from the highway any glass or other injurious substance dropped from the vehicle.

24 (d) A person may not throw, dump, discharge, or deposit any trash, junk, or other
25 refuse on any highway or public bridge or in any public waters.

26 (e) The owner of the vehicle, if present in the vehicle, or, in his absence, the driver
27 of the vehicle is presumed to be responsible for any violation of this section, if:

28 (1) The violation is caused by an occupant of the vehicle;

29 (2) The vehicle has two or more occupants; and

30 (3) It cannot be determined which occupant is the violator.

31 (f) A violation of this section is considered a moving violation for purposes of §
32 16–402 of this article.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 81 7

1 (G) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SECTION ONLY AS A SECONDARY
2 ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE FOR
3 A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

4 22–203.

5 (b) (1) Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with at
6 least two headlamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which
7 headlamps shall emit white light and comply with the requirements and limitations set
8 forth in this title.

9 (2) IF A MOTOR VEHICLE, OTHER THAN A MOTORCYCLE, HAS AT
10 LEAST ONE WORKING HEADLAMP ON THE FRONT OF THE VEHICLE THAT EMITS
11 WHITE LIGHT AND COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS SET
12 FORTH IN THIS TITLE, A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS
13 A SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF THE
14 MOTOR VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE
15 CODE.

16 22–204.

17 (f) (1) Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed and placed
18 to illuminate, with a white light, the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible
19 from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate
20 lamp or lamps for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be wired to be lighted
21 whenever the head lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.

22 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
23 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
24 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

25 22–403.

26 (a) Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with at least one mirror located to
27 reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of
28 the vehicle.

29 (b) Every motor vehicle registered in this State shall be equipped with an outside
30 mirror on the driver’s side located to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance
31 of at least 200 feet to the rear of the vehicle and along the driver’s side of the vehicle. This
32 subsection does not apply to motorcycles, which are governed by subsection (c) of this
33 section.

34 (c) Every motorcycle shall be equipped with two rearview mirrors, one each
35 attached to the right and left handlebars, which shall meet applicable federal motor vehicle
36 safety standards.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 81

1 (d) (1) Where the view through the inside rearview mirror is obstructed, two
2 outside rearview mirrors are required.

3 (2) A POLICE OFFICER MAY ENFORCE THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
4 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
5 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE.

6 22–406.

7 (i) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, a person may
8 not operate a vehicle registered under § 13–912, § 13–913, § 13–917, or § 13–937 of this
9 article on a highway in this State if:

10 (i) In the case of a vehicle registered under § 13–912 of this article,
11 there is affixed to any window of the vehicle any tinting materials added to the window
12 after manufacture of the vehicle that do not allow a light transmittance through the window
13 of at least 35%; and

14 (ii) In the case of a vehicle registered under § 13–913, § 13–917, or §
15 13–937 of this article, there is affixed to any window to the immediate right or left of the
16 driver any window tinting materials added after manufacture of the vehicle that do not
17 allow a light transmittance through the window of at least 35%.

18 (2) If a police officer observes that a vehicle is being operated in violation
19 of paragraph (1) of this subsection, the officer may [stop the driver of the vehicle and, in
20 addition to]:

21 (I) ENFORCE PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ONLY AS A
22 SECONDARY ACTION WHEN THE POLICE OFFICER DETAINS A DRIVER OF A MOTOR
23 VEHICLE FOR A SUSPECTED VIOLATION OF ANOTHER PROVISION OF THE CODE; AND

24 (II) 1. ISSUE a citation charging the driver with the offense[,
25 issue]; OR

26 2. ISSUE to the driver a safety equipment repair order in
27 accordance with the provisions of § 23–105 of this article.

28 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall be
29 construed to apply retroactively and shall be applied to and interpreted to affect any
30 proceedings not finally adjudicated on the effective date of this Act.

31 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
32 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8