START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 52

G1 6lr1104
HB 710/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF SB 89

By: Delegate Wilkins
Requested: October 6, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Election Law – Incarcerated Individuals – Voter Hotline and Voting Eligibility
3 (Voting Rights for All Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Elections to provide a certain voter hotline
5 for incarcerated individuals; altering the circumstances under which an individual
6 is not qualified to be a registered voter for the purpose of allowing individuals
7 convicted of a felony and serving a court–ordered sentence of imprisonment for the
8 conviction to register to vote; and generally relating to a voting hotline and voting
9 eligibility for incarcerated individuals.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Election Law
12 Section 1–306
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Election Law
17 Section 3–102 and 3–504(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing
21 Article – Election Law
22 Section 16–202
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
26 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0052*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 52

1 Article – Election Law

2 1–306.

3 (A) THE STATE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE A TOLL–FREE VOTER HOTLINE FOR
4 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS TO RECEIVE INFORMATION ABOUT VOTING, REQUEST
5 ELECTION–RELATED MATERIALS, AND REPORT VOTING RIGHTS VIOLATIONS.

6 (B) THE STATE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS IN COLLABORATION
7 WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND
8 CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE VOTER HOTLINE.

9 3–102.

10 (a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an individual may
11 become registered to vote if the individual:

12 (i) is a citizen of the United States;

13 (ii) is at least 16 years old;

14 (iii) is a resident of the State as of the day the individual seeks to
15 register; and

16 (iv) registers pursuant to this title.

17 (2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(ii) of this subsection, an individual
18 under the age of 18 years:

19 (i) may vote in a primary election in which candidates are
20 nominated for a general or special election that will occur when the individual is at least
21 18 years old; and

22 (ii) may not vote in any other election.

23 (b) An individual is not qualified to be a registered voter if the individual:

24 (1) [has been convicted of a felony and is currently serving a court–ordered
25 sentence of imprisonment for the conviction;

26 (2)] is under guardianship for mental disability and a court of competent
27 jurisdiction has specifically found by clear and convincing evidence that the individual
28 cannot communicate, with or without accommodations, a desire to participate in the voting
29 process; or
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 52 3

1 [(3)] (2) has been convicted of buying or selling votes.

2 3–504.

3 (a) (1) (i) Information from the agencies specified in this paragraph shall
4 be reported to the State Administrator in a format and at times prescribed by the State
5 Board.

6 (ii) The Maryland Department of Health shall report the names and
7 residence addresses (if known) of all individuals at least 16 years of age reported deceased
8 within the State since the date of the last report.

9 (iii) [Each month, the clerk of the circuit court for each county and
10 the administrative clerk for each District Court shall report the names and addresses of all
11 individuals convicted, in the respective court, of a felony and sentenced to imprisonment
12 with commitment papers.

13 (iv)] The clerk of the circuit court for each county shall report the
14 former and present names and residence addresses (if known) of all individuals whose
15 names have been changed by decree or order of the court since the date of the last report.

16 (2) [The State Administrator shall make arrangements with the clerk of
17 the United States District Court for the District of Maryland to receive reports of names
18 and addresses, if available, of individuals convicted of a felony in that court and sentenced
19 to imprisonment with commitment papers.

20 (3)] The State Administrator shall make arrangements with the United
21 States Social Security Administration or an entity that receives information from the Social
22 Security Administration and is approved by the State Administrator to receive reports of
23 names and addresses, if available, of all Maryland residents at least 16 years of age who
24 are reported deceased.

25 [16–202.

26 (a) A person who has been convicted of a felony and is currently serving a
27 court–ordered sentence of imprisonment for the conviction, and has been rendered
28 ineligible to vote pursuant to § 3–102(b) of this article, may not vote or attempt to vote
29 during the time that the person is rendered ineligible to vote.

30 (b) A person who violates this section is guilty of a felony and is subject to
31 imprisonment for not less than 1 year nor more than 5 years.]

32 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
33 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 3