START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 41

F3 6lr1338
HB 1529/25 – HRU (PRE–FILED) CF SB 40

By: Delegate McCaskill
Requested: October 27, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore County Board of Education – Alterations of Elected Member Districts
3 and Establishment of Redistricting Process

4 FOR the purpose of requiring certain members of the Baltimore County Board of Education
5 to be elected in a certain manner from certain districts in certain elections; requiring
6 the chair of the Baltimore County delegation to the General Assembly to introduce
7 legislation to reapportion certain school board districts in a certain manner after
8 each decennial census of the United States; and generally relating to elected member
9 districts for the Baltimore County Board of Education.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Education
12 Section 3–2B–01
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Education
17 Section 3–2B–11
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Education

23 3–2B–01.

24 (a) The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0041*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 41

1 (1) Seven nonpartisan elected members;

2 (2) Four appointed members; and

3 (3) One student member.

4 (b) (1) Of the 11 elected and appointed members of the county board:

5 (i) 1. [One] BEFORE THE 2034 GENERAL ELECTION, ONE
6 member shall be elected from each of the seven councilmanic districts in the county,
7 established by the County Council of Baltimore County IN EXISTENCE ON OCTOBER 1,
8 2024, by the voters of that district; and

9 2. BEGINNING WITH THE 2034 GENERAL ELECTION, ONE
10 MEMBER SHALL BE ELECTED FROM EACH OF THE SEVEN SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICTS
11 ESTABLISHED BY THE REDISTRICTING PROCESS DESCRIBED IN § 3–2B–11 OF THIS
12 SUBTITLE, BY THE VOTERS OF THAT DISTRICT; AND

13 (ii) Four members shall be appointed by the Governor from the
14 county at large.

15 (2) (i) The seven elected members shall be elected at a general election
16 in gubernatorial election years in accordance with § 3–2B–02 of this subtitle.

17 (ii) The four appointed members shall be appointed by the Governor
18 in presidential election years from a list of nominees submitted by the Baltimore County
19 School Board Nominating Commission as provided in § 3–2B–03 of this subtitle:

20 1. On the expiration of the term of an incumbent appointed
21 member within 30 days after the general election; or

22 2. Within the 30–day period otherwise required under this
23 subtitle.

24 (3) (i) A member from a school board district shall be at least 21 years
25 old, a resident of that district for at least 2 years, and a registered voter of the county before
26 the election.

27 (ii) A member from a district who does not maintain residency in
28 that district may not continue as a member of the county board and the office shall be
29 deemed vacant.

30 (iii) If the boundary line of a district is changed, the term of an
31 incumbent member of the county board who no longer resides in the district because of the
32 change is not affected during this term.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 41 3

1 (4) (i) A member may not be elected or appointed to serve on the county
2 board for more than three consecutive terms.

3 (ii) A member who has served three consecutive 4–year terms may
4 not be elected or appointed to the county board until at least 4 years have elapsed since the
5 end of the member’s last term on the county board.

6 (5) During an election year:

7 (i) The Governor may not appoint as a member of the county board
8 an individual who files a certificate of candidacy for election to the county board; and

9 (ii) An individual who files a certificate of candidacy for election to
10 the county board may not seek appointment to the county board by the Governor through
11 nomination by the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission.

12 3–2B–11.

13 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICT” MEANS THE GEOGRAPHIC
14 AREA OF BALTIMORE COUNTY FROM WHICH AN ELECTED MEMBER OF THE
15 BALTIMORE COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION IS ELECTED.

16 (B) (1) BEGINNING AFTER THE 2030 U.S. CENSUS, THE SCHOOL BOARD
17 DISTRICTS SHALL BE:

18 (I) REAPPORTIONED AFTER EACH DECENNIAL CENSUS OF THE
19 UNITED STATES; AND

20 (II) EFFECTIVE FOR EACH GENERAL ELECTION WHERE A
21 MEMBER WILL BE ELECTED UNTIL THE FOLLOWING DECENNIAL CENSUS.

22 (2) THE REAPPORTIONED SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICTS UNDER THIS
23 SECTION SHALL BE SUBSTANTIALLY EQUAL IN POPULATION.

24 (C) AFTER EACH DECENNIAL CENSUS, THE CHAIR OF THE BALTIMORE
25 COUNTY DELEGATION TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY SHALL INTRODUCE
26 LEGISLATION TO REAPPORTION THE SCHOOL BOARD DISTRICTS.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3