START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 90 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 90 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Taxes - Authority of Counties to Establish a Subclass and Set a Special 
Rate for Commercial and Industrial Property 
 
 
This bill authorizes Baltimore City and county governments to establish, by law, a subclass 
of improved real property consisting of the following real property assessment  
codes:  (1) commercial; (2) industrial; (3) commercial/industrial condominium; 
(4) residential/commercial; and (5) commercial/residential. Baltimore City and county 
governments are authorized to set a special property tax rate for these real property 
classifications. The bill mandates either a property tax exemption or property tax credit for 
residential portions of commercial or industrial property. The bill authorizes a local 
property tax credit for specified small businesses. The bill adds a reporting requirement for 
jurisdictions that enact a special property tax rate. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and 
applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues (Baltimore City and county governments) may 
be affected depending on the real property tax rate that is set for commercial or industrial 
property. Local government reporting requirements can be handled with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses that own commercial or 
industrial property may be affected depending on the real property tax rate set by 
Baltimore City or county governments. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 90/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Baltimore City and county governments may only impose a special 
property tax rate:  (1) within a special taxing district established for the purpose of 
financing the cost of specified State or county transportation improvements; or (2) on a 
countywide basis for the purpose of funding the approved budget of the county board of 
education. 
 
A special rate (1) must be in addition to the general real property tax rate; (2) may not 
exceed a combined total of $0.125 for each $100 of assessed value for both authorized 
purposes; and (3) may not apply to the residential portion of a specified mixed-use property 
that receives either an exemption from the special rate or a credit against the special rate. 
If Baltimore City or a county set a special rate, they must grant either (1) a credit against 
the special rate for the entire residential portion of a mixed‑use property or (2) an 
exemption from the special rate for the entire residential portion of a mixed-use property. 
 
Property Tax Credit or Exemption 
 
A county may calculate the property tax credit or exemption (1) as a percentage of a 
mixed‑use property’s special tax liability that is equal to the percentage of the total square 
footage of the property that is used for residential purposes; (2) as a percentage of a 
mixed‑use property’s special tax liability that is equal to the percentage of the total income 
produced by the property that is derived from residential use; or (3) using any other 
reasonable method that ensures the entire residential portion of a mixed‑use property is not 
subject to the special rate. 
 
The credit or exemption continues for as long as the special rate is in effect. A county must 
automatically grant the credit or exemption without requiring an application from the 
property owner if, based on publicly available records, the county is able to:  (1) identify a 
mixed-use property that is subject to the special rate; and (2) calculate the credit or 
exemption due for the residential portion of that mixed-use property. If, based on publicly 
available records, a county is able to identify a mixed-use property that is subject to the 
special rate but has insufficient information to calculate the credit or exemption due for the 
residential portion of that mixed-use property, the county may request additional 
information from the owner of the mixed-use property to enable the county to calculate the 
credit or exemption due. If an owner of a mixed-use property does not provide the 
information requested to calculate the credit or exemption due, the county is not required 
to grant the credit or exemption to that mixed-use property.  
 
Applications and Notice 
 
Baltimore City and counties must accept applications for the exemption or credit from an 
owner of a mixed-use property that is not automatically granted an exemption. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 90/ Page 3 
Baltimore City and counties must provide written notice of the exemption or credit to the 
owner of each property that is subject to the special rate and is not automatically granted 
an exemption or credit. The notice must include (1) a description of the exemption or credit 
and (2) instructions on how to apply for the exemption or credit. Baltimore City and 
counties may provide for (1) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform 
processing of requests for the exemption or credit and (2) any other provision necessary to 
carry out the exemption or credit. 
 
Small Business Property Tax Credit 
 
If Baltimore City or a county set a special property tax rate, Baltimore City or a county 
may grant a property tax credit against the special rate imposed on real property owned or 
leased by a business that employs 15 or fewer employees. Baltimore City and counties may 
provide for (1) the amount and duration of the tax credit; (2) additional eligibility 
requirements for the tax credit; (3) procedures for the application and uniform processing 
of requests for the tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the tax 
credit. 
 
Current Law:  Local property tax rates are set annually by local governments and are 
applied to the county and municipal assessable bases. Generally, State law does not restrict 
the setting of property tax rates, enabling local governments to set rates at the level required 
to fund governmental services. Under the Maryland Constitution, the General Assembly 
retains the authority to set maximum limits on the rate of property taxes in municipalities 
(subject to approval at a local referendum) and in code home rule counties. However, the 
Department of Legislative Services is unaware of any instances in which this authority has 
ever been exercised. Furthermore, local government statutes may limit the tax rates that 
may be set. 
 
The local property tax rate is established by each county, Baltimore City, or municipality 
expressed as an amount per $100 of assessed value. The county property tax rate may be 
supplemented by special property tax levies for special districts. Thus, local governments 
have the final authority for determining how much property tax revenue is generated. 
 
Property Classification for Assessment Purposes 
 
Title 8 of the Tax Property Article establishes the methods of property valuation and 
assessments and lists those classifications of property created by the General Assembly. 
For assessment purposes, property is divided into two classes – real property and 
personal property. Real property is divided into 11 subclasses, and personal property is 
divided into 7 subclasses. The State only imposes a property tax on real property, whereas 
county governments impose separate tax rates for real and personal property. Several 
county governments do not impose a personal property tax on business property.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 90/ Page 4 
Prior to fiscal 2025, Baltimore City and county governments were not authorized to set 
separate property tax rates among different subclasses of property. However,  
Chapter 277 of 2024 authorized Baltimore City and county governments, beginning  
July 1, 2024, to establish, by law, a subclass of real property consisting of vacant lots or 
improved property cited as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a 
housing or building violation notice. Baltimore City and county governments are 
authorized to set a special property tax rate for properties within this subclass. An annual 
reporting requirement was included for jurisdictions that enact a special property tax rate. 
In addition, Chapter 170 of 2025 authorizes Baltimore City to impose the city’s regular 
property tax rate and a special tax rate for specified vacant property on real property that 
would otherwise be exempt from taxation, if the real property is (1) a vacant lot or 
(2) improved property cited as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a 
housing or building violation notice. 
 
Unlike Baltimore City and county governments, municipalities have broader discretion to 
impose property tax rates on different classes of property. Municipalities may impose 
property taxes on those classes of property that it selects to be subject to the municipal 
property tax. In addition, municipalities retain the authority to classify property for local 
purposes and to impose different tax treatment on those classes. Furthermore, 
municipalities have the express power to exempt classes of property from taxation. 
Moreover, because municipalities may select the classes of property to be taxed and may 
set special rates for any class of property that is subject to the municipal property tax, 
municipalities retain the authority to levy different tax rates on selected classes of property. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues for Baltimore City and county 
governments may be affected depending on the real property tax rate that is set by each 
jurisdiction for specified commercial or industrial property. Based on information from the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation, for fiscal 2026, there are 78,268 various 
improved commercial and industrial properties with an assessed value of approximately 
$172.8 billion and 22,950 vacant commercial and industrial properties with an assessed 
value of approximately $6.0 billion. 
 
As a point of reference, Exhibit 1 shows the estimated taxable real property assessable 
base for commercial and industrial property for fiscal 2026 and the potential revenue 
generated by various increases in county real property tax rates. The revenue impact 
reflects partial exemptions for property accounts designated as residential commercial and 
commercial residential. For each 1.0 cent increase in the real property tax rate on 
commercial and industrial property, local property tax revenues could increase by 
$17.9 million. Based on a maximum combined 12.5 cent additional tax rate, local revenues 
could increase by $223.6 million. The actual revenue increase may be lower due to the 
level of property tax exemptions and credits provided to both small businesses and other 
affected properties.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 90/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Potential Increase in County Revenues from Various Tax Rates for  
Commercial and Industrial Property 
 
County 
FY 2026 
Assessable Base 
$0.01 Increase in 
Tax Rate 
$0.125 Increase in 
Tax Rate 
Allegany 
$1,115,738,000 
$111,574 
$1,394,673 
Anne Arundel 
19,239,050,000 
1,923,905 
24,048,813 
Baltimore City 
18,172,602,000 
1,817,260 
22,715,753 
Baltimore 
21,234,197,000 
2,123,420 
26,542,746 
Calvert 
1,126,506,000 
112,651 
1,408,133 
Caroline 
409,063,000 
40,906 
511,329 
Carroll 
2,995,528,000 
299,553 
3,744,410 
Cecil 
3,324,550,000 
332,455 
4,155,688 
Charles 
3,108,895,000 
310,890 
3,886,119 
Dorchester 
631,929,000 
63,193 
789,911 
Frederick 
7,916,401,000 
791,640 
9,895,501 
Garrett 
531,617,000 
53,162 
664,521 
Harford 
6,084,432,000 
608,443 
7,605,540 
Howard 
11,433,137,000 
1,143,314 
14,291,421 
Kent 
412,531,000 
41,253 
515,664 
Montgomery 
42,105,466,000 
4,210,547 
52,631,833 
Prince George’s 
25,034,991,000 
2,503,499 
31,293,739 
Queen Anne’s 
1,132,199,000 
113,220 
1,415,249 
St. Mary’s 
1,804,338,000 
180,434 
2,255,423 
Somerset 
266,581,000 
26,658 
333,226 
Talbot 
1,164,875,000 
116,488 
1,456,094 
Washington 
4,897,264,000 
489,726 
6,121,580 
Wicomico 
1,553,963,000 
155,396 
1,942,454 
Worcester 
3,173,202,000 
317,320 
3,966,503 
Total 
$178,869,057,000 
$17,886,906 
$223,586,319 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 90/ Page 6 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues for Maryland counties and 
Baltimore City can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. Additional 
information on the county property tax base can be found in the Local Government 
Overview Report. A copy of both reports is available on the Department of Legislative 
Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 23 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 224 (Senator Lewis Young) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6