START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 65 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 65 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Estates and Trusts - Fiduciaries - Attorney-Client Privilege 
 
 
This bill establishes, under Title 15 (“Fiduciaries”) of the Estates and Trusts Article, that 
unless waived by the client, a communication between an attorney and a client that acts as 
a fiduciary is subject to the attorney‑client privilege, even if fiduciary funds are used to 
compensate the attorney for legal services rendered to the client. The existence of a 
fiduciary relationship between a fiduciary and a beneficiary does not constitute or give rise 
to a waiver of the attorney-client privilege for communications between the attorney and 
the fiduciary. “Fiduciary” includes a person granted authority to act for a principal under a 
power of attorney. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Attorney-client Privilege 
 
Section 9-108 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article establishes that a person may 
not be compelled to testify in violation of the attorney-client privilege. The Supreme Court 
of Maryland, in Newman v. State, (1) cites the U.S. Supreme Court’s recognition of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 65/ Page 2 
attorney‑client privilege as “the oldest of privileges for confidential communications 
known to the common law” and (2) describes the privilege as understood to be a rule of 
evidence that prevents the disclosure of a confidential communication made by a client to 
the client’s attorney for the purpose of obtaining legal advice. 384 Md. 285, 
300‑302 (2004). 
 
Duty of Confidentiality 
 
The court, in Newman, also distinguishes between the attorney-client privilege and an 
attorney’s duty of confidentiality toward their client under the Maryland Attorneys’  
Rules of Professional Conduct. Under the rules, an attorney must not reveal information 
relating to representation of a client unless the client gives informed consent, the disclosure 
is impliedly authorized in order to carry out the representation, or the disclosure is 
permitted under specified exceptions. The court indicates that the attorney-client privilege 
addresses compelled disclosure of client secrets during judicial proceedings, whereas client 
confidentiality under the rules of professional conduct relates to the attorney’s general duty 
to maintain the confidentiality of all aspects of a client’s representation. The attorney‑client 
privilege applies in judicial and other proceedings in which an attorney may be called as a 
witness or otherwise required to produce evidence adverse to the client. The rule of 
confidentiality applies in all other situations that do not involve the compulsion of law. 
Id. at 303-304. 
 
“Fiduciary” 
 
Under existing definitions under Title 15 of the Estates and Trusts Article, that apply to the 
bill’s provisions, “fiduciary” is defined to include (in addition to the bill’s inclusion, for 
the purposes of the bill’s provisions, of a person granted authority under a power of 
attorney) a trustee acting under a deed, will, declaration of trust or other instrument in the 
nature of a trust or appointed by a court, a receiver, custodian, committee or guardian of 
the property of a minor or disabled person, executor, administrator, or personal 
representative. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 135 and HB 310 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 131 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 65/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3