START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 39 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 39 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Net Energy Metering - Portable Solar Electric Generating Facilities 
 
 
This bill authorizes the use of “portable solar” electric generating facilities by eligible 
customer‑generators for the purpose of net energy metering.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s changes can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the definition of “eligible customer‑generator” to 
expressly include “portable solar” as a qualifying generating technology for customers who 
own, lease, or contract for portable solar facilities that are located on their premises or 
contiguous property, are interconnected with the utility’s transmission and distribution 
system, and are operated in parallel with the grid. Eligible customer‑generators may 
participate in net metering. 
 
“Portable solar” means a moveable solar electric photovoltaic generating facility that:   
 
 
has a generating capacity not exceeding 120 kilowatts, as measured by the 
alternating current rating of the device’s inverter;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 39/ Page 2 
 
is designed to be connected to an eligible customer-generator’s electric system 
through a standard 120 volt alternating current outlet; 
 
is intended primarily to offset all or part of the customer’s own electricity 
requirements;  
 
meets the standards of the most recent version of the National Electrical Code; and 
 
is certified to meet all applicable standards, as determined by a nationally 
recognized testing laboratory. 
 
Current Law:       
 
Net Metering – Generally  
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible customer-
generator’s billing period. The Public Service Commission must require electric utilities to 
develop and make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. Generally, 
the generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 
2 megawatts, or up to 5 megawatts for a community solar energy generating system. 
Eligible energy sources are solar, wind, biomass, micro combined heat and power, fuel 
cell, and certain types of hydroelectric. Current law does not authorize the use of portable 
solar electric generating facilities for net energy metering. There is a statewide net-metered 
capacity limit of 3,000 megawatts. 
 
For a general overview of net metering see the Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy 
Generating Systems. 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Unlike most other sources of renewable energy, solar is eligible for inclusion in meeting 
the State Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) only if the source is connected with 
the electric distribution grid serving Maryland. For information on the State RPS, see the 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill broadens the eligible customer base by adding solar 
electric generating facilities. These changes may benefit small solar businesses that 
construct, own, and/or operate portable solar energy generating systems under the program. 
 
Additional Comments:  In Maryland, a 120‑kilowatt solar system can generate, on 
average, between 360 and 540 kilowatt‑hours per day, depending on sunlight and time of 
the year. At that rate, it takes approximately two days of normal operation to produce 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 39/ Page 3 
1 megawatt-hour of electricity. Because one solar renewable energy credit (SREC) is 
issued for every megawatt‑hour generated, a system of this scale can earn SRECs on a 
regular basis and, therefore, has the potential to contribute meaningfully to the State’s 
renewable energy targets. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 39/ Page 4 
Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
 
State law establishes multiple incentives for solar energy generating systems of different 
types, sizes, and locations. The following is an overview of notable State incentives, which 
may be combined, depending on the specifics of a particular solar energy generating 
system. 
 
Production Incentives 
 
 
Net Metering 
 
Under § 7-306 of the Public Utilities Article, the Public Service Commission (PSC) must 
require electric companies to develop and make net metering tariffs available to eligible 
customer-generators. Net metering is the measurement of the difference between the 
electricity that is supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by 
the customer and fed back to the grid over the customer’s billing period. Under net 
metering, the customer pays only for energy used, netted against energy generated, plus 
the fixed monthly customer charge. In the event that more energy is generated than used, 
the electric company must pay the customer the value of the difference, subject to specified 
requirements. Generally, net excess generation payments are made annually, although 
certain customers may instead choose to accrue net excess generation indefinitely.  
 
Generally, the generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may 
be up to 2 megawatts, although there are exceptions allowing for larger capacities, 
including for community solar. Community solar systems are those that meet specified 
requirements, have multiple subscribers, and engage in virtual net metering. 
 
There are multiple eligible energy sources for net metering, although most of the installed 
capacity is solar. The statewide capacity limit is 3,000 megawatts. 
 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Under Title 7, Subtitle 7 of the Public Utilities Article, which establishes the State 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS), utilities and other competitive energy 
suppliers must submit renewable energy credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail 
electricity sales specified in statute each year or else pay an alternative compliance payment 
(ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to 
1 megawatt-hour of electricity generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation 
source. In program compliance year 2026, RPS percentage requirements include 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 39/ Page 5 
8.0% from solar, which must be connected to the electric distribution grid serving 
Maryland. 
Under § 7-709.1 of the Public Utilities Article, PSC must establish a Small Solar Energy 
Generating System Incentive Program and begin determining eligibility by 
January 1, 2025. Under the program, a solar energy generating system that meets specified 
requirements and is certified by PSC generates certified solar RECs, which have an RPS 
compliance value of 150%, for 15 years. In addition to other requirements, an eligible 
system must be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and January 1, 2028, inclusive.  
 
Grant and Loan Incentives 
 
Under § 9-20B-05 of the State Government Article, the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) must administer the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF). Among other 
revenue sources, SEIF receives funds from the sale of carbon dioxide emissions allowances 
under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) and ACP revenues through the State 
RPS. RGGI-sourced funding is allocated through a statutory formula that provides 
significant annual funding for clean energy programs and initiatives, in addition to other 
purposes. In practice, MEA offers a variety of residential and commercial grants and 
rebates for different types of solar installations. Generally, solar ACP revenues must be 
used to support new solar development, although there are additional requirements in 
certain years. 
 
Tax Incentives 
 
 
Solar Energy Property Generally Not Subject to State or Local Real Property Tax 
 
Under § 7-242 of the Tax-Property Article, solar energy property is generally not subject 
to State or local real property tax. “Solar energy property” means equipment that is installed 
to use solar energy or solar thermal electric energy to generate electricity to be used in a 
structure or supplied to the electric grid or provide hot water for use in a structure. 
 
Specified Nonresidential Solar Systems Exempt from Valuation or State or Local 
Property Taxes 
 
Under § 7-249 of the Tax-Property Article, specified nonresidential solar energy generating 
systems that are constructed on the rooftops of buildings or on parking facility canopies 
are not subject to valuation or to State or local property taxes. The exemption applies only 
to a system approved by PSC for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
(CPCN) or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 39/ Page 6 
 
Community Solar Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
Under § 7-237 of the Tax-Property Article, a community solar energy generating system 
with up to 5 megawatts of capacity that meets specified requirements is exempt from the 
county and municipal personal property tax through the life cycle of the system. To be 
eligible, a system must (1) be placed in service after June 30, 2022, and be approved by 
PSC by December 31, 2030; (2) provide at least 50% of the energy produced to low- to 
moderate-income customers at reduced prices, as specified; and (3) be used for agrivoltaics 
or be installed on a rooftop, brownfield, parking facility canopy, landfill, or clean fill. 
 
 
Community Solar Real Property Tax Credit 
 
Under § 9-111 of the Tax-Property Article, the State and local governments must grant a 
50% property tax credit for a brownfield, landfill, or clean fill on which a specified 
community solar energy generating system is installed. To be eligible, a system must be 
placed in service after June 30, 2022, and have been approved by PSC by 
December 31, 2025. 
 
 
Optional Local Property Tax Credit for Solar Energy Devices 
 
Under § 9-203 of the Tax-Property Article, counties and municipalities are authorized to 
grant tax credits against county or municipal property taxes for the use of a solar energy, 
geothermal energy, or qualifying energy conservation device in a structure for the purposes 
of heating and cooling, electricity generation, or the provision of hot water. Local 
governments may establish related definitions in determining eligibility for the credit. 
 
 
Optional Local Real Property Assessment Reduction for Certain Parking Canopies 
 
Under § 7-250 of the Tax-Property Article, the governing body of a county or municipality 
may reduce or eliminate, by law, the percentage of the assessment of any real property that 
is subject to the county or municipal property tax if the real property includes a parking 
facility on which a solar energy generating system has been constructed on its canopy. 
These provisions apply only to real property that includes a parking facility on which a 
system has been approved by PSC for a CPCN or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024. 
The provision terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemptions 
 
Under § 11-230 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of solar energy equipment, which is defined as equipment that uses solar energy to heat or 
cool a structure, generate electricity to be used in a structure or supplied to the electric grid, 
or provide hot water for use in a structure. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 39/ Page 7 
Under § 11-207 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of electricity generated by solar energy equipment for use in residential property owned by 
an eligible customer-generator under the State’s net metering law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 39/ Page 8 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case more recently. Generally, the Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2026, the requirements are 38.0% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 8.0% from solar 
and 0.50% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 
14.5% from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 39/ Page 9 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a five-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the  
Generation Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by  
PJM Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of 
RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water‑heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; thermal energy from a thermal biomass system; and raw or treated 
wastewater used as a heat source or sink for heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large 
hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from  
Tier 1 beginning in 2022, although some black liquor RECs remain eligible through the 
duration of certain contracts. Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 removed waste-to-energy and 
refuse‑derived fuel from RPS eligibility. The exclusion generally applies to all RPS 
compliance years starting on or after January 1, 2025, except for a facility owned by a 
public instrumentality of the State (i.e., Montgomery County), which applies beginning 
July 1, 2026.  
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $616.9 million in 2024:  $254.7 million 
for 7.0 million RECs and $362.3 million in ACPs. This continues a multi-year trend of 
increasing overall compliance costs, reliance on ACPs, and REC prices. Of note,  
2024 continues the trend of 2023 that ACPs have been used in a significant way for general  
Tier 1 compliance. In fact, 2024 had the fewest RECs retired since 2014. ACP prices were 
in many instances less expensive than REC prices and, as a result, suppliers chose to pay 
the ACP rather than retire RECs. Compliance costs and REC prices for the most recent 
five-year period are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 39/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2020-2024 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
RECs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$99.8  
$187.3  
$246.5  
$124.9  
$90.1  
Tier 1 Solar 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
109.6 
150.4 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
0.1 
2.2 
Tier 2  
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
9.3 
12.0 
RECs Subtotal 
$223.1  
$332.7  
$352.3  
$243.8  
$254.7  
ACPs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1  
$0.0  
$0.2  
$0.7  
$262.4  
$319.4  
Tier 1 Solar 
0.0 
76.9 
85.9 
56.0 
37.2 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.6 
4.4 
Tier 2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
1.3 
ACPs Subtotal 
$0.1  
$77.1  
$86.6  
$320.4  
$362.3 
Total 
$223.2  
$409.8  
$438.9  
$564.2  
$616.9  
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$8.24  
$14.36  
$17.80  
$24.61 
$27.09  
Tier 1 Solar 
$66.10 
$72.59 
$57.80 
$56.67 
$58.56 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
$94.47 
$94.04 
Tier 2 
$1.06 
$6.45 
$7.42 
$10.50 
$11.16 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
n/a:  not applicable 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The post-2022 geothermal system 
carve-out became effective in 2023. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Approximately 45% of RECs used for compliance in 2024 came from in-state resources, 
up from 35% in 2023. RECs derived from three fuel types, solar (43.4%), black liquor 
(16.2%), and wind (15.1%), were the predominant sources of Tier 1 compliance in 2024. 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 39/ Page 11 
Maryland facilities generated approximately 5.7 million RECs in 2024:  1.5 million 
Tier 1 nonsolar RECs, 2.4 million Tier 1 SRECs, and 1.8 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs 
can be used for compliance in both Maryland and other surrounding states, although there 
are geographic and energy source restrictions. 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2024, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
PPRP’s supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a 
goal of 100% by 2040 can be found here. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued an RPS report in 2025, which can be 
found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11