START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 88

J5, J4 6lr1208
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Taveras
Requested: October 15, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Insurance – Bulk Purchasing Pools for Prescription Drugs

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health
4 maintenance organizations to join bulk purchasing pools for prescription drugs; and
5 generally relating to health insurance and bulk purchasing pools for prescription
6 drugs.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Insurance
9 Section 15–128
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Insurance

15 15–128.

16 (A) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

17 (I) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
18 PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND DEVICES UNDER INDIVIDUAL,
19 GROUP, OR BLANKET HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES OR CONTRACTS THAT ARE
20 ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE; AND

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0088*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 88

1 (II) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
2 COVERAGE FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND DEVICES UNDER INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP
3 CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

4 (2) AN INSURER, A NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLAN, OR A HEALTH
5 MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION THAT PROVIDES COVERAGE FOR PRESCRIPTION
6 DRUGS AND DEVICES THROUGH A PHARMACY BENEFITS MANAGER IS SUBJECT TO
7 THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

8 (B) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY JOIN A BULK PURCHASING
9 POOL FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
11 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2