START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 20

A2 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr0796
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 17

By: Delegate Amprey
Requested: September 8, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Related Event Promoter’s Permit

3 FOR the purpose of reestablishing a related event promoter’s permit in Baltimore City;
4 authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City to issue a related
5 event promoter’s permit to certain applicants under certain circumstances; requiring
6 a holder of a State caterer’s license to obtain a certain Class C per diem license from
7 the Board before the holder may act as a participating license holder at a related
8 event; and generally relating to related event promoter’s permits in Baltimore City.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 12–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 12–1102.2 and 12–2802(e) and (f)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22 12–102.

23 This title applies only in Baltimore City.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0020*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 20

1 12–1102.2.

2 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (2) “CIAA BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT” MEANS THE ANNUAL
5 BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT OF THE CENTRAL INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETIC
6 ASSOCIATION.

7 (3) (I) “RELATED EVENT” MEANS AN EVENT IN WHICH:

8 1. A LICENSE HOLDER PARTICIPATES IN A
9 COORDINATED PROMOTION WITH A THIRD–PARTY PROMOTER TO SELL OR PROVIDE
10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING A SPECIFIED TIME; AND

11 2. AT LEAST 75 INDIVIDUALS ARE REASONABLY
12 ANTICIPATED TO PARTICIPATE.

13 (II) “RELATED EVENT” INCLUDES AN EVENT FOR WHICH
14 TICKETS ARE SOLD TO THE PUBLIC, EITHER IN ADVANCE OR AT THE DOOR, OR A
15 COVER CHARGE IS IMPOSED, INCLUDING A CONCERT, AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT, A
16 HAPPY HOUR, OR A PARTY.

17 (4) “RELATED EVENT PROMOTER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL, A
18 FOR–PROFIT ORGANIZATION, OR A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT PROMOTES A
19 SOCIAL EVENT RELATED TO THE CIAA BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT AROUND THE
20 SAME TIME AND LOCATION AS THE CIAA BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT.

21 (B) THERE IS A RELATED EVENT PROMOTER’S PERMIT.

22 (C) (1) A RELATED EVENT PROMOTER OR PARTICIPATING LICENSE
23 HOLDER ON BEHALF OF A RELATED EVENT PROMOTER SHALL APPLY FOR A PERMIT
24 FROM THE BOARD BEFORE THE RELATED EVENT PROMOTER MAY PUBLICIZE, SELL
25 TICKETS FOR, ORGANIZE, OPERATE, PRODUCE, OR STAGE A RELATED EVENT.

26 (2) A HOLDER OF A STATE CATERER’S LICENSE SHALL OBTAIN A
27 CLASS C PER DIEM BEER, BEER AND WINE, OR BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE
28 FROM THE BOARD BEFORE THE HOLDER MAY ACT AS A PARTICIPATING LICENSE
29 HOLDER AT A RELATED EVENT.

30 (D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
31 THE BOARD MAY GRANT THE PERMIT TO AN APPLICANT WHO SUBMITS AN
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 20 3

1 APPLICATION TO THE BOARD AS PROVIDED UNDER TITLE 4 OF THIS ARTICLE AT
2 LEAST 30 DAYS BEFORE THE DATE OF THE RELATED EVENT.

3 (2) BEFORE BEING GRANTED THE PERMIT, AN APPLICANT SHALL:

4 (I) OBTAIN WRITTEN CONSENT FROM A DESIGNEE OF VISIT
5 BALTIMORE;

6 (II) IF REQUIRED BASED ON THE TYPE OF PREMISES TO BE
7 USED:

8 1. OBTAIN A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT FROM THE
9 BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION; AND

10 2. PROVIDE A COPY OF THE SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT TO
11 THE BOARD; AND

12 (III) PROVIDE A COMPLETED APPLICATION THAT:

13 1. IS DATED AND NOTARIZED, AND SIGNED BY EACH
14 LICENSE HOLDER THAT WILL PARTICIPATE IN THE RELATED EVENT;

15 2. LISTS EACH PREMISES FOR WHICH THE RELATED
16 EVENT WILL BE HELD; AND

17 3. IS ACCOMPANIED BY ANY OTHER DOCUMENT THAT
18 THE BOARD REQUIRES.

19 (3) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO APPLIES FOR AND IS ISSUED THE PERMIT IS
20 NOT REQUIRED TO BE A RESIDENT OF OR REGISTERED TO VOTE IN BALTIMORE
21 CITY.

22 (4) WITHIN 7 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING AN APPLICATION, THE BOARD
23 SHALL GRANT OR DENY THE PERMIT OR REQUEST MORE INFORMATION FROM THE
24 APPLICANT.

25 (5) A PERMIT MAY NOT BE ALTERED WITHIN 14 DAYS BEFORE THE
26 RELATED EVENT IS SCHEDULED TO TAKE PLACE.

27 (E) THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE RELATED EVENT PROMOTER AND
28 PARTICIPATING LICENSE HOLDER TO CONDUCT A RELATED EVENT.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 20

1 (F) THE PERMIT FOR EACH RELATED EVENT MAY BE IN EFFECT FOR THE
2 TIME STATED ON THE SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
3 (D)(2) OF THIS SECTION.

4 (G) THE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING THE
5 REQUIREMENTS FOR:

6 (1) CONDUCTING A RELATED EVENT, INCLUDING HEALTH AND
7 SAFETY STANDARDS TO BE MET BY THE RELATED EVENT PROMOTER AND
8 PARTICIPATING LICENSE HOLDER; AND

9 (2) PROVIDING PUBLIC NOTICE OF A RELATED EVENT AT THE
10 PREMISES OF PARTICIPATING LICENSE HOLDERS BY THE RELATED EVENT
11 PROMOTER OR PARTICIPATING LICENSE HOLDERS.

12 (H) (1) THE APPLICATION FEE IS $50, PAYABLE ON THE SUBMISSION OF
13 THE APPLICATION.

14 (2) THE PERMIT FEE, PAYABLE WHEN THE PERMIT IS GRANTED, IS:

15 (I) $500, IF THE BALTIMORE CITY FIRE MARSHAL HAS
16 DETERMINED THAT THE MAXIMUM CAPACITY FOR THE PROPOSED LOCATION IS LESS
17 THAN 300 PERSONS; OR

18 (II) $1,500, IF THE BALTIMORE CITY FIRE MARSHAL HAS
19 DETERMINED THAT THE MAXIMUM CAPACITY FOR THE PROPOSED LOCATION IS 300
20 OR MORE PERSONS.

21 12–2802.

22 (E) (1) FOR THE OFFENSE OF PUBLICIZING, SELLING TICKETS OR
23 IMPOSING A COVER CHARGE FOR, ORGANIZING, OPERATING, PRODUCING,
24 FACILITATING, OR STAGING A RELATED EVENT WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OR A REASON
25 TO KNOW THAT A RELATED EVENT PROMOTER’S PERMIT REQUIRED UNDER §
26 12–1102.2 OF THIS TITLE HAS NOT BEEN OBTAINED, THE BOARD SHALL IMPOSE A
27 FINE OF NOT LESS THAN $1,000 AND NOT MORE THAN $3,000 OR SUSPEND THE
28 LICENSE OR BOTH.

29 (2) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES § 12–1102.2 OF THIS TITLE MAY NOT BE
30 GRANTED A RELATED EVENT PROMOTER’S PERMIT FOR AT LEAST 1 YEAR.

31 (F) FOR THE OFFENSE BY A HOLDER OF A STATE CATERER’S LICENSE OF
32 PARTICIPATING IN A CIAA BASKETBALL TOURNAMENT RELATED EVENT WITHOUT
33 FIRST OBTAINING A CLASS C PER DIEM BEER, BEER AND WINE, OR BEER, WINE, AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 20 5

1 LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED UNDER § 12–1102.2 OF THIS TITLE, THE EXECUTIVE
2 DIRECTOR SHALL IMPOSE A FINE OF NOT LESS THAN $1,000 AND NOT MORE THAN
3 $3,000 OR SUSPEND THE STATE CATERER’S LICENSE OR BOTH.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
5 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
6 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
7 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
8 enacted. It shall remain effective through June 30, 2029, and, at the end of June 30, 2029,
9 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
10 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 5