START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 14

F1 6lr0720
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0722

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: August 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Education – Bullying, Harassment, or Intimidation –
3 Information Collection and Reporting Requirements

4 FOR the purpose of altering the contents of a certain bullying, harassment, or intimidation
5 form to require the identification of certain information; requiring each county board
6 of education to post certain information on its website in a certain manner on or
7 before a certain date each year; and generally relating to bullying, harassment, or
8 intimidation and county boards of education.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Education
11 Section 7–424
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 7–424.

18 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (2) “Bullying, harassment, or intimidation” means intentional conduct,
20 including verbal, physical, or written conduct, or an intentional electronic communication,
21 that:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0014*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 14

1 (i) Creates a hostile educational environment by substantially
2 interfering with a student’s educational benefits, opportunities, or performance, or with a
3 student’s physical or psychological well–being and is:

4 1. Motivated by an actual or a perceived personal
5 characteristic including race, national origin, marital status, sex, sexual orientation,
6 gender identity, religion, ancestry, physical attributes, socioeconomic status, familial
7 status, or physical or mental ability or disability;

8 2. Sexual in nature, including descriptions or depictions of a
9 student with the student’s intimate parts exposed or while engaged in an act of sexual
10 contact; or

11 3. Threatening or seriously intimidating; and

12 (ii) 1. Occurs on school property, at a school activity or event, or
13 on a school bus; or

14 2. Substantially disrupts the orderly operation of a school.

15 (3) “Electronic communication” means a communication transmitted by
16 means of an electronic device, including a telephone, cellular phone, computer, or pager.

17 (4) “Intimate parts” means the naked genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or
18 female nipple.

19 (5) “Sexual contact” means sexual intercourse, including genital–genital,
20 oral–genital, anal–genital, or oral–anal, whether between persons of the same or opposite
21 sex.

22 (b) (1) The Department shall require a county board to report incidents of
23 bullying, harassment, or intimidation against students attending a public school under the
24 jurisdiction of the county board.

25 (2) An incident of bullying, harassment, or intimidation may be reported
26 by:

27 (i) A student;

28 (ii) The parent, guardian, or close adult relative of a student; or

29 (iii) A school staff member.

30 (c) (1) The Department shall create a standard victim of bullying, harassment,
31 or intimidation report form.

32 (2) Each victim of bullying, harassment, or intimidation report form shall:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 14 3

1 (i) Identify the victim and the alleged perpetrator, if known;

2 (ii) Indicate the age of the victim and alleged perpetrator;

3 (iii) Describe the incident, including alleged statements made by the
4 alleged perpetrator;

5 (IV) IF THE INCIDENT IS BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN MOTIVATED
6 IN WHOLE OR IN SUBSTANTIAL PART BY ANY OF THE ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED
7 PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(2)(I)1 OF THIS
8 SECTION, INDICATE THOSE PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS, IF KNOWN;

9 [(iv)] (V) Indicate the location of the incident;

10 [(v)] (VI) Identify any physical injury suffered by the victim and
11 describe the seriousness and any permanent effects of the injury;

12 [(vi)] (VII) Indicate the number of days a student is absent from
13 school, if any, as a result of the incident;

14 [(vii)] (VIII) Identify any request for psychological services initiated by
15 the victim or the victim’s family due to psychological injuries suffered; and

16 [(viii)] (IX) Include instructions on how to fill out the form and the
17 mailing address to where the form shall be sent.

18 (3) A county board shall distribute copies of the victim of bullying,
19 harassment, or intimidation report form to each public school under the county board’s
20 jurisdiction.

21 (d) (1) A county board may establish an anonymous two–way electronic tip
22 program to allow the reporting of an act of bullying, harassment, or intimidation of a
23 student.

24 (2) The purpose of the anonymous two–way electronic tip program is for a
25 student, a parent, guardian, or close adult relative of a student, or a school staff member to
26 report acts of bullying, harassment, or intimidation.

27 (3) Each county board that establishes an anonymous two–way electronic
28 tip program shall publicize the anonymous two–way electronic tip program in student
29 handbooks, school system websites, and other locations that the county board determines
30 are necessary or appropriate.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 14

1 (4) On receipt of a report of an act of bullying, harassment, or intimidation
2 from an anonymous two–way electronic tip, the recipient of the report or the recipient’s
3 designee shall:

4 (i) Complete a victim of bullying, harassment, or intimidation
5 report form in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; and

6 (ii) Provide a transcript of the conversation to a designated person
7 in the school.

8 (5) The Governor may include funding in the State budget to provide
9 grants to county boards to establish an anonymous two–way electronic tip program.

10 (e) (1) Each county board shall submit summaries of report forms filed with
11 the county board to the State Board on or before January 31 each year.

12 (2) A county board shall delete any information that identifies an
13 individual.

14 (F) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31 EACH YEAR, EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL
15 POST IN A PROMINENT LOCATION ON ITS WEBSITE INFORMATION ABOUT THE
16 NUMBER OF INCIDENTS OF BULLYING, HARASSMENT, OR INTIMIDATION REPORTED
17 TO THE STATE BOARD BY THE COUNTY BOARD UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
18 SECTION THAT WERE DETERMINED TO BE MOTIVATED BY AN ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED
19 PERSONAL CHARACTERISTIC OF AN INDIVIDUAL OR A GROUP, DISAGGREGATED BY
20 THE MOTIVATING PERSONAL CHARACTERISTIC.

21 [(f)] (G) The information contained in a victim of bullying, harassment, or
22 intimidation report form in accordance with subsection (c) of this section or received from
23 an anonymous two–way electronic tip in accordance with subsection (d) of this section:

24 (1) Is confidential and may not be redisclosed except as otherwise provided
25 under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act or this section; and

26 (2) May not be made a part of a student’s permanent educational record.

27 [(g)] (H) (1) The Department shall submit a report on or before March 31 each
28 year to the Senate Education, [Health, and Environmental Affairs] ENERGY, AND THE
29 ENVIRONMENT Committee and the House Ways and Means Committee, in accordance
30 with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, consisting of a summary of the information
31 included in the victim of bullying, harassment, or intimidation report forms filed with the
32 county boards the previous year.

33 (2) The report submitted by the Department shall include, to the extent
34 feasible:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 14 5

1 (i) A description of the act constituting the bullying, harassment, or
2 intimidation;

3 (ii) The age of the victim and alleged perpetrator;

4 (iii) The allegation of the alleged perpetrator’s motive;

5 (iv) A description of the investigation of the complaint and any
6 corrective action taken by the appropriate school authorities;

7 (v) The number of days a student is absent from school, if any, as a
8 result of the incident; and

9 (vi) The number of false allegations reported.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
11 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5