START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 2 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 2 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Subtraction Modification - Public Safety Retirement Income 
 
 
This bill increases the maximum value of the income tax subtraction modification for 
public safety employee retirement income from $15,000 to $20,000. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $1.6 million in FY 2027. 
Future years reflect projected growth in eligible subtraction modifications. The 
Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($1.6) 
($1.7) 
($1.7) 
($1.8) 
($1.8) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($1.6) 
($1.7) 
($1.7) 
($1.8) 
($1.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $1.3 million in 
FY 2027 and by similar amounts annually thereafter. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  As authorized by Chapters 3 and 4 of 2022, an individual who is at least 
55 years old on the last day of the tax year may claim a subtraction modification against 
the personal income tax for the first $15,000 of income received from an employee 
retirement system (within the meaning of the State’s standard pension exclusion, as 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 2/ Page 2 
discussed below) that is attributable to service as a public safety employee. “Public safety 
employee” means an individual who is a retired correctional officer; law enforcement 
officer; or fire, rescue, or emergency services personnel of the United States, the State, or 
a political subdivision of the State. As discussed below, an individual who is at least age 65, 
is totally disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may qualify for and claim the 
standard State pension exclusion for retirement income that is not excluded under the 
public safety employee retirement income subtraction. 
 
Maryland Pension Exclusion 
 
Under Maryland’s standard pension exclusion, an individual who is at least age 65, who is 
totally disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may subtract certain taxable pension 
and retirement annuity income from federal adjusted gross income for purposes of 
determining Maryland adjusted gross income. The maximum value of the subtraction is 
indexed to the maximum annual benefit payable under the Social Security Act  
($41,200 for 2025) and is reduced by the amount of any benefit payments received under 
the Social Security Act or Railroad Retirement Act (“Social Security offset”). 
 
The pension exclusion is limited to income received from an “employee retirement 
system,” which is defined as a plan (1) established and maintained by an employer for the 
benefit of its employees and (2) qualified under § 401(a), § 403, or § 457(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. This includes defined benefit and defined contribution pension 
plans, 401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, and 457(b) plans. Public safety employee retirement 
income that is excluded under the public safety employee retirement income subtraction 
modification is not taken into account for purposes of the standard pension exclusion. 
 
Other Tax Relief for Retirees and Seniors 
 
Social Security benefits and benefits received under the federal Railroad Retirement Act 
are totally exempt from Maryland income tax, though they may be partly taxable for federal 
income tax purposes. Other income tax relief provided to seniors include an additional 
exemption of $1,000 for individuals age 65 and older (in addition to the regular personal 
exemption) as well as the senior tax credit for qualifying taxpayers age 65 and older.  
 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications 
claimed against the personal income tax. Exhibit 1 displays the bill’s estimated effect on 
State and local revenues in fiscal 2027 through 2031. As shown in the exhibit, in 
fiscal 2027, State general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $1.6 million, and local 
income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $1.3 million. Future years reflect projected 
growth in eligible public safety employee retirement income. This estimate is based on an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 2/ Page 3 
analysis of tax year 2023 claims for the existing public safety employee retirement income 
subtraction modification.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on State and Local Revenues 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
State Effect 
($1.6) 
($1.7) 
($1.7) 
($1.8) 
($1.8) 
Local Effect 
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
(1.4) 
(1.4) 
(1.4) 
Total Effect 
($3.0) 
($3.1) 
($3.1) 
($3.2) 
($3.2) 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding.  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 30 and HB 792 of 2025 and SB 588 and HB 714 of 2024.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 185 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Moody’s Analytics; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3