START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 40 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 40 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Utilities - Transmission Lines - Advanced Transmission Technologies 
 
 
This bill requires an application for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
(CPCN) for the construction of an overhead transmission line to include (1) evidence that 
the applicant considered, during its internal planning process, specified transmission 
planning processes and (2) an analysis of the selected transmission line route. The Public 
Service Commission (PSC) may not take final action on such a CPCN application until it 
gives due consideration of evidence that specified alternatives have been considered by the 
applicant. By December 1, 2026, and every four years thereafter, each owner or operator 
of an overhead transmission line must submit a report to PSC containing specified 
information related to transmission congestion. The bill also makes a related change to the 
definition of “qualified generator lead line.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by approximately 
$500,000 annually beginning in FY 2027, under the assumptions discussed below; PSC 
special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. The Department of Natural Resources and the Office of People’s 
Counsel can likely handle any increase in workloads with existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
SF Expenditure 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 40/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Some local governments may incur minimal costs associated with additional 
evaluations of proposed transmission line projects. However, the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Qualified generator lead line” means an overhead transmission line and any associated 
advanced transmission technology designed to carry, or support the carrying of, a voltage 
in excess of 69,000 volts and would allow an out-of-state Tier 1 or Tier 2 renewable source 
to interconnect with a portion of the electric system in Maryland that is owned by an 
electric company. 
 
The bill defines “advanced transmission technologies” as grid-enhancing technologies, 
high performance conductors, or energy storage used as transmission. 
 
“Grid-enhancing technology” means hardware or software that increases the capacity, 
efficiency, or reliability of existing transmission systems. It includes (1) a system that uses 
real-time or forecasted weather and operating conditions to determine the transfer capacity 
of transmission systems; (2) technology that modulates circuit impedance or other 
electrical properties to reroute power flows and relieve congestion; and (3) software that 
identifies switching configurations to reroute electricity and alleviate transmission 
constraints. 
 
“High performance conductors” are defined as conductors (including carbon fiber 
conductors, composite core conductors, or superconductors) that (1) have a similar 
diameter and weight as “traditional aluminum conductor steel-reinforced (ACSR) 
conductors”; (2) have a direct current electrical resistance at least 10% less than traditional 
ACSR conductors; (3) increase the potential energy carrying capacity by at least 75% 
compared to traditional ACSR conductors; and (4) have a coefficient of thermal expansion 
of at least 30% less than traditional ACSR conductors. “Traditional ACSR conductors” 
means electrical cables used in overhead transmission systems that consist of a central core 
of galvanized steel wires surrounded by strands of aluminum. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 40/ Page 3 
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity Applications for the Construction of an 
Overhead Transmission Line 
 
An applicant for a CPCN for the construction of an overhead transmission line must include 
evidence in its application evidence that the applicant considered, as part of its internal 
planning process, any local, State, or federal government transmission planning processes 
and any transmission planning processes required by PJM Interconnection, LLC, 
including: 
 
 
alternatives to the proposed transmission line; 
 
an analysis of advanced transmission technologies and whether their use will 
enhance the value of the new lead line, leading to increased ratepayer value through 
efficiency and avoided costs; 
 
alternative routings; 
 
technologies or modifications to one or more electric distribution systems in the 
State that could avoid the need for the transmission line; 
 
the cost to ratepayers; 
 
resource adequacy, energy efficiency and demand response, and the impact of the 
project on the environment;  
 
a review of an integrated electric transmission-distribution system to address the 
need for the transmission line; and 
 
any other information that PSC considers appropriate. 
 
Additionally, the applicant must include an analysis of the transmission line route selection, 
including (1) risks associated with the cost estimates; (2) cost containment efforts;  
(3) construction schedule; (4) acquisition of land and rights-of-way; (5) outage 
coordination; and (6) the applicant’s experience working with communities and 
stakeholders on route consideration. 
 
Approval of a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity Application for the 
Construction of an Overhead Transmission Line 
 
In addition to existing requirements, PSC may take final action on a CPCN application for 
the construction of a new overhead transmission line only after due consideration of 
evidence that alternatives have been considered by the applicant (in accordance with the 
bill’s requirements). 
 
Reporting Requirements on Owners/Operators of Overhead Transmission Lines 
 
By December 1, 2026, and every four years thereafter, each owner or operator of an 
overhead transmission line must submit a report to PSC that identifies: 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 40/ Page 4 
 
areas of transmission congestion for the immediately preceding three years and any 
reasonably foreseeable transmission congestion issues for the five years 
immediately following the date of the report; 
 
the projected or actual cost to ratepayers as a result of past and projected future 
transmission congestion; 
 
the feasibility and cost of using alternative means of addressing transmission 
congestion, including the use of advanced transmission technologies; and 
 
the economic, environmental, and social issues posed by the use of each alternative 
means of addressing transmission congestion. 
 
If feasible, the report must also propose an advanced transmission technology 
implementation plan to address areas of transmission congestion identified by the owner 
or operator of the overhead transmission line. The bill specifies that an owner or operator 
may use any available data from PJM Interconnection, LLC, or other sources in completing 
the report. 
 
The reporting schedule specified above is subject to modification by PSC. 
 
Current Law:  Under § 7-207 of the Public Utilities Article, unless a CPCN for the 
construction is first obtained from PSC, a person may not begin construction of an overhead 
transmission line that is designed to carry a voltage in excess of 69,000 volts or exercise a 
right of condemnation with the construction. However, a person that has received a CPCN 
from PSC for the construction of an overhead transmission line may acquire by 
condemnation, in accordance with Title 12 of the Real Property Article, any property or 
right necessary for the construction or maintenance of the transmission line. 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of the 
recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located and the effect of the project on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
For the construction of a new overhead transmission line specifically, PSC must also 
provide due consideration of (1) the need to meet existing and future demand for electric 
service and (2) the alternative routes that the applicant considered, including the estimated 
capital and operating costs of each alternative route and a statement of the reason why the 
alternative route was rejected. Additionally, PSC must require the applicant to (1) comply 
with specified agreements and obligations related to the ongoing operations and 
maintenance of the overhead transmission line and (2) identify whether the overhead 
transmission line is proposed to be constructed on an existing brownfields site, a property 
that is subject to an existing easement, or a site where a tower structure or components 
thereof exist and can be used to support an overhead transmission line. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 40/ Page 5 
As part of the CPCN process, PSC must examine alternatives to the construction of a new 
transmission line in a service area, including the use of an existing transmission line of 
another company, if the existing transmission line is convenient to the service area or the 
use of the transmission line will best promote economic and efficient service to the public. 
 
For additional information on the CPCN process, see the Appendix – Certificate of Public 
Convenience and Necessity. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Among other things, the bill mandates new transmission congestion 
reports and establishes requirements for considering alternatives to new transmission 
infrastructure. According to PSC, the technical nature of analyzing these reports and 
alternatives to new transmission infrastructure necessitates the engagement of outside 
consultants and experts to adequately implement the bill. This estimate assumes that PSC 
spends approximately $500,000 annually on consulting services to comply with the bill’s 
requirements. In any given year, consultant costs could be higher or lower depending on 
the actual volume and complexity of CPCN applications submitted for construction of 
overhead transmission lines. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 829 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 201 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and Howard 
counties; City of Laurel; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Natural 
Resources; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 40/ Page 6 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCNs). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, qualified generator lead line, 
overhead transmission line designed to carry more than 69,000 volts, or certain energy 
storage devices unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. 
 
State law provides that a “generating station” excludes: 
 
 
a facility used for electricity production with a capacity of up to 2 megawatts that is 
installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to the electric grid 
during time periods when the grid is out of service; 
 
a combination of two or more co-located or adjacent facilities used for  
electricity production from solar photovoltaic systems or specified eligible 
customer-generators that have a maximum cumulative capacity of 14 megawatts, 
including maximum individual capacities of 2 megawatts (subject to satisfying other 
requirements); and 
 
a facility, or a combination of two or more facilities, used for electricity production 
for the purpose of onsite emergency backup for critical infrastructure when service 
from the electric company is interrupted and conducting necessary test and 
maintenance operations (subject to satisfying other requirements). 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 40/ Page 7 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions and must consider alternative 
routes and related costs for the construction of a new overhead transmission line. 
 
Exemptions Under § 7-207.1 of the Public Utilities Article 
 
Section 7-207.1 of the Public Utilities Article specifies three conditions under which a 
person constructing a generating station may apply to PSC for an exemption from the 
CPCN requirement: 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 40/ Page 8 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company; 
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or 
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 
 
Exemptions Under § 7-207.4 of the Public Utilities Article 
 
The Renewable Energy Certainty Act of 2025 (Chapters 623 and 624) establishes the 
Distributed Generation Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (DGCPCN), a 
certificate that PSC may issue – in lieu of a CPCN – to a person seeking to construct and 
operate community solar projects that have a generating capacity of 2 megawatts to 
5 megawatts and meet other specified requirements. A DGCPCN carries the same force 
and effect as a CPCN while offering applicants a streamlined review process; however, 
until PSC begins accepting applications for DGCPCNs (likely in 2027), a CPCN will still 
be required to construct a community solar project. 
 
As with the CPCN process, PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold 
a public hearing on a DGCPCN application in each county where any portion of the project 
is proposed to be located. 
 
Additional Information 
 
For a more thorough discussion of the above topics, along with legislative history and 
recent data trends, see The Maryland Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity on 
the Department of Legislative Services’ website. 
 

END OF PAGE 8