START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 49

J1 6lr1189
HB 108/25 – HGO (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Metzgar
Requested: October 14, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Health – Abortion
3 (Heartbeat Bill)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring that an abortion be performed by a physician, rather than a
5 qualified provider; repealing certain provisions of law related to State interference
6 with an abortion, regulations related to abortion, and liability or criminal
7 punishment for qualified providers who perform an abortion; prohibiting a physician
8 from knowingly performing, inducing, or attempting to perform or induce an abortion
9 under certain circumstances and subject to certain exceptions; establishing
10 requirements for performing or inducing an abortion on a pregnant woman;
11 requiring that certain requirements relating to the performance or inducement of
12 abortions be enforced exclusively through private civil actions; authorizing any
13 person, other than an officer or employee of the State or a local governmental entity
14 in the State, to bring certain civil actions; providing for sovereign, governmental, and
15 official immunity under certain circumstances; and generally relating to abortions.

16 BY repealing
17 Article – Health – General
18 The part designation “Part II. Abortion Procedures” immediately preceding Section
19 20–207; Section 20–209; the part designation “Part III. Information”
20 immediately preceding Section 20–211; and the part designation “Part IV.
21 Effect of Refusal to Participate or Refer” immediately preceding Section
22 20–214
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY adding to
26 Article – Health – General
27 Section 20–202 and 20–204 through 20–212
28 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0049*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 49

1 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
3 Article – Health – General
4 Section 20–207, 20–208, and 20–214
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

7 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
8 That the part designation “Part II. Abortion Procedures” immediately preceding Section
9 20–207; the part designation “Part III. Information” immediately preceding Section
10 20–211; and the part designation “Part IV. Effect of Refusal to Participate or Refer”
11 immediately preceding Section 20–214 of Article – Health – General of the Annotated Code
12 of Maryland be repealed.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
14 as follows:

15 Article – Health – General

16 [20–207.] 20–201.

17 (A) In [Part II of] this subtitle[, “qualified provider”] THE FOLLOWING WORDS
18 HAVE THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

19 (B) “FETAL HEARTBEAT” MEANS CARDIAC ACTIVITY OR THE STEADY AND
20 REPETITIVE RHYTHMIC CONTRACTION OF THE FETAL HEART WITHIN THE
21 GESTATIONAL SAC.

22 (C) “GESTATIONAL AGE” MEANS THE AMOUNT OF TIME THAT HAS ELAPSED
23 FROM THE FIRST DAY OF THE PREGNANT WOMAN’S LAST MENSTRUAL PERIOD.

24 (D) “GESTATIONAL SAC” MEANS THE STRUCTURE THAT COMPRISES THE
25 EXTRAEMBRYONIC MEMBRANES THAT ENVELOP A BABY AND THAT IS TYPICALLY
26 VISIBLE BY ULTRASOUND AFTER THE FOURTH WEEK OF PREGNANCY.

27 (E) “PHYSICIAN” means an individual[:

28 (1) Who] WHO is licensed[, certified, or otherwise authorized by law] to
29 practice MEDICINE in the State[; and

30 (2) For whom the performance of an abortion is within the scope of the
31 individual’s license or certification] UNDER TITLE 14 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS
32 ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 49 3

1 (F) “PREGNANCY” MEANS THE HUMAN FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE CONDITION
2 THAT:

3 (1) BEGINS WITH FERTILIZATION;

4 (2) OCCURS WHEN THE WOMAN IS CARRYING THE DEVELOPING BABY;
5 AND

6 (3) IS CALCULATED FROM THE FIRST DAY OF THE WOMAN’S LAST
7 MENSTRUAL PERIOD.

8 (G) “STANDARD MEDICAL PRACTICE” MEANS THE DEGREE OF SKILL, CARE,
9 AND DILIGENCE THAT AN OBSTETRICIAN OF ORDINARY JUDGMENT, LEARNING, AND
10 SKILL WOULD EMPLOY IN SIMILAR CIRCUMSTANCES.

11 20–202.

12 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS, ACCORDING TO CONTEMPORARY MEDICAL
13 RESEARCH, THAT:

14 (1) FETAL HEARTBEAT HAS BECOME A KEY MEDICAL PREDICTOR
15 THAT A BABY WILL REACH LIVE BIRTH;

16 (2) CARDIAC ACTIVITY BEGINS AT A BIOLOGICALLY IDENTIFIABLE
17 MOMENT IN TIME, NORMALLY WHEN THE FETAL HEART IS FORMED IN THE
18 GESTATIONAL SAC;

19 (3) THE STATE HAS A COMPELLING INTEREST FROM THE OUTSET OF
20 A WOMAN’S PREGNANCY IN PROTECTING THE HEALTH OF THE WOMAN AND THE LIFE
21 OF THE BABY; AND

22 (4) TO MAKE AN INFORMED CHOICE ABOUT WHETHER TO CONTINUE
23 HER PREGNANCY, THE PREGNANT WOMAN HAS A COMPELLING INTEREST IN
24 KNOWING THE LIKELIHOOD OF HER BABY SURVIVING TO FULL–TERM BIRTH BASED
25 ON THE PRESENCE OF CARDIAC ACTIVITY.

26 [20–208.] 20–203.

27 An abortion must be performed by a [qualified provider] PHYSICIAN.

28 20–204.

29 (A) FOR THE PURPOSES OF DETERMINING THE PRESENCE OF A FETAL
30 HEARTBEAT UNDER THIS SECTION, “STANDARD MEDICAL PRACTICE” INCLUDES
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 49

1 EMPLOYING THE APPROPRIATE MEANS OF DETECTING A HEARTBEAT BASED ON THE
2 ESTIMATED GESTATIONAL AGE OF THE BABY AND THE CONDITION OF THE WOMAN
3 AND HER PREGNANCY.

4 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (D) AND (E) OF THIS SECTION, A
5 PHYSICIAN MAY NOT KNOWINGLY PERFORM OR INDUCE OR ATTEMPT TO PERFORM
6 OR INDUCE AN ABORTION ON A PREGNANT WOMAN:

7 (1) BEFORE A PHYSICIAN DETERMINES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
8 SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION WHETHER THE BABY HAS A DETECTABLE
9 HEARTBEAT; AND

10 (2) IF THE PHYSICIAN DETERMINES THAT THE BABY HAS A
11 DETECTABLE HEARTBEAT.

12 (C) (1) TO DETERMINE WHETHER A BABY HAS A DETECTABLE
13 HEARTBEAT, A PHYSICIAN SHALL USE A TEST THAT IS:

14 (I) CONSISTENT WITH THE PHYSICIAN’S GOOD FAITH AND
15 REASONABLE UNDERSTANDING OF STANDARD MEDICAL PRACTICE; AND

16 (II) APPROPRIATE FOR THE ESTIMATED GESTATIONAL AGE OF
17 THE BABY AND THE CONDITION OF THE PREGNANT WOMAN AND HER PREGNANCY.

18 (2) A PHYSICIAN MAKING A DETERMINATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
19 OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL RECORD IN THE PREGNANT WOMAN’S MEDICAL
20 RECORD:

21 (I) THE ESTIMATED GESTATIONAL AGE OF THE BABY;

22 (II) THE METHOD USED TO ESTIMATE THE GESTATIONAL AGE;
23 AND

24 (III) THE TEST USED FOR DETECTING A FETAL HEARTBEAT,
25 INCLUDING THE DATE, TIME, AND RESULTS OF THE TEST.

26 (D) SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A PHYSICIAN
27 WHO PERFORMS OR INDUCES AN ABORTION IF THE PHYSICIAN:

28 (1) BELIEVES THAT A MEDICAL EMERGENCY EXISTS THAT PREVENTS
29 COMPLIANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION; AND

30 (2) COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF § 20–205 OF THIS
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 49 5

1 SUBTITLE.

2 (E) A PHYSICIAN IS NOT IN VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
3 IF:

4 (1) THE PHYSICIAN COMPLIES WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
5 SECTION; AND

6 (2) THE METHOD USED TO TEST FOR THE PRESENCE OF A FETAL
7 HEARTBEAT DOES NOT DETECT A HEARTBEAT.

8 (F) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO:

9 (1) CREATE OR RECOGNIZE A RIGHT TO ABORTION BEFORE A FETAL
10 HEARTBEAT IS DETECTED;

11 (2) AUTHORIZE THE INITIATION OF A CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST OR
12 THE PROSECUTION OF A WOMAN ON WHOM AN ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR
13 INDUCED OR ATTEMPTED TO BE PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN VIOLATION OF THIS
14 SECTION;

15 (3) WHOLLY OR PARTLY REPEAL, EITHER EXPRESSLY OR BY
16 IMPLICATION, ANY OTHER STATUTE THAT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS ABORTION; OR

17 (4) RESTRICT A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION FROM REGULATING OR
18 PROHIBITING ABORTION IN A MANNER THAT IS AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE
19 LAWS OF THE STATE.

20 20–205.

21 (A) IF AN ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR INDUCED ON A PREGNANT WOMAN
22 BECAUSE OF A MEDICAL EMERGENCY, THE PHYSICIAN WHO PERFORMS OR INDUCES
23 THE ABORTION SHALL EXECUTE A WRITTEN DOCUMENT THAT:

24 (1) CERTIFIES THE ABORTION IS NECESSARY DUE TO A MEDICAL
25 EMERGENCY; AND

26 (2) SPECIFIES THE WOMAN’S MEDICAL CONDITION REQUIRING THE
27 ABORTION.

28 (B) A PHYSICIAN SHALL:

29 (1) INCLUDE THE DOCUMENT EXECUTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 49

1 THIS SECTION IN THE PREGNANT WOMAN’S MEDICAL RECORD; AND

2 (2) MAINTAIN A COPY OF THE DOCUMENT IN THE PHYSICIAN’S
3 PRACTICE RECORDS.

4 (C) A PHYSICIAN WHO PERFORMS OR INDUCES AN ABORTION ON A
5 PREGNANT WOMAN SHALL:

6 (1) IF THE ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR INDUCED TO PRESERVE THE
7 HEALTH OF THE PREGNANT WOMAN, EXECUTE A WRITTEN DOCUMENT THAT:

8 (I) SPECIFIES THE MEDICAL CONDITION THE ABORTION IS
9 ASSERTED TO ADDRESS; AND

10 (II) PROVIDES THE MEDICAL RATIONALE FOR THE PHYSICIAN’S
11 CONCLUSION THAT THE ABORTION IS NECESSARY TO ADDRESS THE MEDICAL
12 CONDITION; OR

13 (2) FOR AN ABORTION OTHER THAN AN ABORTION DESCRIBED IN
14 ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, SPECIFY IN A WRITTEN DOCUMENT THAT MATERNAL
15 HEALTH IS NOT A PURPOSE OF THE ABORTION.

16 (D) THE PHYSICIAN SHALL MAINTAIN A COPY OF A DOCUMENT EXECUTED
17 UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION IN THE PHYSICIAN’S PRACTICE RECORDS.

18 20–206.

19 (A) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE
20 REQUIREMENTS OF §§ 20–204 AND 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE ENFORCED
21 EXCLUSIVELY THROUGH THE PRIVATE CIVIL ACTIONS ESTABLISHED IN § 20–207 OF
22 THIS SUBTITLE.

23 (2) ENFORCEMENT OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY
24 NOT BE TAKEN OR THREATENED BY THE STATE, A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE
25 STATE, A STATE’S ATTORNEY, OR AN EXECUTIVE OR ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER OR
26 EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE AGAINST
27 ANY PERSON, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 20–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

28 (B) SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO:

29 (1) LEGALIZE THE CONDUCT PROHIBITED BY THIS SUBTITLE;

30 (2) LIMIT IN ANY WAY OR AFFECT THE AVAILABILITY OF A REMEDY
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 49 7

1 ESTABLISHED BY § 20–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

2 (3) LIMIT THE ENFORCEABILITY OF ANY OTHER LAWS THAT
3 REGULATE OR PROHIBIT ABORTION.

4 20–207.

5 (A) ANY PERSON, OTHER THAN AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE
6 OR A LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY IN THE STATE, MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION
7 AGAINST ANY PERSON WHO:

8 (1) PERFORMS OR INDUCES AN ABORTION IN VIOLATION OF § 20–204
9 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

10 (2) KNOWINGLY ENGAGES IN CONDUCT THAT AIDS OR ABETS THE
11 PERFORMANCE OR INDUCEMENT OF AN ABORTION, INCLUDING PAYING FOR OR
12 REIMBURSING THE COSTS OF AN ABORTION THROUGH INSURANCE OR OTHERWISE,
13 IF THE ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR §
14 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE PERSON KNEW OR
15 SHOULD HAVE KNOWN THAT THE ABORTION WOULD BE PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN
16 VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

17 (3) INTENDS TO ENGAGE IN THE CONDUCT DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OR
18 (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

19 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, IF A
20 CLAIMANT PREVAILS IN AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COURT
21 SHALL AWARD:

22 (1) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF SUFFICIENT TO PREVENT THE DEFENDANT
23 FROM VIOLATING § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE OR ENGAGING IN ACTS
24 THAT AID OR ABET VIOLATIONS OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

25 (2) STATUTORY DAMAGES IN AN AMOUNT OF NOT LESS THAN $10,000
26 FOR EACH ABORTION THAT THE DEFENDANT PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN
27 VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE, AND FOR EACH ABORTION
28 PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE
29 THAT THE DEFENDANT AIDED OR ABETTED; AND

30 (3) COSTS AND ATTORNEY’S FEES.

31 (C) A COURT MAY NOT AWARD RELIEF UNDER THIS SECTION IN RESPONSE
32 TO A CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OR (2) OF THIS SECTION IF
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 49

1 THE DEFENDANT DEMONSTRATES THAT THE DEFENDANT PREVIOUSLY PAID THE
2 FULL AMOUNT OF STATUTORY DAMAGES UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(2) OF THIS
3 SECTION IN A PREVIOUS ACTION FOR:

4 (1) THE PARTICULAR ABORTION PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN
5 VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

6 (2) THE PARTICULAR CONDUCT THAT AIDED OR ABETTED AN
7 ABORTION PERFORMED OR INDUCED IN VIOLATION OF § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF
8 THIS SUBTITLE.

9 (D) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A PERSON MAY
10 NOT BRING AN ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION AFTER 4 YEARS AFTER THE DATE THE
11 CAUSE OF ACTION AROSE.

12 (E) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE FOLLOWING
13 ARE NOT A DEFENSE TO AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION:

14 (1) IGNORANCE OR MISTAKE OF LAW;

15 (2) A DEFENDANT’S BELIEF THAT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
16 SUBTITLE ARE UNCONSTITUTIONAL;

17 (3) A DEFENDANT’S RELIANCE ON ANY COURT DECISION THAT HAS
18 BEEN OVERRULED ON APPEAL OR BY A SUBSEQUENT COURT, EVEN IF THAT COURT
19 DECISION HAD NOT BEEN OVERRULED WHEN THE DEFENDANT ENGAGED IN
20 CONDUCT THAT VIOLATES § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

21 (4) A DEFENDANT’S RELIANCE ON ANY FEDERAL OR STATE COURT
22 DECISION THAT IS NOT BINDING ON THE COURT IN WHICH THE ACTION HAS BEEN
23 BROUGHT;

24 (5) NONMUTUAL ISSUE PRECLUSION OR NONMUTUAL CLAIM
25 PRECLUSION;

26 (6) THE CONSENT OF THE BABY’S MOTHER TO THE ABORTION; OR

27 (7) ANY CLAIM THAT THE ENFORCEMENT OF THIS SUBTITLE OR THE
28 IMPOSITION OF CIVIL LIABILITY AGAINST THE DEFENDANT WILL VIOLATE THE
29 CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED BY § 20–208 OF
30 THIS SUBTITLE.

31 (F) IT IS AN AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 49 9

1 SECTION IF:

2 (1) A PERSON SUED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION
3 REASONABLY BELIEVED, AFTER CONDUCTING A REASONABLE INVESTIGATION,
4 THAT THE PHYSICIAN PERFORMING OR INDUCING THE ABORTION HAD COMPLIED
5 OR WOULD COMPLY WITH § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

6 (2) A PERSON SUED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION
7 REASONABLY BELIEVED, AFTER CONDUCTING A REASONABLE INVESTIGATION,
8 THAT THE PHYSICIAN PERFORMING OR INDUCING THE ABORTION WOULD COMPLY
9 WITH § 20–204 OR § 20–205 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10 (G) THE DEFENDANT HAS THE BURDEN OF PROVING AN AFFIRMATIVE
11 DEFENSE UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION BY A PREPONDERANCE OF THE
12 EVIDENCE.

13 (H) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ON ANY
14 SPEECH OR CONDUCT PROTECTED BY THE FIRST AMENDMENT OF THE U.S.
15 CONSTITUTION, AS MADE APPLICABLE TO THE STATES THROUGH THE U.S.
16 SUPREME COURT’S INTERPRETATION OF THE FOURTEENTH AMENDMENT OF THE
17 U.S. CONSTITUTION, OR BY ARTICLE 40 OF THE MARYLAND DECLARATION OF
18 RIGHTS.

19 (I) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE STATE,
20 A STATE OFFICIAL, OR A STATE’S ATTORNEY MAY NOT INTERVENE IN AN ACTION
21 BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION.

22 (2) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT A
23 PERSON FROM FILING AN AMICUS CURIAE BRIEF IN AN ACTION.

24 (J) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A COURT MAY NOT
25 AWARD COSTS OR ATTORNEY’S FEES UNDER THE MARYLAND RULES OF CIVIL
26 PROCEDURE OR ANY OTHER RULE ADOPTED BY THE SUPREME COURT OF
27 MARYLAND TO A DEFENDANT IN AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION.

28 (K) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A CIVIL ACTION
29 UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE BROUGHT BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IMPREGNATED
30 THE ABORTION PATIENT THROUGH AN ACT OF RAPE, SEXUAL ASSAULT, INCEST, OR
31 ANY OTHER ACT PROHIBITED BY LAW.

32 (L) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A CIVIL ACTION
33 BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE BROUGHT IN:
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 49

1 (1) THE COUNTY IN WHICH ALL OR A SUBSTANTIAL PART OF THE
2 EVENTS OR OMISSIONS GIVING RISE TO THE CLAIM OCCURRED;

3 (2) THE COUNTY OF RESIDENCE FOR ANY ONE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
4 DEFENDANTS AT THE TIME THE CAUSE OF ACTION OCCURRED;

5 (3) THE COUNTY OF THE PRINCIPAL OFFICE IN THE STATE OF ANY
6 ONE OF THE DEFENDANTS THAT IS NOT AN INDIVIDUAL; OR

7 (4) THE COUNTY OF RESIDENCE FOR THE CLAIMANT IF THE
8 CLAIMANT IS AN INDIVIDUAL RESIDING IN THE STATE.

9 (M) IF A CIVIL ACTION IS BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION IN ANY ONE OF
10 THE VENUES DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (L) OF THIS SECTION, THE ACTION MAY
11 NOT BE TRANSFERRED TO A DIFFERENT VENUE WITHOUT THE WRITTEN CONSENT
12 OF ALL PARTIES.

13 20–208.

14 (A) A DEFENDANT AGAINST WHOM AN ACTION IS BROUGHT UNDER § 20–207
15 OF THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT HAVE STANDING TO ASSERT THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN
16 SEEKING AN ABORTION AS A DEFENSE TO LIABILITY UNDER THAT SECTION UNLESS:

17 (1) THE U.S. SUPREME COURT HOLDS THAT THE COURTS OF THE
18 STATE MUST CONFER STANDING ON THAT DEFENDANT TO ASSERT THE
19 THIRD–PARTY RIGHTS OF WOMEN SEEKING AN ABORTION IN STATE COURT AS A
20 MATTER OF FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL LAW; OR

21 (2) THE DEFENDANT HAS STANDING TO ASSERT THE RIGHTS OF
22 WOMEN SEEKING AN ABORTION UNDER THE TESTS FOR THIRD–PARTY STANDING
23 ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S. SUPREME COURT.

24 (B) (1) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO LIMIT OR PRECLUDE
25 A DEFENDANT FROM ASSERTING THE DEFENDANT’S PERSONAL CONSTITUTIONAL
26 RIGHTS AS A DEFENSE TO LIABILITY UNDER § 20–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

27 (2) A COURT MAY NOT AWARD RELIEF UNDER § 20–207 OF THIS
28 SUBTITLE IF THE CONDUCT FOR WHICH THE DEFENDANT HAS BEEN SUED WAS AN
29 EXERCISE OF STATE OR FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS THAT PERSONALLY
30 BELONG TO THE DEFENDANT.

31 [20–209.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 49 11

1 (a) In this section, “viable” means that stage when, in the best clinical judgment
2 of the qualified provider based on the particular facts of the case before the qualified
3 provider, there is a reasonable likelihood of the fetus’s sustained survival outside the womb.

4 (b) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the State may not interfere with
5 the decision of a woman to terminate a pregnancy:

6 (1) Before the fetus is viable; or

7 (2) At any time during the woman’s pregnancy, if:

8 (i) The termination procedure is necessary to protect the life or
9 health of the woman; or

10 (ii) The fetus is affected by genetic defect or serious deformity or
11 abnormality.

12 (c) The Department may adopt regulations that:

13 (1) Are both necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life or
14 health of the woman; and

15 (2) Are not inconsistent with established clinical practice.

16 (d) The qualified provider is not liable for civil damages or subject to a criminal
17 penalty for a decision to perform an abortion under this section made in good faith and in
18 the qualified provider’s best clinical judgment in accordance with accepted standards of
19 clinical practice.]

20 20–209.

21 (A) A PERSON MAY NOT PERFORM OR INDUCE AN ABORTION ON A
22 PREGNANT WOMAN IN THE STATE UNLESS THE ABORTION IS VOLUNTARY AND
23 INFORMED.

24 (B) CONSENT TO AN ABORTION IS VOLUNTARY AND INFORMED ONLY IF:

25 (1) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION
26 INFORMS THE PREGNANT WOMAN ON WHOM THE ABORTION IS TO BE PERFORMED
27 OR INDUCED OF:

28 (I) THE PHYSICIAN’S NAME;

29 (II) THE PARTICULAR MEDICAL RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
30 PARTICULAR ABORTION PROCEDURE TO BE EMPLOYED, INCLUDING, WHEN
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 49

1 MEDICALLY ACCURATE:

2 1. THE RISKS OF INFECTION AND HEMORRHAGE;

3 2. THE POTENTIAL DANGER TO A SUBSEQUENT
4 PREGNANCY AND OF INFERTILITY; AND

5 3. THE POSSIBILITY OF INCREASED RISK OF BREAST
6 CANCER FOLLOWING AN INDUCED ABORTION AND THE NATURAL PROTECTIVE
7 EFFECT OF A COMPLETED PREGNANCY IN AVOIDING BREAST CANCER;

8 (III) THE PROBABLE GESTATIONAL AGE OF THE BABY AT THE
9 TIME THE ABORTION IS TO BE PERFORMED OR INDUCED; AND

10 (IV) THE MEDICAL RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH CARRYING THE
11 CHILD TO TERM;

12 (2) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION
13 OR THE PHYSICIAN’S AGENT INFORMS THE PREGNANT WOMAN THAT:

14 (I) MEDICAL ASSISTANCE BENEFITS MAY BE AVAILABLE FOR
15 PRENATAL CARE, CHILDBIRTH, AND NEONATAL CARE;

16 (II) THE FATHER IS LIABLE FOR ASSISTANCE IN THE SUPPORT
17 OF THE CHILD WITHOUT REGARD TO WHETHER THE FATHER HAS OFFERED TO PAY
18 FOR THE ABORTION; AND

19 (III) PUBLIC AND PRIVATE AGENCIES PROVIDE PREGNANCY
20 PREVENTION COUNSELING AND MEDICAL REFERRALS FOR OBTAINING PREGNANCY
21 PREVENTION MEDICATIONS OR DEVICES, INCLUDING EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION
22 FOR VICTIMS OF RAPE OR INCEST;

23 (3) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION
24 OR THE PHYSICIAN’S AGENT:

25 (I) PROVIDES THE PREGNANT WOMAN WITH PRINTED
26 MATERIALS THAT DESCRIBE THE BABY AND LIST AGENCIES THAT OFFER
27 ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION OR SONOGRAM SERVICES AT NO COST TO THE
28 PREGNANT WOMAN; AND

29 (II) INFORMS THE PREGNANT WOMAN THAT THOSE MATERIALS:

30 1. HAVE BEEN PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 49 13

1 2. ARE ACCESSIBLE ON A WEBSITE SPONSORED BY THE
2 DEPARTMENT;

3 3. DESCRIBE THE BABY AND LIST AGENCIES THAT
4 OFFER ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION; AND

5 4. INCLUDE A LIST OF AGENCIES THAT OFFER
6 SONOGRAM SERVICES AT NO COST TO THE PREGNANT WOMAN;

7 (4) BEFORE ANY SEDATIVE OR ANESTHESIA IS ADMINISTERED TO THE
8 PREGNANT WOMAN AND AT LEAST 24 HOURS BEFORE THE ABORTION OR AT LEAST 2
9 HOURS BEFORE THE ABORTION IF THE PREGNANT WOMAN WAIVES THIS
10 REQUIREMENT BY CERTIFYING THAT SHE CURRENTLY LIVES 100 MILES OR MORE
11 FROM THE NEAREST ABORTION PROVIDER THAT IS A FACILITY THAT PERFORMS
12 MORE THAN 50 ABORTIONS IN ANY 12–MONTH PERIOD:

13 (I) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE
14 ABORTION OR AN AGENT OF THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS ALSO A SONOGRAPHER
15 CERTIFIED BY A NATIONAL REGISTRY OF MEDICAL SONOGRAPHERS PERFORMS A
16 SONOGRAM ON THE PREGNANT WOMAN ON WHOM THE ABORTION IS TO BE
17 PERFORMED OR INDUCED; AND

18 (II) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE
19 ABORTION DISPLAYS THE SONOGRAM IMAGES IN A QUALITY CONSISTENT WITH
20 CURRENT MEDICAL PRACTICE IN A MANNER THAT THE PREGNANT WOMAN MAY VIEW
21 THEM AND HEAR THE FETAL HEARTBEAT IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE
22 STANDARD OF CARE;

23 (5) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION
24 PROVIDES, IN A MANNER UNDERSTANDABLE TO A LAYPERSON, A VERBAL
25 EXPLANATION OF THE RESULTS OF THE SONOGRAM IMAGES, INCLUDING A MEDICAL
26 DESCRIPTION OF THE DIMENSIONS OF THE EMBRYO OR BABY, THE PRESENCE OF
27 CARDIAC ACTIVITY, AND THE PRESENCE OF EXTERNAL MEMBERS AND INTERNAL
28 ORGANS;

29 (6) THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION
30 OR AN AGENT OF THE PHYSICIAN WHO IS ALSO A SONOGRAPHER CERTIFIED BY A
31 NATIONAL REGISTRY OF MEDICAL SONOGRAPHERS MAKES AUDIBLE THE HEART
32 AUSCULTATION FOR THE PREGNANT WOMAN TO HEAR, IF PRESENT, IN A QUALITY
33 CONSISTENT WITH CURRENT MEDICAL PRACTICE AND PROVIDES, IN A MANNER
34 UNDERSTANDABLE TO A LAYPERSON, A SIMULTANEOUS VERBAL EXPLANATION OF
35 THE HEART AUSCULTATION;
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 49

1 (7) BEFORE RECEIVING A SONOGRAM UNDER ITEM (6) OF THIS
2 SUBSECTION AND BEFORE THE ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR INDUCED AND BEFORE
3 ANY SEDATIVE OR ANESTHESIA IS ADMINISTERED, THE PREGNANT WOMAN
4 COMPLETES AND CERTIFIES WITH HER SIGNATURE AN ELECTION FORM THAT
5 STATES AS FOLLOWS:

6 “ABORTION AND SONOGRAM ELECTION

7 (1) THE INFORMATION AND PRINTED MATERIALS UNDER § 20–209(B)(3) OF
8 THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE HAVE BEEN PROVIDED AND EXPLAINED TO ME.

9 (2) I UNDERSTAND THE NATURE AND CONSEQUENCES OF AN ABORTION.

10 (3) MARYLAND LAW REQUIRES THAT I RECEIVE A SONOGRAM PRIOR TO
11 RECEIVING AN ABORTION.

12 (4) I UNDERSTAND THAT I HAVE THE OPTION TO VIEW THE SONOGRAM
13 IMAGES.

14 (5) I UNDERSTAND THAT I HAVE THE OPTION TO HEAR THE HEARTBEAT.

15 (6) I UNDERSTAND THAT I AM REQUIRED BY LAW TO HEAR AN EXPLANATION
16 OF THE SONOGRAM IMAGES UNLESS I CERTIFY IN WRITING ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:

17 ___ I AM PREGNANT AS A RESULT OF SEXUAL ASSAULT, INCEST, OR
18 OTHER VIOLATIONS OF THE MARYLAND PENAL CODE THAT HAVE BEEN REPORTED
19 TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES OR THAT HAVE NOT BEEN REPORTED
20 BECAUSE I REASONABLY BELIEVE THAT DOING SO WOULD PUT ME AT RISK OF
21 RETALIATION RESULTING IN SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.

22 ___ I AM A MINOR AND OBTAINING AN ABORTION IN ACCORDANCE
23 WITH § 20–103 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

24 ___ MY BABY HAS AN IRREVERSIBLE MEDICAL CONDITION OR
25 ABNORMALITY, AS IDENTIFIED BY RELIABLE DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES AND
26 DOCUMENTED IN MY MEDICAL FILE.

27 (7) I AM MAKING THIS ELECTION OF MY OWN FREE WILL AND WITHOUT
28 COERCION.

29 (8) FOR A WOMAN WHO LIVES 100 MILES OR MORE FROM THE NEAREST
30 ABORTION PROVIDER THAT IS A FACILITY THAT PERFORMS MORE THAN 50
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 49 15

1 ABORTIONS IN ANY 12–MONTH PERIOD:

2 ___ I CERTIFY THAT, BECAUSE I CURRENTLY LIVE 100 MILES OR
3 MORE FROM THE NEAREST ABORTION PROVIDER THAT IS A FACILITY THAT
4 PERFORMS MORE THAN 50 ABORTIONS IN ANY 12–MONTH PERIOD, I WAIVE THE
5 REQUIREMENT TO WAIT 24 HOURS AFTER THE SONOGRAM IS PERFORMED BEFORE
6 RECEIVING THE ABORTION PROCEDURE. MY PLACE OF RESIDENCE IS ___________.

7 ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– ––––––––––––––––––––––––
8 (SIGNATURE) (DATE)”;

9 (8) BEFORE THE ABORTION IS PERFORMED OR INDUCED, THE
10 PHYSICIAN WHO IS TO PERFORM OR INDUCE THE ABORTION RECEIVES A COPY OF
11 THE SIGNED, WRITTEN CERTIFICATION REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (7) OF THIS
12 SUBSECTION; AND

13 (9) THE PREGNANT WOMAN IS PROVIDED THE NAME OF EACH
14 PERSON WHO PROVIDES OR EXPLAINS THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER THIS
15 SECTION.

16 20–210.

17 (A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE STATE HAS
18 SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY, A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION HAS GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY,
19 AND EACH OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
20 HAS OFFICIAL IMMUNITY IN ANY ACTION, CLAIM, OR COUNTERCLAIM OR ANY TYPE
21 OF LEGAL OR EQUITABLE ACTION THAT CHALLENGES THE VALIDITY OF ANY
22 PROVISION OR APPLICATION OF THIS SUBTITLE, ON CONSTITUTIONAL GROUNDS OR
23 OTHERWISE.

24 (B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A PROVISION OF
25 STATE LAW MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO WAIVE OR ABROGATE AN IMMUNITY
26 DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION UNLESS IT EXPRESSLY WAIVES
27 IMMUNITY UNDER THIS SECTION.

28 20–211.

29 (A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, ANY PERSON WHO
30 SEEKS DECLARATORY OR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO PREVENT THE STATE, A POLITICAL
31 SUBDIVISION, ANY GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OR PUBLIC OFFICIAL IN THE STATE, OR
32 ANY PERSON IN THE STATE FROM ENFORCING ANY STATUTE, ORDINANCE, RULE,
33 REGULATION, OR ANY OTHER TYPE OF LAW THAT REGULATES OR RESTRICTS
34 ABORTION OR THAT LIMITS TAXPAYER FUNDING FOR INDIVIDUALS OR ENTITIES
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 49

1 THAT PERFORM OR PROMOTE ABORTIONS, IN ANY STATE OR FEDERAL COURT, OR
2 THAT REPRESENTS ANY LITIGANT SEEKING SUCH RELIEF IN ANY STATE OR
3 FEDERAL COURT, IS JOINTLY AND SEVERALLY LIABLE TO PAY THE COSTS AND
4 ATTORNEY’S FEES OF THE PREVAILING PARTY.

5 (B) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, A PARTY IS CONSIDERED A
6 PREVAILING PARTY IF A FEDERAL OR STATE COURT:

7 (1) DISMISSES ANY CLAIM OR CAUSE OF ACTION BROUGHT AGAINST
8 THE PARTY THAT SEEKS THE DECLARATORY OR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF UNDER
9 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, REGARDLESS OF THE REASON FOR THE
10 DISMISSAL; OR

11 (2) ENTERS JUDGMENT IN THE PARTY’S FAVOR ON ANY SUCH CLAIM
12 OR CAUSE OF ACTION.

13 (C) REGARDLESS OF WHETHER A PREVAILING PARTY SOUGHT TO RECOVER
14 COSTS OR ATTORNEY’S FEES IN THE UNDERLYING ACTION, A PREVAILING PARTY
15 UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION TO RECOVER COSTS AND
16 ATTORNEY’S FEES AGAINST A PERSON THAT SOUGHT DECLARATORY OR INJUNCTIVE
17 RELIEF UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN 3 YEARS AFTER THE DATE
18 ON WHICH, AS APPLICABLE:

19 (1) THE DISMISSAL OR JUDGMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
20 SECTION BECOMES FINAL ON THE CONCLUSION OF APPELLATE REVIEW; OR

21 (2) THE TIME FOR SEEKING APPELLATE REVIEW EXPIRES.

22 (D) IT IS NOT A DEFENSE TO AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER SUBSECTION (C)
23 OF THIS SECTION THAT:

24 (1) A PREVAILING PARTY UNDER THIS SECTION FAILED TO SEEK
25 RECOVERY OF COSTS OR ATTORNEY’S FEES IN THE UNDERLYING ACTION;

26 (2) THE COURT IN THE UNDERLYING ACTION DECLINED TO
27 RECOGNIZE OR ENFORCE THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION; OR

28 (3) THE COURT IN THE UNDERLYING ACTION HELD THAT ANY
29 PROVISION OF THIS SECTION IS INVALID, UNCONSTITUTIONAL, OR PREEMPTED BY
30 FEDERAL LAW, NOTWITHSTANDING THE DOCTRINES OF ISSUE OR CLAIM
31 PRECLUSION.

32 20–212.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 49 17

1 (A) A STATUTE THAT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS ABORTION MAY NOT BE
2 CONSTRUED TO REPEAL ANY OTHER STATUTE THAT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS
3 ABORTION, EITHER WHOLLY OR PARTLY, UNLESS THE REPEALING STATUTE
4 EXPLICITLY STATES THAT IT IS REPEALING THE OTHER STATUTE.

5 (B) A STATUTE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO RESTRICT A POLITICAL
6 SUBDIVISION FROM REGULATING OR PROHIBITING ABORTION IN A MANNER THAT IS
7 AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE LAWS OF THE STATE UNLESS THE STATUTE
8 EXPLICITLY STATES THAT POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS ARE PROHIBITED FROM
9 REGULATING OR PROHIBITING ABORTION IN THE MANNER DESCRIBED IN THE
10 STATUTE.

11 (C) (1) EVERY STATUTE THAT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS ABORTION IS
12 SEVERABLE IN EACH OF ITS APPLICATIONS TO EVERY PERSON AND CIRCUMSTANCE.

13 (2) IF ANY STATUTE THAT REGULATES OR PROHIBITS ABORTION IS
14 FOUND BY ANY COURT TO BE UNCONSTITUTIONAL, EITHER ON ITS FACE OR AS
15 APPLIED, THEN ALL APPLICATIONS OF THAT STATUTE THAT DO NOT VIOLATE THE
16 U.S. CONSTITUTION AND THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION SHALL:

17 (I) BE SEVERED FROM THE UNCONSTITUTIONAL
18 APPLICATIONS;

19 (II) REMAIN ENFORCEABLE, NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER
20 LAW; AND

21 (III) BE INTERPRETED AS IF CONTAINING LANGUAGE LIMITING
22 THE STATUTE’S APPLICATION TO THE PERSONS, GROUP OF PERSONS, OR
23 CIRCUMSTANCES FOR WHICH THE STATUTE’S APPLICATION WILL NOT VIOLATE THE
24 U.S. CONSTITUTION AND THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

25 [20–214.] 20–213.

26 (a) (1) A person may not be required to perform or participate in, or refer to
27 any source for, any medical procedure that results in artificial insemination, sterilization,
28 or termination of pregnancy.

29 (2) The refusal of a person to perform or participate in, or refer to a source
30 for, these medical procedures may not be a basis for:

31 (i) Civil liability to another person; or

32 (ii) Disciplinary or other recriminatory action against the person.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 49

1 (b) (1) A licensed hospital, hospital director, or hospital governing board may
2 not be required:

3 (i) To permit, within the hospital, the performance of any medical
4 procedure that results in artificial insemination, sterilization, or termination of pregnancy;
5 or

6 (ii) To refer to any source for these medical procedures.

7 (2) The refusal to permit or to refer to a source for these procedures may
8 not be grounds for:

9 (i) Civil liability to another person; or

10 (ii) Disciplinary or other recriminatory action against the person by
11 this State or any person.

12 (c) (1) The refusal of an individual to submit to or give consent for an abortion
13 or sterilization may not be grounds for loss of any privileges or immunities to which the
14 individual otherwise would be entitled.

15 (2) Submitting to or granting consent for an abortion or sterilization may
16 not be a condition precedent to the receipt of any public benefits.

17 (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a health care provider, a
18 licensed hospital, a hospital director, or a hospital governing board is not immune from civil
19 damages, if available at law, or from disciplinary or other recriminatory action, if the failure
20 to refer a patient to a source for any medical procedure that results in sterilization or
21 termination of pregnancy would reasonably be determined as:

22 (1) The cause of death or serious physical injury or serious long–lasting
23 injury to the patient; and

24 (2) Otherwise contrary to the standards of medical care.

25 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
26 the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
27 court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other
28 application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
29 and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

30 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 18