START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 54 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 54 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Task Force to Study Restructuring Maryland's Electric Utility Industry 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force to Study Restructuring Maryland’s Electric Utility 
Industry. The Public Service Commission (PSC) must provide staff for the task force. Task 
force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for travel 
expenses. By November 1, 2027, the task force must report its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and 
terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by approximately $667,000 in 
FY 2027 and by approximately $333,000 in FY 2028. Special fund revenues increase 
correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service companies. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$667,000 
$333,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$667,000 
$333,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 54/ Page 2 
 
study options for restructuring Maryland’s electric utility industry, such as publicly 
owned utilities, cooperatives, and public utility districts; 
 
evaluate options for improving or reducing electricity rates for Maryland ratepayers; 
 
assess strategies for ensuring that electric companies are more responsive to 
ratepayer needs; 
 
examine alternative utility and governance models used in other states, including 
Nebraska, Washington, and Oregon, and compare electricity rates in those states 
with electricity rates in Maryland; 
 
compare infrastructure investments and improvements made by publicly owned 
electric companies with infrastructure investments and improvements made by 
private electric companies; 
 
analyze the legal implications of transferring electric company assets to public 
ownership, including through the use of eminent domain, all or part of the privately 
owned electric company assets within the State; 
 
evaluate options for energy market participation, including withdrawal from PJM 
Interconnection, LLC (PJM); 
 
estimate the potential costs and benefits to Maryland residents of transitioning to 
the options and models studied by the task force; 
 
identify options for providing public review or approval of proposed structural 
changes; and 
 
develop recommendations based on its findings. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Electric Customer Choice and Competition Act of 1999 
 
The Electric Customer Choice and Competition Act of 1999 facilitated the restructuring of 
the electric utility industry in Maryland, which deregulated the generation, supply, and 
pricing of electricity. As part of restructuring, the State’s vertically integrated electric 
companies divested themselves of their generation assets. With restructuring, generation 
resources are considered competitive, and the competitive market is relied upon to provide 
new generation resources and to meet load requirements. 
 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies, which includes electric 
companies, subject to its jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of the 
public and (2) promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in 
the State without unjust discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, 
the economy of the State, the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected 
workers, the conservation of natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 54/ Page 3 
the achievement of the State’s climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, and the protection of a public service company’s infrastructure against 
cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce compliance with legal requirements by public 
service companies. State law does not require electric companies to be a member of an 
Regional Transmission Organization (RTO). 
 
PJM Interconnection, LLC 
 
PJM is the RTO for all or parts of 13 states plus the District of Columbia, including 
Maryland. According to PJM, its members include electricity distributors, transmission and 
generator owners, organizations that can sell electricity to end-users, marketing firms, and 
end-use customers. PJM members take part in PJM’s stakeholder process, which provides 
a forum for those who have a stake in the wholesale electric industry to discuss and work 
through issues related to PJM markets, operations, public policies, and current and future 
industry matters. PJM’s stakeholder process – the Consensus-Based Issue Resolution 
strategy – uses committees, subcommittees, user groups and task forces to conduct 
business. 
 
All four Maryland investor-owned utilities are affiliate members of PJM, and all 
five Maryland municipal electric utilities are voting members of PJM, as is the Southern 
Maryland Electric Cooperative. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by an estimated 
$1.0 million over the two-year duration of the task force to hire a consultant to oversee the 
work of the task force and provide analysis in support of its required duties. This estimate 
is based on the cost of similar consultants recently hired by PSC. While PSC has technical 
experts on staff, the scope of the task force and the time frame within which the task force 
must complete its work necessitate supplemental assistance. 
 
Based on the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date and the task force’s reporting deadline of 
November 1, 2027, this analysis assumes that PSC incurs about two-thirds of the consultant 
costs in fiscal 2027 and the remaining one-third in fiscal 2028. Accordingly, special fund 
expenditures for PSC increase by approximately $667,000 in fiscal 2027 and $333,000 in 
fiscal 2028. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for task force members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. In addition, it is assumed that any other 
State agencies represented on the task force can participate using existing resources. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 54/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  PSC advises, and the Department of Legislative Services concurs, 
that it may not be feasible for the task force to address all of its required duties within the 
time frame established by the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Energy Administration; 
Office of People’s Counsel; PJM Interconnection, LLC; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4