START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 83 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 83 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family and Law Enforcement Protection Act 
 
 
This bill alters numerous provisions that govern the surrender of firearms by a respondent 
subject to a domestic violence protective order, including by requiring a temporary 
protective order to require a respondent to surrender to law enforcement authorities any 
firearm in the respondent’s possession and refrain from the purchase or possession of any 
firearm for the duration of the order. The bill also establishes additional responsibilities for 
local law enforcement agencies related to the surrender of firearms and requires 
commissioners to provide specified information to petitioners when issuing interim 
protective orders. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $86,200 in FY 2027 
only for one-time programming costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
86,200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($86,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant fiscal and operational impact on local law enforcement 
agencies, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate 
on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 83/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Protective Orders – Petitions and Available Relief 
 
Petitions:  Under current law, an individual meeting specified relationship requirements 
may seek relief from abuse by filing a petition with the court or, if the clerk’s office is 
closed, with a District Court Commissioner. Under limited circumstances, a petition may 
also be filed electronically from specified locations. The petition must be under oath and 
include specified information known to the petitioner, including the nature and extent of 
the abuse for which the relief is sought, any previous or pending action between the parties 
in any court, and the whereabouts of the respondent. 
 
Under the bill, a petition must also include any information known to the petitioner as to 
whether the respondent possesses a valid handgun qualification license (or a permit to 
wear, carry, or transport a handgun) issued to the respondent by the Secretary of 
State Police and whether the respondent owns or possesses a firearm. If the petition states 
that the respondent possesses a valid handgun qualification license (or permit) or that the 
respondent owns or possesses a firearm, the petitioner must also include the following 
information known to the petitioner:   
 
 
the length of time that the petitioner has known or lived with the respondent; 
 
the potential location of the respondent’s firearm; 
 
the last time the petitioner saw the respondent’s firearm; 
 
the make and model of the respondent’s firearm; 
 
how many and what type of firearms the respondent may have access to; and 
 
whether the respondent keeps the firearm in the respondent’s car, as specified. 
 
In General:  Under provisions set forth in Title 4, Subtitle 5 of the Family Law Article, 
generally, if an interim protective order is granted by a District Court Commissioner, a 
temporary protective order hearing is held on the first or second day on which a 
District Court judge is sitting after issuance of the interim protective order. Generally, if a 
temporary protective order is granted, a final protective order hearing occurs one week 
later. Statute specifies the types of relief authorized to be included in each type of order. 
 
Interim Protective Orders:  A commissioner may issue an interim protective order on a 
finding that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent has committed 
abuse against a person eligible for relief. The bill requires the commissioner to provide the 
petitioner with resources for safety, planning, and other support, including contact 
information for the Maryland Network Against Domestic Violence. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 83/ Page 3 
Temporary Protective Orders:  Under current law, if a judge finds that there are reasonable 
grounds to believe that a person eligible for relief has been abused, the judge may grant a 
temporary protective order. Among other relief, a temporary protective order may order 
the respondent to surrender to law enforcement authorities any firearm in the respondent’s 
possession and to refrain from possession of any firearm for the duration of the temporary 
protective order if the abuse consisted of the use of (or threat to use) a firearm by the 
respondent against a person eligible for relief or serious bodily harm to a person eligible 
for relief (or a threat by the respondent to cause serious bodily harm). 
 
The bill repeals the limitations above and instead requires a temporary protective order 
(regardless of the nature of the abuse that resulted in the order being issued) to order the 
respondent to surrender any firearm and any handgun qualification license (or permit to 
wear, carry, or transport a handgun) issued to the respondent to law enforcement authorities 
and refrain from purchasing or possessing a firearm for the duration of the temporary 
protective order. 
 
Final Protective Orders:  Under existing statute, a judge may grant a final protective order 
if the judge finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred 
or if the respondent consents to the entry of the order. In addition to other authorized relief, 
a final protective order must order the respondent to surrender any firearm in the 
respondent’s possession to law enforcement authorities and refrain from possession of any 
firearm for the duration of the protective order. 
 
Under the bill, a final protective order must also order the respondent to surrender any 
handgun qualification license (or permit) issued to the respondent. It also specifies that a 
respondent must refrain from purchasing or possessing a firearm for the duration of the 
protective order. 
 
Procedures for the Surrender of Firearms 
 
Surrender by Respondent:  Under current law, a respondent may transport a firearm if the 
respondent is carrying a protective order requiring the surrender of the firearm and (1) the 
firearm is unloaded; (2) the respondent has notified the law enforcement unit, barracks, or 
station that the firearm is being transported in accordance with the protective order; and 
(3) the respondent transports the firearm directly to the law enforcement unit, barracks, or 
station. 
 
The bill does not alter the above provision, but further establishes that if a respondent in a 
protective order proceeding is ordered to surrender a firearm, a handgun qualification 
license, or a permit to wear, carry, or transport a handgun, the respondent must surrender 
all firearms and any handgun qualification license/permit in the respondent’s possession to 
a local law enforcement authority within 24 hours after a law enforcement officer serves 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 83/ Page 4 
the order on the respondent. If the respondent does not possess a firearm, the respondent 
must submit an affidavit to the court and any relevant law enforcement agency to that 
effect, signed under penalty of perjury, within two business days, as specified. If the 
respondent has lawfully sold or transferred a firearm within the prior 30 days, the 
respondent must submit the transfer paperwork to the court and any relevant law 
enforcement agency within two business days after service of the order. 
 
Law Enforcement Duties:  Under the bill, a local law enforcement authority must determine 
whether the respondent has complied with the above provisions within three business days 
after service of the order. If a local law enforcement authority determines a respondent is 
not in compliance within three business days of service of the order, the local law 
enforcement authority must (1) notify the State’s Attorney’s Office that the respondent is 
not in compliance and (2) take appropriate steps to determine whether the respondent is in 
possession of firearms, including by obtaining a search warrant, and remove any firearms. 
 
Under current law, if a respondent surrenders a firearm in accordance with the terms of a 
temporary or final protective order, the law enforcement officer must (1) provide to the 
respondent information on the process for retaking possession of the firearm and 
(2) transport and store the firearm in a protective case, if one is available, and in a manner 
intended to prevent damage to the firearm during the time the protective order is in effect. 
 
Under the bill, a law enforcement agency that receives a surrendered firearm must also 
issue written proof of the surrender to the respondent, including:   
 
 
the name of the person surrendering the firearm; 
 
the date the firearm was surrendered; and 
 
the serial number, make, and model of the firearm or, for a firearm manufactured 
prior to 1968 without a serial number, the identifying marks on the firearm. 
 
Under the bill, to carry out the surrender of firearms, a law enforcement officer must 
accompany the respondent or proceed without the respondent’s presence, if necessary, to 
any place where the law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe a firearm in the 
possession of the respondent is located to ensure that the respondent does not gain access 
to a firearm. On application by the State’s Attorney or a law enforcement officer, based on 
probable cause to believe that the respondent has failed to surrender a firearm in accordance 
with the requirements under a protective order or is in possession of other firearms, the 
court may authorize the execution of a search warrant for the removal of a firearm at any 
subject location. If a protective order prohibits a respondent from returning to the scene of 
domestic violence or another place where a law enforcement officer has probable cause to 
believe a firearm in the possession of the respondent is located, the law enforcement officer 
must proceed without the respondent’s presence. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 83/ Page 5 
Retaking of Surrendered Firearms 
 
Under current law, the respondent may retake possession of the firearm at the expiration 
of a temporary or final protective order unless the respondent is ordered to surrender the 
firearm in a final protective order or an extension of a final protective order, respectively, 
or the respondent is not otherwise legally entitled to own or possess the firearm. The bill 
also establishes that a respondent may retake possession of the firearm at the expiration of 
an interim protective order unless the respondent is ordered to surrender the firearm in a 
temporary protective order, or the respondent is not otherwise legally entitled to own or 
possess the firearm. (The Department of Legislative Services notes that neither the bill nor 
current law explicitly allows a commissioner to include the surrender of a firearm as a form 
of relief in an interim protective order.) 
 
Under the bill, a respondent who does not wish to recover a firearm surrendered in 
accordance with a protective order or who is otherwise prohibited from possessing a 
firearm may (1) sell or transfer the firearm or ammunition to a licensed firearm dealer or 
another person who is not prohibited from possessing a firearm or ammunition under  
State or federal law and who does not live in the same residence as the respondent or 
(2) request the destruction of the firearm. 
 
Violations of Protective Orders 
 
Under current law, a law enforcement officer must arrest – with or without a warrant – and 
take into custody an individual who the officer has probable cause to believe is in violation 
of an interim, temporary, or final protective order in effect at the time of the violation. An 
individual who fails to comply with specified provisions of an interim, temporary, or final 
protective order, including those related to the surrender of (and prohibition against 
possessing) firearms under a temporary/final protective order, is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and subject to maximum penalties of a $1,000 fine and/or 90 days imprisonment for a 
first offense and a $2,500 fine and/or one year imprisonment for a second or subsequent 
offense. The bill extends these penalties to a respondent who does not surrender a firearm 
or continues to possess a firearm as prohibited by a temporary protective order. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Depending on the volume of temporary protective orders issued in 
each locality, local law enforcement agencies may incur expenditures associated with the 
storage of potentially significantly more firearms and associated administrative 
responsibilities. For example, Caroline County indicates that the bill’s requirements for 
follow-up with respondents within three days to ensure a firearm has been surrendered 
results in a significant increase in workload that cannot be absorbed with existing 
resources. Caroline County therefore anticipates the need for additional staff at a cost of 
approximately $150,000 on an annual basis. For additional context, the Judiciary reports 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 83/ Page 6 
that 21,141 temporary protective orders were granted in fiscal 2025, although it is unknown 
how many of these orders involved a respondent who owns firearms. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 943 and HB 1050 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 20 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6