START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 20 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 20 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Related Event Promoter's Permit 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to 
issue a related event promoter’s permit that authorizes a “related event promoter” or 
participating license holder to conduct a social event related to and around the same time 
and location as the basketball tournament of the Central Intercollegiate Athletic 
Association (CIAA). The bill specifies requirements, restrictions, fees, and penalties 
applicable to the permit and authorizes the board to adopt regulations establishing 
requirements for conducting and providing public notice of a specified related event.  
The bill terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners advises that any 
monitoring and enforcement can be handled with existing budgeted resources.  
Baltimore City revenues may increase minimally in FY 2026 through FY 2029 from 
application and permit fees to the extent permits are issued under the bill. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Related event” means an event in which a license holder participates in a coordinated 
promotion with a third-party promoter to sell or provide alcoholic beverages during a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 20/ Page 2 
specified time, and at least 75 individuals are reasonably anticipated to participate. It 
includes an event for which tickets are sold to the public, either in advance or at the door, 
or a cover charge is imposed, including a concert, entertainment event, happy hour, or 
party. 
 
“Related event promoter” means an individual, for-profit organization, or non-profit 
organization that promotes a social event related to the CIAA Basketball Tournament 
around the same time and location as the tournament. 
 
Application Process 
 
A related event promoter or participating license holder on behalf of a promoter must apply 
for a related event permit from the board before the related event promoter may publicize, 
sell tickets for, organize, operate, produce, or stage a related event. A holder of a State 
caterer’s license must obtain a Class C per diem beer; a Class C beer and wine; or a  
Class C beer, wine, and liquor license from the board before the holder may act as a 
participating license holder at a related event. 
 
The board may grant a permit to an applicant who (1) submits an application at least  
30 days before the date of the related event; (2) obtains written consent from a designee of 
Visit Baltimore; and (3) if applicable, obtains and provides to the board a special event 
permit from the Baltimore City Department of Transportation. 
 
A completed application must (1) be dated and notarized; (2) be signed by each 
participating license holder; (3) list each premises at which the related event will be held; 
and (4) include any other document that the board requires. An individual need not be a 
resident of or registered voter in Baltimore City to be eligible for the permit. 
 
Within 7 days of receipt of a permit application, the board must grant or deny the permit 
or request additional information from the applicant. A permit may not be altered within 
14 days before the scheduled related event. 
 
Permit Fees 
 
The application fee for a permit is $50. The permit fee is payable when the permit is granted 
and is either $500 or $1,500, contingent on whether the Baltimore City Fire Marshal 
determines that the maximum capacity of the proposed event location is less than  
300 people or if the capacity is 300 or more people, respectively. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 20/ Page 3 
Penalties for Violations 
 
An individual who violates specified provisions of the application process noted above 
may not be granted a related event promoter’s permit for at least one year. 
 
For the offense of publicizing, selling tickets or imposing a cover charge for, organizing, 
operating, producing, facilitating, or staging a related event with the knowledge or reason 
to know that a related event promoter’s permit has not been obtained, the board must 
impose a fine of at least $1,000 and up to $3,000 and/or suspend the license. 
 
For a violation of the bill’s requirement that a State caterer’s licensee obtain a Class C per 
diem license before acting as a participating license holder at a related event, the Executive 
Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission must impose a fine of at least 
$1,000 and up to $3,000 and/or suspend the State caterer’s license. 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes local boards of license commissioners to issue special 
alcoholic beverages licenses for use during specified periods. Chapter 764 of 2019 
authorized the board to issue a related event promoter’s permit for social events related to 
and around the same time and location as the CIAA Basketball Tournament.  
Chapter 391 of 2023 extended the termination date of the related event promoter’s permit 
to June 30, 2025, and updated the application process and certain definitions associated 
with the permit. 
 
Additional Comments:  The 2026 CIAA Basketball Tournament is set to begin in 
Baltimore City on February 24. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 17 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3