START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 13 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 13 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Public Safety Employee Retirement 
Income (Supporting Our 9-1-1 Specialists Act) 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the public safety employee retirement income subtraction 
modification to include specified retirement income attributable to service as a 
9‑1‑1 specialist. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and 
beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s change with 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in FY 2027. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “9-1-1 specialist,” as it applies to the bill, has the meaning stated in 
§ 9‑262 of the Tax-Property Article (9-1-1 specialist local property tax credit). Specifically, 
a 9-1-1 specialist is an employee of a county public safety answering point, or an employee 
working in a county safety answering point, whose duties and responsibilities include 
(1) receiving and processing 9-1-1 requests for emergency assistance; (2) other support 
functions directly related to 9-1-1 requests for emergency assistance; or (3) dispatching 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 13/ Page 2 
law enforcement officers, fire rescue services, emergency medical services, and other 
public safety services to the scene of an emergency. 
 
Current Law:  As authorized by Chapters 3 and 4 of 2022, an individual who is at least 
55 years old on the last day of the tax year may claim a subtraction modification against 
the personal income tax for the first $15,000 of income received from an employee 
retirement system (within the meaning of the State’s standard pension exclusion, as 
discussed below) that is attributable to service as a public safety employee. “Public safety 
employee” means an individual who is a retired correctional officer; law enforcement 
officer; or fire, rescue, or emergency services personnel of the United States, the State, or 
a political subdivision of the State. “Emergency services personnel” means emergency 
medical technicians or paramedics. (Under the bill, this definition is expanded to include 
9‑1‑1 specialists.) As discussed below, an individual who is at least age 65, is totally 
disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may qualify for and claim the  
standard State pension exclusion for retirement income that is not excluded under the 
public safety employee retirement income subtraction. 
 
Maryland Pension Exclusion  
 
Under Maryland’s standard pension exclusion, an individual who is at least age 65, who is 
totally disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may subtract certain taxable pension 
and retirement annuity income from federal adjusted gross income for purposes of 
determining Maryland adjusted gross income. The maximum value of the subtraction is 
indexed to the maximum annual benefit payable under the Social Security Act  
($41,200 for 2025) and is reduced by the amount of any benefit payments received under 
the Social Security Act or Railroad Retirement Act (“Social Security offset”).  
 
The pension exclusion is limited to income received from an “employee retirement 
system,” which is defined as a plan (1) established and maintained by an employer for the 
benefit of its employees and (2) qualified under § 401(a), § 403, or § 457(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. This includes defined benefit and defined contribution pension 
plans, 401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, and 457(b) plans. Public safety employee retirement 
income that is excluded under the public safety employee retirement income subtraction 
modification is not taken into account for purposes of the standard pension exclusion. 
 
Other Tax Relief for Retirees and Seniors 
 
Social Security benefits and benefits received under the federal Railroad Retirement Act 
are totally exempt from Maryland income tax, though they may be partly taxable for federal 
income tax purposes. Other income tax relief provided to seniors include an additional 
exemption of $1,000 for individuals age 65 and older (in addition to the regular personal 
exemption) as well as the senior tax credit for qualifying taxpayers age 65 and older. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 13/ Page 3 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease by an indeterminate amount annually beginning in fiscal 2027 due to increased 
subtraction modifications claimed against the personal income tax. Due to data limitations, 
the precise effect on State and local revenues cannot be reliably estimated at this time. It is 
unknown how many taxpayers may become eligible for the subtraction modification as a 
result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 759 and HB 590 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 148 (Senators Kagan and Carozza) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Systems; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3