START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 38 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 38 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Financial Institutions - Licensing of Affiliated Insurance Producer-Mortgage 
Loan Originators - Alteration 
 
   
This bill allows an individual who originates loans on behalf of a single mortgage lender 
that is not a financial institution to be licensed as an “affiliated insurance 
producer‑mortgage loan originator (AIP-MLO)” under specified conditions. Any 
individual licensed under the bill is subject to the licensing and regulatory framework set 
forth in current law for AIP-MLOs who work for financial institutions. The bill makes 
conforming changes, including substituting “sponsor” for “employer” in relevant portions 
of current law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potentially minimal increase in special fund revenues due to license 
application and other related fees beginning in FY 2027. The Office of Financial 
Regulation (OFR) can otherwise implement the bill with existing budgeted resources.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Definitions 
 
A “financial institution” refers to any bank, trust company, savings bank, savings and loan 
association, or credit union incorporated or chartered under the laws of this State or the 
United States or any other-state bank having a branch in this State.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 38/ Page 2 
A “mortgage lender” means any person who (1) is a mortgage broker; (2) makes a mortgage 
loan to any person; or (3) is a mortgage servicer. A “mortgage lender” does not include 
(1) a financial institution that accepts deposits and is regulated under Title 3, 4, 5, or 6 of 
the Financial Institutions Article; (2) the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; 
(3) the Federal Nation Mortgage Association; (4) the Government National Mortgage 
Association; (5) any person engaged exclusively in the acquisition of all or any portion of 
a mortgage loan under any federal, State, or local governmental program of mortgage loan 
purchases; or (6) an affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator, as specified. 
 
An “affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator” is an individual who 
(1) originates mortgage loans only on behalf of a single financial institution approved by 
OFR; (2) is a licensed insurance producer in good standing; and (3) holds an appointment 
as an insurance producer for an insurer that controls, or is controlled by, the aforementioned 
financial institution or an approved mortgage lender licensee approved by OFR. 
 
When approving a financial institution or mortgage lender licensee, OFR must determine 
if the financial institution or licensee is in good standing with their primary state or federal 
regulator (including OFR for licensees) and is in material compliance with applicable State 
and federal law. OFR must notify a financial institution or a mortgage lender licensee of 
approval in writing. 
 
Among other requirements, applications to be an AIP-MLO must identify:   
 
 
the financial institution; 
 
if applicable, the mortgage lender licensee; and 
 
the insurer with which the applicant holds an appointment. 
 
The application must be signed by an authorized representative of the financial institution 
or the mortgage lender licensee identified in the application, as applicable. 
 
A licensed affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator must limit their activities 
to originating mortgage loans only on behalf of a single financial institution approved by 
OFR. 
 
The financial institution identified in a licensee’s license application or, if a mortgage 
lender licensee is identified in a licensee’s license application, the mortgage lender licensee 
must:  (1) supervise the licensee, as specified; (2) be held jointly and severally liable with 
the licensee for claims arising out of the licensee’s mortgage loan origination activities; 
and (3) meet, or cause the licensee to meet, surety bond requirements in current law, as 
specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 38/ Page 3 
Affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originators are exempt from certain 
provisions of law applicable to mortgage loan originator licensees. Furthermore, an 
affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator is not considered a mortgage lender 
within the scope of the Maryland Mortgage Lender Law. A licensee who is an affiliated 
insurance producer-mortgage loan originator must also maintain a surety bond that meets 
specified requirements. 
 
A licensed affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator may not, among other 
things, aid or assist a borrower to obtain a mortgage loan from a financial institution other 
than the financial institution identified in the licensee’s license application. 
 
A licensed affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator may forward a check to 
the financial institution identified in the licensee’s license application if the check is:  
(1) made payable to the financial institution; (2) from an applicant for a mortgage loan; and 
(3) in connection with an application for a mortgage loan to cover certain costs. 
 
The Office of Financial Regulation 
 
OFR is responsible for licensing and regulating mortgage lenders, brokers, servicers and 
loan originators, and other financial institutions. The office also supervises and regulates 
State-chartered financial institutions including State-chartered banks, credit unions, and 
trust companies. Supervision includes periodic on-site evaluations as well as off-site 
monitoring programs. The office responds to consumer complaints and oversees retail 
credit accounts, retail installment contracts, and credit grantor contracts. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill expands eligibility for AIP-MLO licensure, which carries a 
licensing fee of $700. OFR advises that it has not received any applications for AIP-MLO 
licenses since 2020, with the number of licensees peaking at 27 in 2010. Based on this 
information, this analysis assumes that few if any entities apply for an AIP-MLO license 
authorized by the bill. Based on this assumption, any impact on revenues is anticipated to 
be minimal. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill replaces references to “employer” with “sponsor” 
numerous times throughout § 11-603.1 of the Financial Institutions Article, presumably 
because some AIP-MLOs are independent contractors. However, the term sponsor is never 
defined. The Maryland Department of Labor advises that, as it is used in the bill, the term 
sponsor is not used in other relevant areas of current law.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 38/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4