START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 70 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 70 
(Delegate Healey) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Highway Administration - Traffic Calming Devices - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the State Highway Administration (SHA) to study and make 
recommendations on the implementation of a consistent statewide policy for the use of 
traffic calming devices on highway in the State. By December 1, 2026, SHA must report 
its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by an estimated 
$12,500 in FY 2026 and $62,500 in FY 2027. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
12,500 
62,500 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($12,500) 
($62,500) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must include:   
 
 
research on best practices for the implementation and use of traffic calming devices;  
 
recommended guidelines for determining the circumstances under which a traffic 
calming device should be used; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 70/ Page 2 
 
recommendations on providing technical support to counties and municipalities on 
the implementation and use of traffic calming devices; and  
 
a list of academic, nonprofit, or other entities that could provide assistance in the 
development and implementation of a statewide policy on the use of traffic calming 
devices. 
 
Current Law:  “Traffic calming device” means a physical highway measure used to 
reduce vehicle speed and increase safety for bicyclists, motorists, and pedestrians; it 
includes a speed bump, a raised crosswalk, a traffic circle, and a narrowed road. In 
consultation with appropriate county and municipal authorities, SHA must compile best 
practices for siting, constructing, and maintaining traffic calming devices that address the 
engineering and design of traffic calming devices and the costs and benefits of various 
methods of traffic calming. 
 
SHA must coordinate and act as a clearinghouse for best practices for siting, constructing, 
and maintaining traffic calming devices, and based on the best practices, publish and 
periodically update information about the best practices, including the estimated costs of 
construction for each traffic calming device. SHA must provide information on the best 
practices to counties and municipalities upon request.  
 
State Expenditures:  In the execution of its duties, the Maryland Department of 
Transportation and SHA often engage expert consultants to handle research, evaluations, 
studies, and staffing duties. Even though SHA already has publicly available 
documentation on the use of traffic calming devices on State highways, in order to 
implement the bill, SHA anticipates engaging a consultant to conduct the required study, 
which will focus specifically on the implementation of traffic calming devices. As a result, 
TTF expenditures increase by an estimated $12,500 in fiscal 2026 and $62,500 in  
fiscal 2027 to hire a consultant to conduct the required study. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 70/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3