START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 75 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 75 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Video Lottery Operations - Prohibitions on Campaign Contributions - Parity Act 
 
 
This bill repeals the prohibition against an applicant for, or a holder of, a video lottery 
operation license, or a person who owns an interest in the operation of a video lottery 
facility in the State, making a contribution, directly or indirectly, to (1) the campaign 
finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public office in the State or (2) any other 
campaign finance entity organized in support of a candidate for any nonfederal public 
office in the State. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Campaign Finance Entities and Contributions 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article must be conducted through a campaign finance entity 
(defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the Election Law Article). 
An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration of intent until the 
individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized candidate campaign 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 75/ Page 2 
committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to promote the 
candidate’s candidacy). 
 
Generally, a person may not make, either directly or indirectly, aggregate contributions of 
more than $6,000 to any one campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle. 
Contributions by two or more business entities are considered as being made by 
one contributor if (1) one business entity is a wholly owned subsidiary of another or (2) the 
business entities are owned or controlled by at least 80% of the same individuals or 
business entities. “Business entity” includes a corporation, a sole proprietorship, a general 
partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a real estate investment trust, 
or other entity. 
 
The contribution limit does not apply to contributions to ballot issue committees (campaign 
finance entities formed to promote the success or defeat of a ballot question or prospective 
ballot question). 
 
Video Lottery Contribution Prohibition 
 
Under State campaign finance law, an applicant for, or holder of, a video lottery operation 
license under Title 9, Subtitle 1A (“Video Lottery Terminals”) of the State Government 
Article, or a person who owns an interest in the operation of a video lottery facility (under 
Subtitle 1A) in this State, may not, directly or indirectly, make a contribution to (1) the 
campaign finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public office in the State or 
(2) any other campaign finance entity organized in support of a candidate for any 
nonfederal public office in the State. “Own” means having a beneficial or proprietary 
interest of at least 5% in the property or business of an applicant or licensee. This 
prohibition was enacted under Chapter 1 of the second special session of 2012, which 
expanded commercial gaming in the State. 
 
State Board of Elections regulations establish that a person may not make any contributions 
to a political committee organized in support of a nonfederal candidate for the rest of the 
election cycle once that person holds or controls at least a 5% interest in a property or 
business that is an applicant for, or holder of, a video lottery operation license. If the person 
is a corporation, any wholly owned direct or indirect subsidiary or any other entity owned 
or controlled by persons owning at least 80% of the ownership interests in the corporation, 
at any time during the election cycle, may not make any contributions to a political 
committee organized in support of a nonfederal candidate for the rest of the election cycle. 
If the person is an individual, the prohibition does not apply to any legal entity owned or 
controlled by that individual if the legal entity (1) is organized for legitimate business 
purposes unrelated to gaming and (2) does not have a direct interest or ownership in the 
property or business of an applicant or holder of a video lottery operation license. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 75/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 160 of 2025; HB 132 of 2024; and HB 54 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland State Lottery and 
Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3