START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 57 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 57 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - Maryland Civic Excellence Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Civic Excellence Program in the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) as a voluntary program in which local school systems 
may recognize students and public schools that promote the civic readiness and civic 
engagement of students in public schools. By the 2027-2028 school year, MSDE, in 
consultation with experts and stakeholders, must develop guidelines to assist participating 
local school systems to determine student proficiency in civics and civic literacy. A 
participating local school system that determines a student has fulfilled the criteria under 
the program may (1) award the student a Seal of Civic Excellence and (2) recognize the 
award by awarding a cord or medal or by attaching other insignia on the student’s high 
school diploma. Participating local school systems may collaborate with specified 
organizations or institutions to support the implementation of the program. By July 1, 2028, 
and each July 1, thereafter, each participating local school system must submit to MSDE a 
report based on the most recently completed school year. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can develop guidelines with existing resources to assist participating 
local school systems in determining student proficiency in civics and civic literacy. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that a local school system chooses to participate, local 
expenditures may increase and operations may be affected. However, any expenditures or 
operational effects are discretionary. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 57/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local school systems must use the guidelines established by MSDE to 
establish (1) a Maryland Civic Excellence Program; (2) application criteria to administer 
the program; and (3) criteria for awarding a student the Seal of Civic Excellence. 
 
A participating local school system that determines a student has fulfilled the criteria under 
the program may (1) award the student a Seal of Civic Excellence and (2) recognize the 
award by awarding a cord or medal or by attaching other insignia on the student’s  
high school diploma. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland high schools offer special awards to students. Some of these are 
statewide recognitions including the Seal of Biliteracy. Local school systems and specific 
schools also confer departmental awards in various disciplines. According to regulations, 
to graduate, a student must complete 75 service-learning hours or complete a locally 
designed program in student service that has been approved by the State Superintendent of 
Schools. Some local school systems award a certificate or other recognition for exceeding 
this requirement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 8 and HB 72 of 2025; SB 762 of 2024 and SB 271 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 204 (Senators Kagan and Ready) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico 
County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2