START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 42 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 42 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health 
 
 
Health Occupations - State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners - Revisions 
 
 
This bill authorizes an individual registered as a massage therapy practitioner by the  
State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners to continue to practice under their registration 
beyond October 31, 2026. The bill also (1) alters the educational requirements for 
applicants for a license to practice massage therapy who graduated from an out-of-state 
program; (2) clarifies which entities may accredit a massage therapy curriculum; 
(3) repeals the requirement that the board follow hearing provisions to impose a specified 
administrative penalty; (4) alters reinstatement provisions; and (5) requires licensees or 
registered practitioners on inactive status to submit to a criminal history records check for 
reinstatement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any change in State activities does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Licensure and Registration 
 
Under current law, an individual may practice massage therapy in the State if the individual 
is either (1) licensed by the board or (2) registered by the board to practice massage therapy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 42/ Page 2 
in a non-health care setting. However, Chapters 705 and 706 of 2022 phase out the 
registered massage practitioner credential. Beginning November 1, 2026, an individual 
must be licensed by the board to practice massage therapy in the State.  
 
The bill repeals this change and authorizes individuals registered by the board to continue 
practicing massage therapy under their registration beyond October 31, 2026. The bill also 
repeals the qualifications for a new registration as a massage therapy practitioner, which 
expired September 30, 2024. An individual may continue to practice in a setting that is not 
a health care setting under an existing massage therapy registration. 
 
Under current law, by October 31, 2026, the board must convert the registration of an 
individual registered as a massage practitioner to a license to practice massage therapy if 
the individual complies with board regulations. The bill repeals the October 31, 2026 
deadline for conversion but preserves the requirement that the board convert a registration 
to a license if a registered practitioner meets the regulatory requirements 
(COMAR 10.65.01.06). 
 
Education Requirements 
 
Under current law, to qualify for a license, an applicant must have graduated from an 
institution of postsecondary education approved by the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission with at least 750 contact hours of education in a curriculum (1) approved by 
the board; (2) endorsed by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA) 
or an equivalent entity; and (3) accredited by an institutional accreditation agency 
recognized by the U.S. Department of Education. The bill adds that a curriculum can be 
accredited by another entity that accredits programs offering instruction in massage 
therapy. 
 
The bill also adds exceptions to the educational qualifications for an applicant who 
graduated from an out-of-state program in massage therapy. Such an applicant must have 
graduated from a program for the study of massage therapy that: 
 
 
has been approved by (1) the higher education commission of the state where the 
program occurred or (2) a similar entity that regulates institutions of postsecondary 
education; 
 
has been endorsed by COMTA or an equivalent entity; 
 
is accredited by an institutional accreditation agency recognized by (1) the  
U.S. Department of Education or (2) another entity that accredits programs offering 
instruction in massage therapy; and 
 
requires at least 750 contact hours that include the same areas of content as required 
for an in-state program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 42/ Page 3 
If the out-of-state applicant does not meet the contact hour requirement, they may 
supplement the required hours with (1) contact hours from a board-approved program of 
study of massage therapy on a one-hour to one-hour basis; (2) board-approved continuing 
education hours on a one-hour to one-hour basis; or (3) documented evidence of 
completing at least 1,000 licensed, out-of-state hours of hands-on massage therapy within 
the immediately preceding two years. 
 
Administrative Penalty 
 
Under current law, each licensed massage therapist or registered massage practitioner must 
notify the board in writing of any change in their name or address within 60 days. Subject 
to hearing provisions, the board may impose a $100 administrative penalty on a licensee 
or registration holder who fails to notify the board of such a change within 60 days. 
 
The bill removes the requirement that the imposition of the penalty be subject to 
disciplinary hearing provisions that are otherwise required for the board to deny a license 
or registration, reprimand a licensee or registration holder, place a licensee or registration 
holder on probation, or suspend a licensee or registration holder. 
 
Renewal and Reinstatement 
 
Under current law, if a licensee or registration holder fails to renew, the board must 
reinstate the license or registration if the former licensee or registration holder applies for 
reinstatement within five years and meets other renewal requirements. After five years, the 
board may not reinstate a license or registration. However, the former licensee or registered 
practitioner may apply for a new license or registration by meeting the requirements for a 
new license or registration and any additional requirements determined by the board. 
 
The bill removes the option for a former registered practitioner to apply for a new 
registration after five years (as new registrations are no longer issued by the board). Instead, 
a former registered practitioner may be reinstated by meeting the requirements for 
licensure in effect for a new license and any additional requirements determined by the 
board. Additionally, a registered practitioner on inactive status who fails to reactivate 
within five years may reactivate the registration only by meeting the requirements for new 
licensure and any additional requirements determined by the board. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Registered massage practitioners may continue to practice under 
their registration beyond October 31, 2026, rather than completing additional requirements 
for licensure as a massage therapist. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 42/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4