START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 37

P5 6lr1164
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Schindler
Requested: October 10, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Assembly – Employment and Leave Protection for Members

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting an employer from depriving of employment or taking
4 certain other actions against an employee who is a member of the General Assembly
5 and who loses employment time to performing responsibilities as a member of the
6 General Assembly; and generally relating to employment and leave protection for
7 members of the General Assembly.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – State Government
10 Section 2–105
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – State Government

16 2–105.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER OF THE
18 GENERAL ASSEMBLY” DOES NOT INCLUDE CAMPAIGNING ON BEHALF OF THE
19 MEMBER OR ANOTHER CANDIDATE FOR ELECTED OFFICE.

20 (2) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE
21 GENERAL ASSEMBLY IS IN SESSION.

22 (3) AN EMPLOYER MAY NOT:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0037*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 37

1 (I) DEPRIVE AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS A MEMBER OF THE
2 GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF EMPLOYMENT OR COERCE, INTIMIDATE, OR THREATEN TO
3 DISCHARGE AN INDIVIDUAL BECAUSE THE INDIVIDUAL:

4 1. LOSES EMPLOYMENT TIME TO PERFORMING
5 RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; OR

6 2. EXERCISES A RIGHT TO REFRAIN FROM WORK UNDER
7 ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH;

8 (II) REQUIRE AN INDIVIDUAL WHO SPENT AT LEAST 4 HOURS,
9 INCLUDING TRAVELING TIME, TO PERFORM RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER OF
10 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO WORK AN EMPLOYMENT SHIFT THAT BEGINS:

11 1. ON OR AFTER 5 P.M. ON THE DAY OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S
12 RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER; OR

13 2. BEFORE 3 A.M. ON THE DAY FOLLOWING THE
14 INDIVIDUAL’S RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER; OR

15 (III) REQUIRE AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS A MEMBER OF THE
16 GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO USE THE EMPLOYEE’S ANNUAL, SICK, OR VACATION LEAVE
17 TO PERFORM RESPONSIBILITIES AS A MEMBER.

18 (4) AN EMPLOYER WHO VIOLATES THIS SUBSECTION IS SUBJECT TO A
19 FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000.

20 (B) While the General Assembly is in session, IN ADDITION TO THE
21 REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, each member or employee of
22 the General Assembly who also is employed by the State or any of its political subdivisions:

23 (1) is entitled automatically to a leave of absence from the other
24 employment; and

25 (2) except for a right to a salary or wages, may not be deprived of or
26 otherwise have impaired any incident of the employment, including tenure, seniority,
27 annual or sick leave, promotional rights, or rights to salary increments.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2