START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Investor-Owned Electric, Gas, and Gas and Electric Companies - Cost Recovery 
- Limitations 
 
 
This bill prohibits an investor‑owned electric, gas, or combination gas and electric 
company from recovering through rates any costs associated with (1) employee bonuses, 
as defined, except under specified conditions, or (2) “compensation” for supervisors that 
exceeds 110% of the maximum annual salary payable to a member of the Public Service 
Commission (PSC). The bill also requires the board of directors of each investor‑owned 
electric, gas, and combination gas and electric company to adopt a company‑wide policy 
placing reasonable cost limitations on expenditures for entertainment and events, office 
and facility renovations, transportation services, staff development activities or events, 
performance incentives, and other activities outside the scope of the normal course of 
business operations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State utility expenditures may decrease, as discussed in the Additional 
Comments below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local utility expenditures may decrease, as discussed in the Additional 
Comments below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. Utility costs may decrease, as discussed in the 
Additional Comments below. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An investor-owned electric, gas, or combination gas and electric company 
may recover the costs associated with paying an employee a bonus through rates if the 
employee (1) has a written employment contract that was executed by December 31, 2025, 
or (2) is covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement. 
 
“Compensation” means a form of payment or consideration conveyed to or for the benefit 
of a supervisor in connection with the supervisor’s work for a public service company. The 
term includes (1) direct and indirect methods of conferring benefits; (2) cash and noncash 
benefits; (3) salary, bonuses, period payments, and severance pay; and (4) the value of a 
perquisite, compensatory or paid leave, or other benefit, except as specified. 
“Compensation” does not include any expenditure of a public service company for health, 
medical, or life insurance or disability pay. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Costs Excluded from Recovery through Rates 
 
Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 prohibit an investor-owned electric, gas, or combination gas 
and electric company from recovering through rates any cost associated with:   
 
 
membership, dues, sponsorships, or contributions to an industry trade association, 
group, or related entity exempt under § 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code; or 
 
the acquisition, use, or allocation of costs associated with a private plane that is 
owned or leased by the company or its holding company. 
 
Under PSC regulations, charitable contributions, penalties, and lobbying expenses are not 
allowed for rate-making purposes. Additionally, expenses classified as promotional, 
community affairs, or institutional must be excluded as an expense for rate-making 
purposes unless a utility demonstrates during a rate case proceeding that a particular item 
of advertising or promotional expenditure was directly beneficial to the ratepayer and in 
the public interest. 
 
Public Service Company Rates 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1/ Page 3 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article; 
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and  
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
Additional Comments:  Gas and/or electric utility rates may decrease – or future rate 
increases may be minimized – as a result of the bill’s prohibitions on rate recovery. The 
extent to which the bill results in a decrease in rates cannot be reliably estimated at this 
time. In any event, utility customers, including the State, local governments, and  
small businesses, benefit from any decrease in rates that may result from the bill’s changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 2 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3