START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 88 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 88 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance – Bulk Purchasing Pools for Prescription Drugs 
 
 
This bill authorizes certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations that provide coverage for prescription drugs and devices (including through 
a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM)) to join a bulk purchasing pool for prescription drugs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Per § 2-502.1 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, the Department 
of Budget and Management (DBM) must establish a Maryland Rx Program to achieve 
savings on prescription drugs for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare 
Benefits Program. Maryland Rx must seek savings through a preferred list of covered 
prescription drugs, rebates from drug manufacturers, negotiated discounts, and other 
cost‑saving measures. DBM must use a reverse auction to select a PBM or other entity to 
administer the program. 
 
Nationally, there are several multi-state bulk purchasing pools for prescription drugs, 
including the Medicaid-focused National Medicaid Pooling Initiative, Top Dollar Program 
(TOP$), and Sovereign States Drug Consortium, as well as the Minnesota Multistate 
Contracting Alliance for Pharmacy (MMCAP) – a 50-state purchasing pool consisting of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 88/ Page 2 
non-Medicaid state and local government agencies. Maryland currently participates in 
TOP$ and MMCAP. Health insurance carriers typically use PBMs to negotiate lower prices 
for prescription drugs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2