START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 174

M1, R4 6lr1298
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 145

By: Delegate Cardin
Requested: October 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motor Vehicles and Marine Vessels – Transfer–on–Death Designations

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing an individual who is the sole owner of a marine vessel or
4 multiple individuals who co–own a marine vessel under certain ownership
5 registrations to apply to the Department of Natural Resources to designate a
6 beneficiary to take ownership of the marine vessel on the death of the owner or each
7 co–owner; altering certain provisions of law governing the transfer–on–death
8 designation for motor vehicles to allow multiple individuals who co–own a motor
9 vehicle under certain ownership registrations to designate a transfer–on–death
10 beneficiary; and generally relating to transfer–on–death beneficiaries for motor
11 vehicles and marine vessels.

12 BY adding to
13 Article – Natural Resources
14 Section 8–720.1
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Transportation
19 Section 13–115
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Article – Natural Resources

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0174*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 174

1 8–720.1.

2 (A) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SOLE OWNER OF A VESSEL OR MULTIPLE
3 INDIVIDUALS WHO CO–OWN A VESSEL AS JOINT TENANTS WITH RIGHT OF
4 SURVIVORSHIP OR TENANTS BY THE ENTIRETY MAY APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT TO
5 DESIGNATE A BENEFICIARY TO TAKE OWNERSHIP OF THE VESSEL ON THE DEATH OF
6 THE SOLE OWNER OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

7 (B) THE DESIGNATION OF A BENEFICIARY MAY BE SHOWN BY THE WORDS
8 “TRANSFER–ON–DEATH” OR THE ABBREVIATION “TOD” AFTER THE NAME OF THE
9 REGISTERED OWNER ON A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.

10 (C) (1) THE DESIGNATION OF A BENEFICIARY FOR A VESSEL DOES NOT
11 AFFECT THE OWNERSHIP OF THE VESSEL UNTIL THE DEATH OF THE SOLE OWNER
12 OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER OF THE VESSEL.

13 (2) THE DESIGNATION OF A BENEFICIARY MAY BE REVOKED OR
14 CHANGED AT ANY TIME BEFORE THE DEATH OF THE SOLE OWNER OR THE LAST
15 SURVIVING CO–OWNER WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE BENEFICIARY BY APPLYING
16 TO THE DEPARTMENT.

17 (D) THE DESIGNATION OF A BENEFICIARY IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE
18 SUPPORTED BY CONSIDERATION AND THE CERTIFICATE OF TITLE OF THE VESSEL
19 FOR WHICH THE DESIGNATION IS MADE IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE DELIVERED TO THE
20 BENEFICIARY IN ORDER FOR THE DESIGNATION TO BE EFFECTIVE.

21 (E) ON THE DEATH OF THE SOLE OWNER OR THE LAST SURVIVING
22 CO–OWNER OF A VESSEL WHO HAS DESIGNATED A BENEFICIARY, OWNERSHIP OF
23 THE VESSEL SHALL PASS TO THE BENEFICIARY IF THE BENEFICIARY SURVIVES THE
24 SOLE OWNER OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

25 (F) (1) A DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY WHO SURVIVES THE SOLE OWNER
26 OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER SHALL APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A NEW
27 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE FOR THE VESSEL.

28 (2) AN APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE BY A BENEFICIARY
29 FOLLOWING THE DEATH OF THE SOLE OWNER OR LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER
30 SHALL INCLUDE:

31 (I) THE ORIGINAL CERTIFICATE OF TITLE DESIGNATING THE
32 BENEFICIARY;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 174 3

1 (II) A DEATH CERTIFICATE FOR THE DECEASED SOLE OWNER
2 OR EACH DECEASED CO–OWNER;

3 (III) PROOF OF THE IDENTITY OF THE BENEFICIARY; AND

4 (IV) ANY APPLICABLE TAXES OR FEES.

5 (G) IF A DESIGNATED BENEFICIARY DOES NOT SURVIVE THE DEATH OF THE
6 SOLE OWNER OR LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER, THE VESSEL IS PART OF THE ESTATE
7 OF THE DECEASED OWNER OR LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

8 (H) THIS SECTION DOES NOT LIMIT THE RIGHTS OF CREDITORS OF VESSEL
9 OWNERS AGAINST BENEFICIARIES AND OTHER TRANSFEREES UNDER OTHER LAWS
10 OF THE STATE.

11 (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY CHARGE A FEE, NOT TO EXCEED ITS COSTS, FOR
12 ISSUING A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE UNDER THIS SECTION.

13 (J) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
14 SECTION.

15 Article – Transportation

16 13–115.

17 (a) An individual who is the sole owner of a motor vehicle OR MULTIPLE
18 INDIVIDUALS WHO CO–OWN A MOTOR VEHICLE AS JOINT TENANTS WITH RIGHT OF
19 SURVIVORSHIP OR TENANTS BY THE ENTIRETY may apply to the Administration to
20 designate a beneficiary to take ownership of the motor vehicle on the death of the SOLE
21 owner OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

22 (b) The designation of a beneficiary may be shown by the words
23 “transfer–on–death” or the abbreviation “TOD” after the name of the registered owner on
24 a certificate of title.

25 (c) (1) The designation of a beneficiary for a motor vehicle does not affect the
26 ownership of the motor vehicle until the death of the SOLE owner OR THE LAST
27 SURVIVING CO–OWNER of the motor vehicle.

28 (2) [The owner of a motor vehicle may cancel or change the designation of
29 a beneficiary at any time] THE DESIGNATION OF A BENEFICIARY MAY BE REVOKED OR
30 CHANGED AT ANY TIME BEFORE THE DEATH OF THE SOLE OWNER OR THE LAST
31 SURVIVING CO–OWNER without the consent of the beneficiary by applying to the
32 Administration.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 174

1 (d) The designation of a beneficiary is not required to be supported by
2 consideration, and the certificate of title of the motor vehicle for which the designation is
3 made is not required to be delivered to the beneficiary in order for the designation to be
4 effective.

5 (e) On the death of the SOLE owner OR THE LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER of a
6 motor vehicle who has designated a beneficiary, ownership of [a] THE motor vehicle shall
7 pass to the beneficiary if the beneficiary survives the SOLE owner OR THE LAST
8 SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

9 (f) (1) A designated beneficiary who survives the SOLE owner OR THE LAST
10 SURVIVING CO–OWNER shall apply to the Administration for a new certificate of title for
11 the motor vehicle.

12 (2) An application for a certificate of title by a beneficiary following the
13 death of the SOLE owner OR LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER shall include:

14 (i) The original certificate of title designating the beneficiary;

15 (ii) A death certificate for the deceased SOLE owner OR EACH
16 DECEASED CO–OWNER;

17 (iii) Proof of the identity of the beneficiary; and

18 (iv) Any applicable taxes or fees.

19 (g) If a designated beneficiary does not survive the death of the SOLE owner OR
20 LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER, the motor vehicle is part of the estate of the deceased owner
21 OR LAST SURVIVING CO–OWNER.

22 (h) This section does not limit the rights of creditors of motor vehicle owners
23 against beneficiaries and other transferees under other laws of this State.

24 (i) The Administration may charge a fee, not to exceed its costs, for issuing a
25 certificate of title under this section.

26 (j) The Administration may adopt regulations to carry out this section.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
28 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4