START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 186

M2 6lr1016
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Bouchat, Buckel, Fair, Grammer, Hornberger, Pippy, Valentine,
and Wivell
Requested: September 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Natural Resources – Bow Hunting – Sundays

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Department of Natural Resources to allow statewide a
4 person to hunt deer on Sundays throughout the deer bow hunting season and to hunt
5 turkey using a bow and arrow on Sundays throughout the turkey hunting season;
6 and generally relating to bow hunting on Sundays.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Natural Resources
9 Section 10–410(a)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Natural Resources

15 10–410.

16 (a) (1) (i) The Department may allow a person to hunt on each Sunday of
17 the game bird and game mammal seasons in:

18 1. Allegany County;

19 2. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Calvert
20 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0186*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 186

1 3. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Caroline
2 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

3 4. Cecil County;

4 5. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Charles
5 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

6 6. Subject to subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, Dorchester
7 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

8 7. Garrett County;

9 8. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Queen
10 Anne’s County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

11 9. St. Mary’s County;

12 10. Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Somerset
13 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.;

14 11. Washington County;

15 12. Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Worcester
16 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.; and

17 13. Subject to subparagraph (v) of this paragraph, Wicomico
18 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.

19 (ii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)10 and 12 of this
20 paragraph do not apply:

21 1. On each Sunday of the deer firearms season; [and]

22 2. On [the last three Sundays in October and the first two
23 Sundays in November] EACH SUNDAY of the deer bow hunting season; AND

24 3. ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE TURKEY HUNTING SEASON
25 FOR A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A BOW AND ARROW.

26 (iii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)2, 3, 5, and 8 of this
27 paragraph do not apply:

28 1. On each Sunday [during] OF the deer firearms season;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 186 3

1 2. On [the last three Sundays in October and the first two
2 Sundays in November during] EACH SUNDAY OF the deer bow hunting season; and

3 3. A. ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE TURKEY HUNTING
4 SEASON FOR A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A BOW AND ARROW; AND

5 B. On each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season FOR
6 A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A HUNTING DEVICE OTHER THAN A BOW AND
7 ARROW.

8 (iv) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)6 of this paragraph
9 do not apply:

10 1. On each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from the first
11 Sunday in October through the second Sunday in January, inclusive; [and]

12 2. ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE DEER BOW HUNTING
13 SEASON; AND

14 3. A. ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE TURKEY HUNTING
15 SEASON FOR A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A BOW AND ARROW; AND

16 B. On each Sunday of the spring turkey hunting season FOR
17 A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A HUNTING DEVICE OTHER THAN A BOW AND
18 ARROW.

19 (v) The time restrictions under subparagraph [(i)(13)] (I)13 of this
20 paragraph do not apply:

21 1. On the first Sunday of the deer firearms season; [and]

22 2. On [the last three Sundays in October and the first two
23 Sundays in November] EACH SUNDAY of the deer bow hunting season; AND

24 3. ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE TURKEY HUNTING SEASON
25 FOR A PERSON HUNTING TURKEY USING A BOW AND ARROW.

26 (2) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer on each Sunday of the
27 deer hunting seasons from the first Sunday in October through the second Sunday in
28 January, inclusive, AND ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE DEER BOW HUNTING SEASON, in:

29 (i) Carroll County; and

30 (ii) Frederick County.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 186

1 (3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the Department
2 may allow a person to hunt deer on each Sunday of the deer hunting seasons from 30
3 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m. in:

4 1. Kent County;

5 2. Montgomery County; and

6 3. Talbot County.

7 (ii) The time restrictions under this paragraph do not apply:

8 1. To a participant in a junior deer hunt authorized under
9 this subtitle;

10 2. On one Sunday designated by the Department during the
11 deer firearms season;

12 3. In Kent County, on each Sunday [during] OF the deer bow
13 hunting season and the deer muzzle loader season;

14 4. In Montgomery County, on [one Sunday designated by the
15 Department during] EACH SUNDAY OF the deer bow hunting season; and

16 5. In Talbot County, on [the last three Sundays in October
17 and the first two Sundays in November during] EACH SUNDAY OF the DEER bow hunting
18 season.

19 (4) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer during the deer
20 firearms season:

21 (i) On each Sunday in Harford County; and

22 (ii) On the first Sunday in Anne Arundel County.

23 (5) The Department may allow a person to hunt deer [during the deer bow
24 hunting season on:

25 (i) The last three Sundays in October and the first two Sundays in
26 November in Harford County; and

27 (ii) The first Sunday in November in Anne Arundel County] ON
28 EACH SUNDAY OF THE DEER BOW HUNTING SEASON IN:

29 (I) ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 186 5

1 (II) BALTIMORE CITY;

2 (III) BALTIMORE COUNTY;

3 (IV) HARFORD COUNTY;

4 (V) HOWARD COUNTY; AND

5 (VI) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

6 (6) (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ALLOW A PERSON TO HUNT TURKEY
7 USING A BOW AND ARROW ON EACH SUNDAY OF THE TURKEY HUNTING SEASON IN:

8 1. ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY;

9 2. BALTIMORE CITY;

10 3. BALTIMORE COUNTY;

11 4. CARROLL COUNTY;

12 5. FREDERICK COUNTY;

13 6. HARFORD COUNTY;

14 7. HOWARD COUNTY;

15 8. KENT COUNTY;

16 9. MONTGOMERY COUNTY;

17 10. PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY; AND

18 11. TALBOT COUNTY.

19 (II) The Department may allow a person to hunt turkey USING A
20 HUNTING DEVICE OTHER THAN A BOW AND ARROW on each Sunday of the spring turkey
21 hunting season in:

22 [(i)] 1. Carroll County;

23 [(ii)] 2. Kent County; and
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 186

1 [(iii)] 3. Talbot County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30
2 a.m.

3 (7) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, the Department
4 may allow a person with a deer management permit to shoot deer on any Sunday
5 throughout the year in accordance with the terms of the permit.

6 (8) The Department may allow a person using a State certified raptor to
7 hunt game birds or mammals on each Sunday during the open season for the game birds
8 or mammals.

9 (9) The Department may allow an unarmed person participating in an
10 organized fox chase to chase foxes on Sunday.

11 (10) The Department may allow a person shooting pen–reared game birds
12 or tower–released flighted mallard ducks to hunt on Sunday at a regulated shooting ground
13 in accordance with § 10–906 of this title.

14 (11) The Department may allow a person who is 16 years old or younger to
15 hunt on Sunday if participating in a junior hunt established by the Department in
16 accordance with this subtitle.

17 (12) Except as provided in paragraphs (5), (6), AND (8) through (10) of this
18 subsection and subject to paragraph (7) of this subsection, a person may not hunt on Sunday
19 in:

20 (i) Baltimore City;

21 (ii) Baltimore County;

22 (iii) Howard County; or

23 (iv) Prince George’s County.

24 (13) A person may not hunt migratory game birds on Sunday.

25 (14) A person may not hunt on public land within the State park system on
26 Sunday.

27 (15) (i) The Department may not allow a person to hunt on public land
28 designated for hunting by the Department on Sunday except in:

29 1. Allegany County;

30 2. Cecil County;

31 3. Garrett County;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 186 7

1 4. St. Mary’s County;

2 5. Washington County;

3 6. Dorchester County, for turkey during the spring turkey
4 hunting season;

5 7. Frederick County, for deer from the first Sunday in
6 October through the second Sunday in January of the following year, inclusive;

7 8. Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Somerset
8 County, on public land leased to a hunt club from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30
9 a.m.;

10 9. Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, Worcester
11 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.; and

12 10. Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, Wicomico
13 County, from 30 minutes before sunrise until 10:30 a.m.

14 (ii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)8 and 9 of this
15 paragraph do not apply:

16 1. On each Sunday of the deer firearms season; and

17 2. On the last three Sundays in October and the first two
18 Sundays in November of the deer bow hunting season.

19 (iii) The time restrictions under subparagraph (i)10 of this paragraph
20 do not apply:

21 1. On the first Sunday of the deer firearms season; and

22 2. On the last three Sundays in October and the first two
23 Sundays in November of the deer bow hunting season.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7