START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 157 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 157 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and D. Jones) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Campaign Finance - Exploratory Committees 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes exploratory committees in State campaign finance law:   
(1) defining them; (2) making them subject to provisions that apply to political committees 
but establishing that a donation to an exploratory committee is not subject to any limits; 
and (3) establishing additional requirements and limitations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing resources. Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually, beginning as early as FY 2026. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “exploratory committee” to mean an entity established by 
a potential candidate for a public office to determine the potential candidate’s viability for 
that public office. 
 
The bill establishes that specified provisions of Title 13 (Campaign Finance) of the  
Election Law Article that apply to a political committee also apply to an exploratory 
committee; however, a donation to an exploratory committee is not subject to any limits. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 157/ Page 2 
“Donation” means the gift or transfer, or promise of gift or transfer, of money or any other 
thing of value to a person that makes disbursements for an exploratory committee, subject 
to specified exceptions. 
 
An exploratory committee for an individual may receive funds and make disbursements to 
determine the individual’s viability for a public office. Disbursements may be made only 
for purposes related to determining the potential candidate’s viability for a public office 
and only for the following:  (1) conducting surveys or polls regarding the viability of the 
potential candidate for a public office; (2) direct mailings and other communications to 
potential voters; (3) employing staff; (4) establishing a website; (5) qualifying paid digital 
communications; (6) renting or leasing office space; (7) purchasing electronic equipment, 
including computers and telephones; and (8) security. An exploratory committee may not 
pay any expense in advance for goods or services to be used by the political committee of 
the potential candidate once the potential candidate registers an authorized candidate 
campaign committee. 
 
“Qualifying paid digital communication” means any electronic communication that  
(1) is campaign material; (2) is placed or promoted for a fee on an online platform; (3) is 
disseminated to 500 or more individuals; and (4) does not propose a commercial 
transaction. 
 
The bill modifies the definition of “campaign material” to refer to “a potential candidate” 
rather than “a prospective candidate,” so that the term means any material that (1) contains 
text, graphics, or other images; (2) relates to a candidate, a potential candidate, or the 
approval or rejection of a question or prospective question; and (3) is published, distributed, 
or disseminated. Existing statute, among other things, requires campaign material to 
contain an authority line identifying the person or campaign finance entity responsible for 
the campaign material. 
 
If an authorized candidate campaign committee results from the exploratory committee, 
any purchases made by the authorized candidate campaign committee of equipment from 
the exploratory committee must be made at the fair market value of the equipment. 
 
An exploratory committee must return any remaining funds within 120 days after  
(1) a potential candidate timely files a certificate of candidacy for a public office or publicly 
announces that the potential candidate has declined to file a certificate of candidacy for 
public office or (2) the deadline for filing a certificate of candidacy. 
 
An exploratory committee must return funds pro rata to the contributors or by paying the 
remaining funds to (1) if the potential candidate is a member of a political party, the 
State central committee of the political party or a local central committee of the political 
party; (2) if the potential candidate establishes an authorized candidate campaign 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 157/ Page 3 
committee, the authorized candidate campaign committee, subject to the contribution limit 
($6,000) applicable to an authorized candidate campaign committee; (3) a nonprofit 
organization exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; or 
(4) the Fair Campaign Financing Fund (FCFF) (which holds funds for public campaign 
financing of gubernatorial tickets under the Public Financing Act). 
 
Current Law: 
 
Statute 
 
 
Political Committees 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article must be conducted through a campaign finance entity 
(defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the Election Law Article). 
An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration of intent until the 
individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized candidate campaign 
committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to promote the 
candidate’s candidacy). 
 
“Political committee” is defined as a combination of two or more individuals that has as its 
major purpose promoting the success or defeat of a candidate, political party, question, or 
prospective question submitted to a vote at any election. 
 
Whether establishing and filing with SBE as an authorized candidate campaign committee 
or other campaign finance entity, a political committee must include with the filing a 
statement of organization that includes a statement of purpose specifying (1) each 
candidate or ballot question, if any, that the political committee was formed to promote or 
defeat; (2) the identity of each special interest, including any business or occupation, that 
the organizers of or contributors to the political committee have in common; and 
(3) whether the political committee will participate in presidential, gubernatorial, 
Baltimore City, or multiple elections. 
 
For each election in which a campaign finance entity participates, it generally must file 
campaign finance reports at various times prior to and after the primary and 
general elections, as well as an annual report. The reports must contain information 
required by SBE with respect to all contributions received and all expenditures made by or 
on behalf of the campaign finance entity during a reporting period. 
 
Subject to certain exceptions, a person may not make aggregate contributions of more than 
$6,000 to any one campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle, and a campaign 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 157/ Page 4 
finance entity may not make transfers in a cumulative amount of more than $6,000 to any 
one other campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle. 
 
 
“Candidate” Definition 
 
“Candidate” is defined under the Election Law Article as an individual who files a 
certificate of candidacy for a public or party office, and includes an individual, prior to that 
individual filing a certificate of candidacy, if a campaign finance entity has been 
established on behalf of that individual. 
 
Summary Guide Information on Exploratory Committees 
 
Chapter 4 of SBE’s Summary Guide to Maryland Candidacy and Campaign Finance Laws, 
most recently revised in March 2025, discusses exploratory committees, and limitations 
applicable to them. The guide states that while there are no statutory provisions that 
expressly authorize exploratory committees, the Office of the Attorney General has 
indicated that some exploratory or “testing the waters” activities involving raising and 
spending funds for limited purposes, to determine if an individual would be a viable 
candidate, are permissible without needing to establish a political committee. 
 
Regulations 
 
SBE adopted regulations in 2023 (COMAR 33.13.23) that authorize an individual who is 
not a candidate to establish an exploratory committee for a public office to determine the 
individual’s viability for the office. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues increase, beginning as early as fiscal 2026, to the 
extent late filing fees and/or monetary penalties are collected from exploratory committees 
for violations of applicable requirements/prohibitions (late filing fee and penalty revenues 
are deposited in FCFF). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 27 and HB 111 of 2025; SB 16 and HB 792 of 2024; SB 111 and  
HB 441 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 65 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Prosecutor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 157/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5