START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 116

F5, L6 6lr1184
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 147

By: Delegate Miller
Requested: October 14, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Agreements, Procurement Contracts, and Memoranda of
3 Understanding – Reporting and Publication

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the reporting of certain procurement contracts and
5 memoranda of understanding entered into by certain public elementary and
6 secondary education systems in the State; requiring each local school system to make
7 public in a certain manner certain in–kind services agreements, procurement
8 contracts, and memoranda of understanding; and generally relating to agreements,
9 procurement contracts, and memoranda of understanding entered into by education
10 systems in the State.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Education
13 Section 2–307
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 2–307.

20 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

22 (2) “AGREEMENT” MEANS:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0116*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 116

1 (I) AN IN–KIND SERVICES AGREEMENT;

2 (II) A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT; AND

3 (III) A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING.

4 (3) “COVERED ENTITY” MEANS:

5 (I) A COUNTY BOARD;

6 (II) A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT;

7 (III) A SCHOOL IN THE PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY
8 EDUCATION SYSTEM OF THE STATE;

9 (IV) THE STATE BOARD; OR

10 (V) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT.

11 (4) “PROCUREMENT CONTRACT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
12 11–101 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

13 (B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
14 THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

15 (I) A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ENTERED INTO BY A
16 COVERED ENTITY; AND

17 (II) A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT ENTERED INTO BY A COVERED
18 ENTITY.

19 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT
20 OR MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING THAT INCLUDES INFORMATION THAT:

21 (I) MAY BE WITHHELD FROM DISCLOSURE BY LAW; OR

22 (II) IS PROHIBITED FROM DISCLOSURE BY LAW.

23 (C) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH COVERED
24 ENTITY SHALL REPORT TO THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT A LIST OF EACH
25 PROCUREMENT CONTRACT OR MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ENTERED INTO
26 IN THE PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR BY THE COVERED ENTITY.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 116 3

1 (II) A COVERED ENTITY THAT IS A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
2 OR A SCHOOL IN THE PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION SYSTEM
3 OF THE STATE MAY SATISFY THE REPORTING REQUIREMENT UNDER
4 SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH BY SUBMITTING THE REQUIRED
5 INFORMATION TO THE COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION BY A DATE DETERMINED BY
6 THE COUNTY BOARD.

7 (III) AS PART OF A REPORT MADE UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
8 THIS PARAGRAPH, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL REPORT ANY INFORMATION RECEIVED
9 UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

10 (2) (I) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE STATE
11 SUPERINTENDENT SHALL:

12 1. ISSUE A REPORT COMPILING THE INFORMATION
13 PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

14 2. SUBMIT THE REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257
15 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION
16 COMMITTEE, THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE
17 ENVIRONMENT, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE WAYS
18 AND MEANS COMMITTEE.

19 (II) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
20 THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE:

21 1. A LIST OF EACH PROCUREMENT CONTRACT AND
22 MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ENTERED INTO BY EACH COVERED ENTITY;

23 2. THE TOTAL AMOUNT REQUIRED TO BE PAID BY A
24 COVERED ENTITY UNDER A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT; AND

25 3. THE TOTAL AMOUNT PAID BY A COVERED ENTITY
26 DURING THE PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR.

27 (D) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2026, EACH LOCAL SCHOOL
28 SYSTEM SHALL MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE EACH AGREEMENT THE
29 LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM ENTERED INTO FROM JULY 1, 2025, TO JUNE 30, 2026.

30 (2) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER AN AGREEMENT A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM
31 ENTERS INTO ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2026, THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL MAKE
32 THE AGREEMENT PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 116

1 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
2 SUBSECTION.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
4 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4