START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 130 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 130 
(Delegate Ruff) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Deed Fraud - Prohibition, Deed Fraud Prevention Grant Fund, 
and Task Force to Study Deed Fraud 
 
 
This bill prohibits several actions generally related to deed fraud. In addition, the bill 
(1) requires the Department of State Police (DSP) to include related, disaggregated data as 
part of mandated crime reporting and (2) establishes the Deed Fraud Prevention Grant 
(DFPG) Fund, administered by DSP. Further, the bill establishes the Task Force to  
Study Deed Fraud. In fiscal 2028, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $200,000 for the DFPG Fund. The bill’s provisions related to the task 
force terminate September 30, 2028.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Known general fund expenditures increase by $48,900 in FY 2027. Although 
not reflected below, general fund expenditures in FY 2027 further increase by an 
indeterminate amount for DSP programming costs (exceeding $1.0 million). Future year 
expenditures reflect annualization of administrative costs, ongoing operating expenses, and 
capitalization of the DFPG Fund, including mandated funding in FY 2028 and assumed 
discretionary funding annually thereafter. General fund revenues increase minimally from 
interest earnings of the new special fund through FY 2028. Special fund revenues and 
expenditures are assumed to correspondingly increase by $200,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2026; State finances may be further impacted from the bill’s penalty provisions (not 
reflected below). The bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2028.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$200,000 
$200,000 
$200,000 
$200,000 
GF Expenditure 
$48,900 
$253,300 
$256,000 
$258,600 
$261,200 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$200,000 
$200,000 
$200,000 
$200,000 
Net Effect 
($48,900) 
($253,300) 
($256,000) 
($258,600) 
($261,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 130/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, potentially significantly, in 
FY 2027 for programming costs incurred by local law enforcement agencies, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Prohibitions and Penalties Under § 8-601 of the Criminal Law Article  
 
Under current law, a person, with intent to defraud another, may not counterfeit, cause to 
be counterfeited, or willingly aid or assist in counterfeiting specified instruments, including 
any: 
 
 
deed; 
 
draft; 
 
endorsement or assignments of a bond, draft, check, or promissory note; 
 
entry in an account book or ledger; 
 
letter of credit; 
 
negotiable instrument; 
 
power of attorney; 
 
promissory note; 
 
release or discharge for money or property; 
 
title to a motor vehicle; 
 
waiver or release of a mechanics’ lien; or 
 
will or codicil. 
 
Violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a 
$1,000 maximum fine. Further, a person is also prohibited from knowingly, willfully, and 
with fraudulent intent possessing a counterfeit of any of the types of documents listed 
above. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 3 years 
and/or a $1,000 maximum fine.  
 
Under current law, a prosecution for an alleged violation of these prohibitions or an alleged 
violation of a crime based on an act that establishes a violation of these prohibitions may 
be commenced in any county in which (1) an element of the crime occurred; (2) the deed 
or other alleged counterfeit instrument is recorded in the county land records, filed with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 130/ Page 3 
the clerk of the circuit court, or filed with the register of wills; (3) the victim resides; or 
(4) if the victim is not an individual, the victim conducts business. The bill removes deeds 
from the list of protected legal instruments under § 8-601 and makes a conforming change. 
 
Deed Fraud – Establishment  
 
Under the bill, a person, with the intent to defraud another, may not:   
 
 
claim to sell, convey, or attempt to sell or convey real property that the grantor does 
not own; 
 
claim to sell or convey (or attempt to sell or convey) real property that the grantor 
lacks sufficient authority to transfer; 
 
claim to lease or attempt to lease real property that belongs to another; 
 
obtain, sell, or convey (or attempt to obtain, sell, or convey) the real property of 
another through the execution of a deed by the rightful owner of the property by 
deception, intimidation, threat, or undue influence; 
 
counterfeit a deed or cause a deed to be counterfeited; or 
 
record a deed or cause a deed to be recorded in furtherance of a violation of the bill’s 
provisions. 
 
A person is also prohibited from aiding or assisting another in any of these prohibited acts. 
Violators are guilty of a felony and subject to maximum penalties of 10 years’ 
imprisonment and/or a $7,500 fine. 
 
A person is also prohibited from knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent 
possessing a counterfeit deed; violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
maximum penalties of three years’ imprisonment and/or a $7,500 fine. A prosecution for 
this offense must begin within one year after the victim knew or reasonably should have 
known that the fraud occurred.  
 
Fines collected under these provisions must be paid into the DFPG Fund. The bill includes 
additional provisions regarding authorized venues for prosecution. 
 
Department of State Police – Uniform Crime Report  
 
The bill specifies that DSP, as part of information collected, analyzed, and disseminated 
under the crime reporting program, must include disaggregated information on incidents 
of fraud with specific information on violations of the bill’s deed fraud provisions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 130/ Page 4 
Task Force to Study Deed Fraud  
 
The bill establishes the Task Force to Study Deed Fraud, to be staffed by the Administrative 
Office of the Courts. Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled 
to reimbursement for travel expenses. 
 
The task force must (1) study incidents of deed fraud in the State, including the number of 
complaints, resolved cases, restitution amounts, and geographic and demographic trends; 
(2) study how other states combat deed fraud; (3) identify patterns in the methods used by 
deed fraud perpetrators and patterns in the demographics of deed fraud victims; (4) develop 
recommendations for deed fraud detection tools; (5) conduct an analysis that identifies the 
economic impact of deed fraud on victims; and (6) make recommendations for combatting 
deed fraud in the State, including strategies for intergovernmental coordination to more 
effectively detect and prevent deed fraud. 
 
The task force must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by July 1, 2028. 
 
Deed Fraud Prevention Grant Fund  
 
The DFPG Fund is established as a special nonlapsing fund administered by DSP. The 
fund’s purpose is to provide grants to (1) aid State and local law enforcement agencies in 
identifying and preventing deed fraud; (2) support legal services for victims of deed fraud, 
in coordination with the Maryland Legal Services Corporation (MLSC); and (3) offer 
emergency housing assistance to displaced victims of deed fraud. The fund may only be 
used for these purposes and to pay for administrative costs associated with the operation 
of the fund. 
 
DSP, in conjunction with MLSC, may establish standards to determine eligibility for the 
grants. Money expended from the fund is supplemental and is not intended to take the place 
of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for deed fraud prevention. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Deed Fraud Prevention Grant Fund 
 
Capitalization of the New Special Fund:  General fund expenditures increase by an 
estimated $200,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028 to capitalize the DFPG Fund. This 
estimate reflects the mandated appropriation in fiscal 2028. Although funding beyond 
fiscal 2028 is discretionary, this estimate assumes that funding continues at the same level 
as that in fiscal 2028, in order to sustain a modest grant program. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 130/ Page 5 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund are assumed to increase 
correspondingly each year, reflecting receipt of the capitalization funds and spending from 
the fund as grants are awarded. 
 
Administrative Costs for the Department of State Police:  State expenditures further 
increase to provide DSP with additional resources to administer the DFPG Fund, as 
required under the bill. Although administrative expenses are an authorized use of the fund, 
this estimate assumes that general funds are required. Accordingly, general fund 
expenditures increase by $48,850 in fiscal 2027 for additional staff, which reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. Although funding for grant awards is not assumed until 
fiscal 2028 under this estimate, staff is needed to prepare the DFPG Fund application 
process, establish parameters for granting awards, and create the necessary framework for 
the operation of the fund.  
 
The estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time program manager to facilitate the 
implementation of the grant fund and includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$39,786 
Other Operating Expenses  
    9,064 
Total FY 2027 Admin. Expenditures 
$48,850 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Fine Revenues and the Assumption of General Funds Needed:  As noted above, it is 
assumed that general funds are used for administrative costs and to provide capitalization 
funding each year for the DFPG Fund. Although fine revenues from violations of the bill’s 
provisions are credited to the fund, it is assumed under this analysis that penalties collected 
are likely insufficient to fully maintain operation of the fund in future years without at least 
some general fund support. However, the magnitude of any impact from fine revenues is 
difficult to predict without experience under the bill or further information on the charges, 
convictions, and penalties collected for the existing criminal offense (related to deeds). 
While not specifically accounted for in this analysis, to the extent that fines are imposed 
and collected, special fund revenues and expenditures further increase as additional funds 
are made available; the need for general fund support may also be mitigated. 
 
Crime Reporting Requirements 
 
DSP reports the bill’s crime reporting requirements result in an indeterminate, but likely 
significant, fiscal and operational impact on State and local law enforcement agencies due 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 130/ Page 6 
to necessary programming changes to capture the deed fraud data required under the bill. 
Although a precise estimate is not available at this time, DSP estimates expenditures easily 
exceed $1.0 million dollars. According to DSP, this significant increase is due to the recent 
transition to the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). 
 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation dictates the data elements collected and reported by 
participating states within NIBRS. While the State’s NIBRS reporting system captures 
“fraud data,” there is not a dedicated fraud offense category that specifically references 
“deeds.” Implementing data collection for this specific category within the NIBRS system 
necessitates isolating it from the broader crime reporting framework. To accommodate the 
requirements of this legislation, the State would have to pay a contractor to reprogram the 
State NIBRS system to account for the new specific crime and disaggregate the data as 
required under the bill. 
 
In addition, DSP indicates there are over 100 local law enforcement agencies that are 
required to report to DSP. Each local reporting agency has already been required to 
purchase NIBRS-compliant reporting systems. To implement the bill’s reporting 
requirement, DSP and each of the participating local law enforcement agencies must 
reprogram their data systems to reflect the bill’s changes.  
 
Special Interest from the Fund 
 
Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund remain in the fund, 
the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, that 
interest earnings from special funds or accounts (with certain exceptions) accrue to the 
general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through fiscal 2028. The fund is 
exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of violations and guilty dispositions in the 
District Court and the circuit courts over the last two fiscal years for counterfeiting of 
private instruments and documents and possession of counterfeit instruments and 
documents. Data is not available on how many of these violations and dispositions involved 
deeds. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 130/ Page 7 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions   
Counterfeiting Private Instruments and Documents  
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
 
 
Fiscal 2024 
Fiscal 2025 
 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Disposition 
District Court 
 
 
 
 
Counterfeiting of Private 
Instruments/Documents 
469 
11 
365 
6 
Possession of Private 
Instruments/Documents 
363 
26 
361 
25 
Circuit Courts 
 
 
 
 
Counterfeiting of Private 
Instruments/Documents 
182 
10 
60 
7 
Possession of Private 
Instruments/Documents 
125 
19 
58 
20 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
Other Impacts of the Bill 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or finances of the Office of 
the Public Defender, the Judiciary, and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services. Any expense reimbursements for task force members are assumed to be minimal 
and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1419 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 130/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of State Police; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8