START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 115

G1 6lr0654
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr2278

By: Delegate Wilkins
Requested: July 23, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Election Law – Individuals Released From State Correctional Facilities –
3 Automatic Restoration of Voter Registration

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
5 to transmit a certain list of individuals released from incarceration at a State
6 correctional facility to the State Board of Elections in a certain manner; requiring
7 the State Board to automatically restore the voter registration of certain individuals
8 released from State correctional facilities who were registered to vote in the State
9 before being incarcerated; prohibiting certain information regarding voters
10 registered through the Department from being disclosed under the Public
11 Information Act; and generally relating to automatic restoration of voter registration
12 for individuals released from State correctional facilities.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Correctional Services
15 Section 1–101(a), (f), and (q) and 2–601
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Election Law
20 Section 3–203.1
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Correctional Services

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0115*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 115

1 1–101.

2 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

3 (f) “Department” means the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
4 Services.

5 (q) (1) “State correctional facility” means a correctional facility that is
6 operated by the State.

7 (2) “State correctional facility” includes:

8 (i) the Patuxent Institution;

9 (ii) the Baltimore City Detention Center; and

10 (iii) the centralized booking facility in Baltimore City that is operated
11 by the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services in the Department of Public Safety and
12 Correctional Services.

13 2–601.

14 The Department shall:

15 (1) provide each individual who is released from a correctional facility with
16 a voter registration application and documentation with the individual’s discharge papers
17 that informs the individual that the individual’s voting rights have been restored;

18 (2) display a sign in each parole and probation office, in a conspicuous
19 location where notices to the public are customarily posted, indicating that any individual
20 who is no longer incarcerated has the right to vote; and

21 (3) post a notice, in a conspicuous location on the Department’s website,
22 indicating that any individual who is no longer incarcerated has the right to vote.

23 Article – Election Law

24 3–203.1.

25 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING
26 STATED IN § 1–101 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

27 (B) ON A WEEKLY BASIS, THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND
28 CORRECTIONAL SERVICES SHALL ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMIT TO THE STATE
29 BOARD A LIST THAT INCLUDES THE NAME AND NEW RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS OF EACH
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 115 3

1 INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS RELEASED FROM INCARCERATION AT A STATE
2 CORRECTIONAL FACILITY IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING WEEK.

3 (C) ON RECEIPT OF THE LIST UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
4 THE STATE BOARD SHALL IDENTIFY EACH INDIVIDUAL ON THE LIST WHO WAS
5 REGISTERED TO VOTE IN THE STATE BEFORE BEING INCARCERATED AND WHOSE
6 NEW RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS IS LOCATED IN THE STATE.

7 (D) THE STATE BOARD SHALL AUTOMATICALLY RESTORE THE VOTER
8 REGISTRATION OF EACH INDIVIDUAL IDENTIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
9 SECTION AT THE INDIVIDUAL’S NEW RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS AND GIVE THE
10 INDIVIDUAL ACTIVE VOTER STATUS.

11 (E) WITH THE VOTER NOTIFICATION CARD THAT IS SENT IN ACCORDANCE
12 WITH § 3–301(C) OF THIS TITLE TO EACH INDIVIDUAL WHOSE VOTER REGISTRATION
13 IS RESTORED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE ELECTION DIRECTOR
14 SHALL ENCLOSE A NOTICE THAT INCLUDES A STATEMENT THAT:

15 (1) THE INDIVIDUAL HAS BEEN REGISTERED TO VOTE AT THE
16 RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS THE INDIVIDUAL PROVIDED TO A STATE AGENCY;

17 (2) THE INDIVIDUAL IS ELIGIBLE TO VOTE IN THE STATE IN ALL
18 FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL ELECTIONS; AND

19 (3) IF THE INDIVIDUAL WISHES TO DECLINE VOTER REGISTRATION,
20 OR IF THE INDIVIDUAL NEEDS TO UPDATE THE INDIVIDUAL’S RESIDENTIAL
21 ADDRESS, THE INDIVIDUAL SHOULD CONTACT THE STATE BOARD OR THE
22 APPROPRIATE LOCAL BOARD.

23 (F) NOTWITHSTANDING THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT, THE FACT THAT A
24 PARTICULAR VOTER WAS REGISTERED THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
25 SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE
26 DISCLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
28 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 3