START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 167

M3 6lr0646
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: July 23, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Gasoline–Powered Leaf Blowers – Purchase and Use – Prohibitions

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the State from purchasing gasoline–powered leaf blowers
4 beginning on a certain date; prohibiting the State or any contractor or subcontractor
5 employed by the State from using gasoline–powered leaf blowers beginning on a
6 certain date; requiring the State or any contractor or subcontractor employed by the
7 State to comply with certain local government standards; and generally relating to
8 gasoline–powered leaf blowers.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Environment
11 Section 3–601 through 3–605 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 6.
12 Gasoline–Powered Leaf Blowers”
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Environment

18 SUBTITLE 6. GASOLINE–POWERED LEAF BLOWERS.

19 3–601.

20 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “GASOLINE–POWERED LEAF BLOWER”:

21 (1) MEANS A COMBUSTION ENGINE–POWERED HANDHELD,
22 BACKPACK, OR WALK–BEHIND LEAF OR GRASS BLOWER, VACUUM, OR LEAF DEBRIS

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0167*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 167

1 REMOVAL DEVICE;

2 (2) INCLUDES AN ELECTRIC LEAF BLOWER CONNECTED TO A
3 GENERATOR POWERED BY GASOLINE OR OTHER FOSSIL FUELS; AND

4 (3) DOES NOT INCLUDE A STATIONARY OR TOW–BEHIND LEAF
5 VACUUM, MULCHER, DEBRIS LOADER DEVICE, OR SNOW BLOWER.

6 3–602.

7 THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO:

8 (1) WILDLAND FIRE SUPPRESSION ACTIVITIES;

9 (2) PRESCRIBED BURN MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES;

10 (3) FIRE FIGHTING ACTIVITIES CARRIED OUT BY AUTHORIZED
11 PERSONNEL; OR

12 (4) EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING ACTIVITIES TO
13 CLEAR SURFACES FOLLOWING A CRASH, CARRIED OUT BY AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL
14 AT A TRANSPORTATION FACILITY AS DEFINED IN § 3–101 OF THE TRANSPORTATION
15 ARTICLE.

16 3–603.

17 (A) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2026, THE STATE MAY NOT PURCHASE A
18 GASOLINE–POWERED LEAF BLOWER.

19 (B) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2031, THE STATE, OR ANY CONTRACTOR OR
20 SUBCONTRACTOR EMPLOYED BY THE STATE WORKING ON STATE–OWNED LAND,
21 MAY NOT USE A GASOLINE–POWERED LEAF BLOWER.

22 3–604.

23 EACH AGENCY IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF STATE GOVERNMENT SHALL
24 MONITOR AND ENFORCE THAT AGENCY’S COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF
25 THIS SUBTITLE.

26 3–605.

27 (A) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT AFFECT THE AUTHORITY OF A COUNTY, A
28 MUNICIPALITY, OR ANY OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ENACT STANDARDS THAT
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 167 3

1 ARE AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE STANDARDS ESTABLISHED IN THIS SUBTITLE
2 OR THAT BEGIN ON AN EARLIER DATE THAN THE DATES ESTABLISHED IN THIS
3 SUBTITLE.

4 (B) THE STATE, OR ANY CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR EMPLOYED BY
5 THE STATE, SHALL COMPLY WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT STANDARDS THAT ARE AT
6 LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE STANDARDS ESTABLISHED IN THIS SUBTITLE WHEN
7 MANAGING STATE PROPERTY.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3