START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 192

F2 6lr1441
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 208

By: Delegate Woods
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Higher Education Commission – Religious Educational Institutions –
3 Certificate of Approval

4 FOR the purpose of exempting certain religious educational institutions accredited by
5 certain accrediting bodies from the requirement to obtain a certificate of approval
6 from the Maryland Higher Education Commission to operate in the State; and
7 generally relating to religious educational institutions and a certificate of approval.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 10–101(a) and (c)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 11–202.1(b)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Education

21 10–101.

22 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (c) “Commission” means the Maryland Higher Education Commission.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0192*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 192

1 11–202.1.

2 (b) (1) Subject to the requirements imposed by this section, and except as
3 prohibited in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a religious educational institution may
4 operate without a certificate of approval from the Commission and may enroll Maryland
5 students in a fully online distance education program in the State without a registration
6 from the Commission if the institution:

7 (i) Is established for religious educational purposes;

8 (ii) Provides educational programs only for religious vocations or
9 purposes;

10 (iii) Offers only sectarian instruction designed for and aimed at
11 individuals who hold or seek to learn the particular religious faiths or beliefs taught by the
12 institution; and

13 (iv) States on the certificate or diploma the religious nature of the
14 award.

15 (2) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY TO A RELIGIOUS
16 EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION THAT WAS AUTHORIZED TO OPERATE IN THE STATE
17 AND HAS BEEN IN CONTINUOUS OPERATION IN THE STATE SINCE BEFORE JANUARY
18 1, 2013.

19 (II) A religious educational institution that is accredited by an
20 accrediting body recognized by the United States Department of Education may not operate
21 without a certificate of approval from the Commission.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2