START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 147 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 147 
(Delegate Guzzone) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Nonprofit Organizations Navigator - Termination Provision - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the termination provision associated with the nonprofit organizations 
navigator within the Department of Commerce, thereby, making the requirement for the 
position permanent. Thus, the navigator must continue to provide technical assistance to 
nonprofit organizations, resolve grant-making delays, and share information on funding 
opportunities. Also, the navigator must continue to represent the interests and concerns of 
nonprofit organizations as a member of the Maryland Efficient Grant Application (MEGA) 
Council. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No likely effect in FY 2027, under the assumptions discussed below. 
General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $92,200 in FY 2028 to convert the 
existing contractual nonprofit organizations navigator position to a regular position; future 
year expenditures reflect ongoing costs due to making the position permanent. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
92,200 
96,500 
100,900 
105,300 
Net Effect 
$0 
($92,200) 
($96,500) 
($100,900) 
($105,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 147/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 314 and 315 of 2025 established the nonprofit organizations 
navigator within Commerce, with intent language that the position be filled by July 1, 2025 
(funding to do so was included in the fiscal 2026 budget). The provisions establishing the 
position and its duties terminate June 30, 2027.  
 
The navigator must:  
 
 
provide technical assistance to nonprofit organizations in obtaining access to and 
applying for State grant programs; 
 
work with nonprofit organizations and units of State government to resolve 
procedural complexities and delays in State grant-making processes; 
 
collect and share information on opportunities for federal, State, and local grants 
with nonprofit organizations; and 
 
represent the interests and concerns of nonprofit organizations as a nonvoting 
member of the MEGA Council (through the termination date of the council). 
 
By January 1, 2027, Commerce must report to specified committees on the following 
information for fiscal 2026:  (1) the number of nonprofit organizations that received 
technical assistance; (2) the total number of grant applications completed and submitted as 
a result of receiving technical assistance; (3) the total amount of grant funds awarded to 
nonprofit organizations as a result of receiving technical assistance; and (4) any findings 
and recommendations regarding implementation of the navigator position.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $92,213 in fiscal 2028, 
increasing to $105,324 in fiscal 2031, to make the position permanent. There is likely no 
fiscal impact in fiscal 2027, despite the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date, as the position is 
already funded as a contractual through that year. Instead, this estimate assumes the 
position converts to a regular position on July 1, 2027 (when the requirement for it would 
otherwise terminate absent the bill). The estimate for the new regular position includes a 
full salary, fringe benefits, and ongoing operating expenses; it does not include operating 
equipment as that equipment has already been provided to the contractual navigator and is 
assumed to continue to be used. If the position is converted during fiscal 2027, general fund 
expenditures increase minimally to cover the fringe benefits for that year. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$89,408 
Ongoing Operating Expenses 
    2,805 
Total FY 2028 State Expenditures 
$92,213 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 147/ Page 3 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additional Comments:  The MEGA Council was established in 2020 to streamline the 
State grant’s life cycle and is scheduled to terminate June 30, 2029.     
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 69 (Senator Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Commerce; Governor’s Office; Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3