START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 151 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 151 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Distribution of Cannabis Sales Tax Revenue - Maryland 
Veterans Trust Fund 
 
   
This bill redirects 3% of the first 25% of cannabis sales and use tax collections that is 
distributed to the general fund under current law to the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund 
(MVTF). The remaining 22% (of the first 25% of cannabis sales and use tax collections) 
continues to be distributed to the general fund. The distribution of the remaining 75% of 
cannabis sales and use tax collections is unchanged. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $4.1 million in  
FY 2027 due to the redistribution of cannabis sales and use tax collections; future years 
reflect projected growth in taxable cannabis sales. Nonbudgeted revenues for MVTF 
increase by commensurate amounts each year; nonbudgeted expenditures increase 
correspondingly.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($4,095,000) 
($4,322,500) 
($5,185,400) 
($6,100,500) 
($6,222,500) 
NonBud Rev. 
$4,095,000 
$4,322,500 
$5,185,400 
$6,100,500 
$6,222,500 
NonBud Exp. 
$4,095,000 
$4,322,500 
$5,185,400 
$6,100,500 
$6,222,500 
Net Effect 
($4,095,000) 
($4,322,500) 
($5,185,400) 
($6,100,500) 
($6,222,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none.    
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 151/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax  
 
The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 (Chapter 604) increased the sales 
and use tax rate imposed on the retail sale of adult-use cannabis from 9% to 12% beginning 
in fiscal 2026 and altered the distribution of sales and use tax collections from the sale of 
cannabis so that the entire portion of revenue attributable to the higher rate is distributed to 
the general fund. Under current law, the first 25% of cannabis sales and use tax collections 
is distributed directly to the general fund.  
 
For additional information regarding the sales and use tax on cannabis and how that 
revenue is distributed, please see the Appendix – Adult‑use Cannabis Sales and Use and 
Tax and Revenues.   
 
Maryland Veterans Trust  
 
The purpose of the Maryland Veterans Trust (MVT) and MVTF is to provide monetary 
and other assistance to (1) veterans and members of the Maryland National Guard and their 
families and (2) public and private programs that support veterans and their families. 
MVTF is nonbudgeted and maintained by MVT, which is staffed by the Department of 
Veterans and Military Families (DVMF).  
 
Generally, MVTF consists of (1) gifts and grants; (2) contributions from the sale of tickets 
from instant ticket lottery machines, donations from video lottery facility players, 
designated fees from specified special registration plates, and specified civil penalties 
related to persons providing veterans benefits and veterans benefits appeals services; and 
(3) the net proceeds from contributions under a State income tax checkoff. 
 
Money in the fund may only be used to (1) make grants and loans to veterans and members 
of the Maryland National Guard and their families, to public and private programs that 
support veterans and their families, or to any other programs MVT considers to be within 
the purpose of the fund; (2) be invested, as specified; and (3) pay the costs of administering 
MVTF through distribution to an administrative cost account within DVMF.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Redistribution of Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues from the General Fund to the 
Maryland Veterans Trust Fund  
 
General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $4,094,953 in fiscal 2027, increasing to 
$6,222,499 by 2031, due to the redistribution of 3% of the cannabis sales and use tax 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 151/ Page 3 
revenues from the general fund to MVTF; future years reflect projected growth in taxable 
cannabis sales. This estimate is based on the December 2025 cannabis sales and use tax 
revenue forecast. Nonbudgeted revenues for MVTF increase by commensurate amounts 
each year. Nonbudgeted expenditures for MVTF increase correspondingly each year, 
reflecting spending of the additional available funding on grants and loans and for related 
administrative costs. This estimate is based on the following assumptions and information: 
 
 
historically, there has been more demand for funding from MVTF than available 
funds, so it is assumed that all available funds are spent each year;  
 
MVT is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization, so its funds are not reported as part of 
State fund balances and are reflected in this estimate as nonbudgeted funds;  
 
DVMF staffs the trust and processes grant and loan applications; and 
 
it is assumed that additional DVMF administrative costs incurred under the bill, 
discussed in more detail below, are covered using cannabis sales and use tax 
revenues redirected to the fund under the bill (and not general funds).  
 
Maryland Department of Veterans and Military Families and Maryland Veterans Trust 
Administrative Costs  
 
Administrative workloads for DVMF increase significantly to process and award additional 
grants and loans due to the additional funding available under the bill. According to 
DVMF, funding for the trust fund in 2025 was approximately $1.0 million. Administering 
and processing grants from MVTF is a labor-intensive process and typical grants are for 
relatively small amounts (roughly $5,000 to $15,000 each) that are disbursed primarily to 
individuals and families. Currently, three full‑time DVMF staff (which includes one 
dedicated accountant) administer the grant and loan program. These staff are paid for with 
general funds. DVMF anticipates that it needs to hire approximately four additional 
full‑time staff to administer the additional funding available under the bill. The Department 
of Legislative Services (DLS) is unable to independently verify MVTF’s anticipated need 
for additional staff without actual experience under the bill. However, DLS concurs that 
administering four to six times as much funding significantly increases DVMF’s 
administrative workload and that the department needs to hire several additional staff to 
fully expend the additional funding available under the bill. For context, if DVMF hires 
four agency grant specialists on July 1, 2026, administrative costs increase by $386,406 in 
fiscal 2027 and by at least $345,344 annually thereafter.  
 
DLS also notes that because existing DVMF staff that administer grants and loans from 
MVTF are paid for with general funds, it is somewhat unclear whether staff hired under 
the bill would be funded using general funds or the cannabis sales and use tax revenues 
redistributed to MVTF under the bill. This analysis assumes that, because the cannabis 
sales and use tax revenues redirected to the fund under the bill far exceed current funding 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 151/ Page 4 
levels and the projected cost of the additional staff needed, DVMF uses the additional 
funding redistributed to MVTF under the bill to cover its increased administrative costs, as 
authorized under current law. However, to the extent that DVMF chooses not to use trust 
funds to hire staff, general fund expenditures increase instead.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 151/ Page 5 
Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and 
Revenues 
 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of 
adult‑use cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 
(Chapter 604) increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of 
adult‑use cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated 
approximately $71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and 
use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate 
went into effect, totaled $26.9 million; collections are on track to exceed $100.0 million in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the Department 
of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) Fund an amount sufficient to defray the 
operating and administrative costs of the Maryland Cannabis Administration and the Office 
of Social Equity, respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and 
DoSEM are then distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through 
fiscal 2028, after which the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (through fiscal 2033 only), which is 
administered by the Comptroller’s Office with oversight assistance from the Office of 
Social Equity; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund, which is administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (through 
fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the Department of Commerce; and 5% as a 
separate direct allocation to counties. 
 

END OF PAGE 5