START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 142 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 142 
(Delegate Taylor) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Child Support - Earnings Withholdings Limits 
 
   
This bill limits an earnings/wage withholding order from exceeding 25% of an obligor’s 
“disposable earnings” for the combined support order and arrearage if the obligor’s 
individual income for the current year does not exceed 250% of the federal poverty 
guidelines, unless the obligor was determined to be voluntarily impoverished at the time of 
the most recent order. An earnings/wage withholding notice sent to an obligor’s employer 
must include information relevant to the bill’s limitation. The bill also authorizes an 
employee to contest the amount of a withholding order based on the limits specified 
in § 10‐122 of the Family Article. “Disposable earnings” means that part of the earnings of 
an individual remaining after the deduction from those earnings of any amounts required 
by law to be withheld.    
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and federal fund expenditures for the Department of Human 
Services (DHS) increase by at least $3.8 million in FY 2027 for staff and one‑time 
programming costs; federal fund matching revenues increase accordingly. Future year 
expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. The bill is not anticipated to materially 
affect the workload of the Judiciary or the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH).  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$2.5 
$0.5 
$0.6 
$0.6 
$0.6 
GF/FF Exp. 
$3.8 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.9 
$0.9 
Net Effect 
($1.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.3)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect circuit court operations or 
finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 142/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Earnings Withholding Limitations – § 10-122 of the Family Law Article 
 
Statute includes numerous requirements regarding the use of earnings withholding orders, 
which are orders issued to an employer to require the deduction of certain support payments 
(e.g., child support, spousal support) from the earnings of an obligor.   
 
Generally, the amount of an earnings withholding must (1) be enough to pay the support 
and any arrearage included in the payments required by the support order and (2) include 
any arrearage accrued since the support order. When arrearages are part of an earnings 
withholding order or earnings withholding notice, the total arrearage withheld must be in 
one lump‑sum payment or apportioned over a period of time. The amount of the arrearage 
withheld must be determined by the court or, in a case in which the Child Support 
Administration (CSA) is providing services, by CSA. The amount of arrears apportioned 
to each payment must be at least $1 but not more than 25% of the current support payment. 
 
If there is more than one earnings withholding order or earnings withholding notice against 
a single obligor, CSA must allocate amounts available for withholding, giving priority to 
current support, up to the limits imposed by the federal Consumer Credit Protection Act 
(CCPA).  
 
Contents and Effect of Orders 
 
An earnings withholding order or notice sent to the obligor’s employer must be a separate 
document (not including any other orders or pleadings), and must include, among other 
information, the amount to be withheld from the obligor’s earnings, including explanation 
of the application of CCPA. The employer is then required to withhold the stated amount 
on a regular and continuing basis beginning at the start of the next pay period after receipt 
of the order/notice.  
 
An earnings withholding order or notice is binding on each present and future employer of 
the obligor on whom a copy of the earnings withholding order or notice is served. Subject 
to federal law, an earnings withholding order or notice has priority over any other lien or 
legal process. The copy of the earnings withholding order or notice served on the employer 
of the obligor must contain a statement that upon willful violation of the order or notice, 
the employer is subject to civil penalties.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 142/ Page 3 
Earnings Withholding Orders Upon Request of Obligor or in Contempt Proceedings 
 
Upon request of the obligor, the court must immediately authorize service of an earnings 
withholding order. A court may at any time issue an earnings withholding order in a 
contempt (or other) proceeding if (1) the recipient or the support enforcement agency has 
filed a petition that includes a request for an earnings withholding order and (2) the obligor 
is in arrears in support payments of more than 30 days.  
 
A hearing must be held if the obligor appears and contests the issuance of the order. The 
amount of the order must be enough to pay the support as originally entered by the court 
and may include a part of the arrearage.  
 
Administrative Contests of Withholdings 
 
Statute outlines the process for an employee to contest a withholding, request an 
investigation, and initiate an appeal of the CSA’s decision (to be heard by OAH).  
 
In general, the only issues that may be contested, initially or in an appeal, are (1) the identity 
of the employee; (2) whether there is an underlying court order requiring the employee to 
provide health insurance coverage for the employee’s child; (3) that the amount of the 
withholding exceeds the limits of CCPA; and (4) that the child for whom health insurance 
coverage is sought is emancipated. 
 
“Earnings” includes (1) any form of periodic payment to an individual, including an 
annuity, a pension, Social Security payments, worker’s compensation payments, and 
unemployment insurance benefits and (2) any commissions or fees paid in connection with 
the obligor’s employment.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General and federal fund expenditures increase by at least 
$3.8 million in fiscal 2027, and by at least $794,000 annually thereafter. Federal fund 
matching revenues correspondingly increase with federal fund expenditures. 
 
DHS advises that it has no readily available automated means of determining the disposable 
income of obligors prior to issuing an earnings withholding notice. Accordingly, a process 
must be developed in order to determine the current (within the last 12 months) income of 
potentially affected obligors and whether the 25% garnishment cap applies, and to calculate 
the amount to be withheld and included on the withholding notice sent to the employers. 
According to DHS, under current practice, employers calculate appropriate deductions and 
disposable earnings relevant to CCPA after receipt of the withholding notice. 
 
To facilitate implementation of the bill and update the functionalities of the Child Support 
Management System to allow for necessary manual inputs and adjustments, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 142/ Page 4 
State expenditures increase by approximately $3.1 million in fiscal 2027 for programming 
costs. 
 
In addition to the programming costs, DHS advises that it requires 29 caseworkers (one for 
each of the 24 local child support offices, with an additional caseworker in the five metro 
offices) to manually make necessary calculations and ensure that proper, timely notices are 
sent to employers. DHS also notes that fluctuating incomes for some obligors further 
exacerbate the challenges of implementation.  Additionally, DHS notes that the process has 
to occur within two business days, subject to the potential loss of federal funding for 
noncompliance. Specifically, federal Title IV‐D program requirements mandate the 
issuance of withholding orders within two business days.   
 
Although the Department of Legislative Services cannot independently validate the need 
for 29 positions, as indicated by DHS above, it does agree that existing staff cannot absorb 
the additional workload generated by the bill. This estimate therefore reflects an 
assumption that at least the equivalent of 10 full‐time caseworkers are needed to 
supplement current resources at certain jurisdictions with higher case volumes. 
Accordingly, State expenditures increase by a minimum of $3,810,749 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the programming costs mentioned above), and 
ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions (Full‐time equivalents) 
10.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$590,707 
Programming Costs 
3,107,460 
Other Operating Expenses 
     112,582 
Minimum FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$3,810,749 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. These expenditures  
are assumed to be supported using 34% general funds/66% federal funds 
($1,295,655/$2,515,094 respectively). Federal fund matching revenues correspondingly 
increase.  
 
Finally, DHS receives performance incentive payments related to certain federal 
performance goals, including the total amount of child support collections. For context, 
DHS advises that it received $7.5 million in federal incentive payments in  
federal fiscal 2023. By limiting the amounts that may be garnished from certain obligors, 
there is likely to be an overall reduction in child support collections, potentially impacting 
achievement of federal performance goals and corresponding incentive payments. As any 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 142/ Page 5 
impact exclusively attributable to the bill cannot be reliably estimated, it is not reflected in 
this analysis. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Employers likely experience increased workloads associated with 
earnings withholding orders under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 16 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5