START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 177

R2 6lr0940
HB 422/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED) CF SB 155

By: Delegates Palakovich Carr, Lehman, and Ruth
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Bicycles, Play Vehicles, and Unicycles – Crosswalks

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing a person operating a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle at an
4 intersection who is facing a red signal to enter the intersection to cross the highway
5 in the direction of a pedestrian control “walk” signal; and generally relating to the
6 operation of bicycles, play vehicles, and unicycles at crosswalks.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 21–1202
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 21–1202.

16 (a) Every person operating a bicycle or a motor scooter in a public bicycle area
17 has all the rights granted to and is subject to all the duties required of the driver of a vehicle
18 by this title, including the duties set forth in § 21–504 of this title, except:

19 (1) As otherwise provided in this subtitle; and

20 (2) For those provisions of this title that by their very nature cannot apply.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0177*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 177

1 (b) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection, a person has
2 the rights and is subject to the restrictions applicable to pedestrians under this title while
3 the person is lawfully operating a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle:

4 (i) On a sidewalk or sidewalk area; or

5 (ii) In or through a crosswalk.

6 (2) (I) [At] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
7 PARAGRAPH, AT an intersection, a person operating a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle is
8 subject to all traffic control signals, as provided in §§ 21–202 and 21–203 of this title.

9 (II) 1. UNLESS OTHERWISE DIRECTED BY A TRAFFIC
10 CONTROL DEVICE, A PERSON OPERATING A BICYCLE, PLAY VEHICLE, OR UNICYCLE
11 AT AN INTERSECTION WHO IS FACING A RED SIGNAL MAY ENTER THE INTERSECTION
12 TO CROSS THE HIGHWAY IN THE DIRECTION OF A PEDESTRIAN CONTROL “WALK”
13 SIGNAL DISPLAYED FOR THE PORTION OF THE HIGHWAY ON WHICH THE BICYCLE,
14 PLAY VEHICLE, OR UNICYCLE IS TRAVELING.

15 2. BEFORE ENTERING AN INTERSECTION AS DESCRIBED
16 IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, A PERSON OPERATING A
17 BICYCLE, PLAY VEHICLE, OR UNICYCLE SHALL YIELD THE RIGHT–OF–WAY TO ANY
18 VEHICLE OR PEDESTRIAN LAWFULLY USING THE INTERSECTION.

19 (3) A person operating a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a sidewalk or
20 sidewalk area or in or through a crosswalk shall yield the right–of–way to a pedestrian or
21 a person riding on an electric personal assistive mobility device.

22 (4) Section 21–506 of this title does not apply to a person operating a
23 bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
25 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2