START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 189 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 189 
(Delegate Miller) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Middle, High, and Charter Schools - Start Time for Instruction 
 
 
This bill requires, beginning with the 2028-2029 school year, all middle schools in the State 
to begin instruction no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and all high schools in the State to begin 
instruction no earlier than 8:30 a.m. The State Board of Education (SBE), by request, may 
grant waivers from these requirements if SBE determines that there is a compelling reason 
for a school to require a different start time. However, lack of funding to implement the 
new start times is not a compelling reason for a waiver. Beginning in the 2027-2028 school 
year, each local board of education and public charter school must implement a public 
information campaign to raise awareness of the later start times for middle and high 
schools, as specified. If requested, SBE must assist with these campaigns. The bill makes 
additional technical and conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  No fiscal effect in some local school systems, but expenditures increase, in 
some cases significantly, in some local school systems for transportation costs. No effect 
on revenues. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State statute and regulations do not address the start times of public schools, 
which are under the purview of local school boards.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 189/ Page 2 
Each public school under the jurisdiction of a local school board must be open for students 
for at least 180 actual school days and a minimum of 1,080 hours (1,170 hours for high 
schools) during a 10-month period each school year. Within these guidelines, each local 
school board must set the start and end dates of the school year for its county. If normal 
attendance is prevented because of specified conditions (e.g., severe weather), schools must 
be open for at least 1,080 hours during a 10-month period. Schools must be open for at 
least 3 hours every school day. Publicly funded prekindergarten programs are not subject 
to these requirements. 
 
By written request, SBE may allow adjustments to these requirements if a local school 
board describes a demonstrated effort to comply with the above requirements. Authorized 
adjustments include an increase or decrease in the length of the school year, adjustments 
to the length of the school day, and allowing schools to be open on holidays. 
 
All school systems are required to arrange transportation to and from school for all public 
school students and are required to provide transportation to and from school for all 
disabled students. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill’s effects on local school system expenditures vary 
extensively among local school systems, with some indicating no effect and some 
indicating significant fiscal and/or operational effects.  
 
For instance, Anne Arundel County Public Schools advises that the bill has no effect 
because all of its middle and high schools already comply with the bill’s requirements. 
Although St. Mary’s County Public Schools advises that it has to adjust multiple start times 
to comply with the bill, it does not anticipate any financial costs to do so. Wicomico County 
Public Schools also anticipates no fiscal effect under the bill.  
 
By contrast, Frederick County Public Schools estimates first year costs exceeding 
$11 million and annual costs of $6 million or more to purchase and maintain (and 
eventually replace) more buses, hire more bus drivers and support personnel 
(e.g., mechanics), and acquire and maintain more storage facilities for the buses. 
Baltimore City Public Schools advises that the bill will disrupt efficiencies in student 
transportation by requiring the adjustment of start times at 52 schools, thus increasing costs 
by unspecified amounts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 468 and HB 1015 of 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 189/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 103 (Senator Benson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3