START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 126 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 126 
(Delegate Pippy) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Regulated Firearms - Seven-Day Waiting Period - Exceptions 
 
   
This bill establishes an exception for the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm from 
the required seven-day waiting period after an application is executed when the purchaser, 
renter, or receiver of the regulated firearm is a law enforcement officer, an individual who 
retired as a law enforcement officer in good standing from a law enforcement agency, or 
an individual to whom a permit to wear, carry, or transport a firearm has been issued. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2027 only. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Department of State Police (DSP) regulates firearms and regulated 
firearms dealer licensees under provisions of the Public Safety Article. Before a person 
purchases, rents, or transfers a regulated firearm in the State, the person must submit to 
DSP or other designated law enforcement agency a firearm application that identifies the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 126/ Page 2 
applicant and the firearm that is the subject of the transaction. A person must lawfully 
possess a regulated firearms dealer’s license issued by the Secretary of State Police before 
the person engages in the business of selling, renting, or transferring regulated firearms. 
One dealer’s license is required for each place of business where regulated firearms are 
sold.  
 
A licensee may not sell, rent, or transfer a regulated firearm until after seven days following 
the time a firearm application is executed by the firearm applicant, in triplicate, and the 
original is forwarded by the prospective seller or transferor to the Secretary of State Police. 
For secondary sales, a person who is not a licensee is prohibited from selling, renting, or 
transferring a regulated firearm until after seven days following the time a firearm 
application is executed by the firearm applicant, in triplicate, and the original is forwarded 
by a licensee to the Secretary. As an alternative to completing a secondary sale of a 
regulated firearm through a licensee, a prospective seller, lessor, or transferor and a 
prospective purchaser, lessee, or transferee may complete the transaction through a 
designated law enforcement agency. A firearm applicant for a secondary sale of a regulated 
firearm through a licensee must pay to the licensee a processing fee of up to $20. 
 
A licensee or person must complete the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm within 
90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being 
disapproved. If the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm is not completed within 
90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being 
disapproved, the licensee or person must return the firearm application to the Secretary 
within seven days, and the Secretary must void the returned firearm application as an 
incomplete sale, rental, or transfer. 
 
Reports of sales of all regulated firearms must be forwarded to DSP within seven days of 
the completed sale. The Secretary must maintain a permanent record of all notifications 
received of completed sales, rentals, and transfers of regulated firearms in the State. 
 
A dealer must maintain the dealer’s copy of the application form for a minimum of 
three years. The prospective seller, lessor, or transferor must keep one copy of the firearm 
application for at least three years. These records must be open for inspection by any law 
enforcement officer during normal business hours or as specifically requested by the 
Secretary. State licensees must also have a federal firearms license issued by the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in fiscal 2027 only 
for one-time programming costs for DSP to update its licensing portal to allow (1) for an 
applicant to select one of the possible exemptions to the seven-day waiting requirement 
and (2) the system to recognize the exemption and automatically send the approval 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 126/ Page 3 
notifications to the applicant and the licensee upon application. Currently, the approval 
notification is not sent until the seventh day regardless of when the approval is granted.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 27 (Senators Folden and McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; cities of 
College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of General Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3