START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 117 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 117 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public Schools - Airway Clearing Device Availability and Use - Policy (Bowen 
Levy Airway Clearing Device Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education to establish a policy for public schools to 
obtain at least one “airway clearing device” per school and authorize the school nurse or 
other school personnel to use such a device on an individual experiencing a choking 
emergency. The bill provides a good faith exemption from liability for school nurses or 
other school personnel and establishes certain required elements for county policies. The 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must develop and disseminate a 
standard form for public schools to report each incident requiring the use of an airway 
clearing device. Each public school must report to MSDE each incident at the school or at 
a related school event that required the use of an airway clearing device. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can develop, disseminate, and collect responses from a standard 
incident reporting mechanism and collaborate with the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) on updating appropriate School Health Services Guidelines with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Local Effect:  Local school system (LSS) expenditures increase meaningfully to stock at 
least one airway clearing device per school. LSS and (in some jurisdictions local health 
department (LHD)) expenditures may increase by a minimal and likely absorbable amount 
for training school nurses and staff. Local revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 117/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Airway clearing device” means a portable medical device that uses 
manually created suction to remove a blockage from the airway during a choking 
emergency. 
 
The bill provides a good-faith exemption from liability for a school nurse or other school 
person who, except for any willful or grossly negligent act, responds to an individual 
experiencing a choking emergency in accordance with the bill.  
 
A county policy regarding airway cleaning devices must include requirements for 
(1) storage of the device in areas where students or school personnel primarily eat and 
(2) training for the school nurse and other school personnel on how to recognize the 
symptoms of an individual experiencing a choking emergency and procedures for the use 
of an airway clearing device on such an individual. 
 
Current Law:  With the assistance of LHDs, each local board of education must provide 
adequate school health services, instruction in health education, and a healthful school 
environment. MSDE and MDH must jointly develop public standards and guidelines for 
school health programs and offer assistance to the local boards of education and LHDs in 
their implementation.  
 
MSDE and MDH must jointly establish guidelines for public schools regarding emergency 
care for students with special health needs. The guidelines must include procedures for the 
emergency administration of medication and the proper follow-up emergency procedures, 
a description of parental or caregiver responsibilities, a description of school 
responsibilities, a description of student responsibilities that are age and condition 
appropriate, and any other issue that is relevant to the emergency medical care of students 
with special health needs. MSDE and MDH must provide technical assistance to schools 
to implement the guidelines established, train designated school personnel at the local 
level, and develop a process to monitor the implementation of the guidelines.  
 
MSDE’s Maryland State School Health Services Guidelines for Emergency Care in 
Maryland Schools contain recommended procedures to serve as “what to do in an 
emergency information” for school staff with minimal training to guide decision making 
in an actual emergency. The guidelines include recommendations for emergency choking 
situations.  
 
MSDE advises that the agency already collects, tracks, and analyzes incident reports from 
all public schools on epinephrine, bronchodilator, and naloxone administration.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 117/ Page 3 
Local Expenditures:  Airway clearing devices are available for about $60 each. Therefore, 
the cost to stock at least one device at each of Maryland’s more than 1,400 public schools 
is roughly $85,200 statewide. Exact costs for each LSS depend on the price of such devices 
available and the number of devices local policies require each school to stock (as the bill 
requires at least one device per school and local jurisdictions may choose to stock 
additional replacement devices). Costs to LSSs may be lower to the extent they are able to 
buy such devices in bulk.  
 
Frederick County Public Schools advise that the school system may incur minimal 
additional costs to purchase and install wall-mounted cases for the airway clearing devices. 
LSSs will also incur ongoing replacement costs for at least portions of the device every 
two to three years.  
 
LSSs also may face minimal costs to train school nurses and other school personnel in the 
appropriate use of airway clearing devices. As LHDs provide school nurses in 
approximately 14 jurisdictions, LHD expenditures may increase minimally in those 
jurisdictions for training costs. These costs are offset to the extent LSSs and LHDs can 
partner with organizations that provide airway clearing device training at no cost.  
 
Additional Comments:  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) generally 
encourages the public to follow established choking rescue protocols, which do not include 
the use of airway clearing devices. In a November 13, 2025 Safety Communication, FDA 
noted, “anti-choking devices currently sold over-the-counter do not have FDA marketing 
authorization, meaning the FDA has not evaluated the safety and effectiveness of those 
devices. Consumers, parents, caregivers, and health care providers should be aware that 
using an unauthorized anti-choking device before established protocols could delay critical 
life-saving action.” 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 219 (Senator Salling) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Association 
of County Health Officers; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; St. 
Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 117/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4