START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 141 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 141 
(Delegate Foley) 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Appropriations 
 
 
State Personnel - Collective Bargaining - Graduate Assistants 
 
 
This bill authorizes graduate assistants, including fellows and postdoctoral interns, at the 
University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU) and St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland (SMCM) to collectively bargain. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expenditures for USM institutions and MSU increase minimally to 
reimburse the Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) for collective bargaining 
expenses. Accordingly, PERB reimbursable revenues and expenditures increase 
minimally. In addition, USM and MSU administrative and personnel expenditures may 
increase, potentially significantly. SMCM is not likely to be affected in the near term. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A bargaining unit at each USM institution, MSU, and SMCM may be 
established for all eligible graduate assistants, including fellows and postdoctoral interns. 
 
“Graduate assistant” is defined as a graduate student at a USM institution, MSU, or SMCM 
who is a teaching, administrative, or research assistant, or in a comparable position, a 
fellow, or a postdoctoral intern. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 141/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Chapter 341 of 2001 extended collective bargaining rights to many 
categories of higher education personnel at public four-year institutions of higher education 
and Baltimore City Community College but excluded all faculty and students from the 
benefit. In addition, contingent, contractual, temporary, or emergency employees are 
specifically excluded from collective bargaining. Also excluded are student employees, 
including a teaching assistant or a comparable position, fellow, or postdoctoral intern. 
 
University Employment and Compensation Policies 
 
USM institutions must follow various policies related to staff employment and 
compensation. For example, under USM Policy II – 1.05 Policy on the Employment of 
Full-Time, Non-Tenure Track Instructional Faculty in the University System of Maryland 
and USM Policy II – 1.06 Policy on the Employment of Salaried, Part-Time, Non-Tenure 
Track Instructional Faculty in the University System of Maryland, every effort must be 
made to make salaries professionally appropriate and competitive to the extent allowed by 
available fiscal resources. 
 
Wages for graduate assistants are set by each institution. USM institutions must follow 
USM Policy III – 7.11 Policy on Graduate Assistantships. Under this policy, appointments 
may be made for appropriate periods of time, as determined by the institution. A graduate 
assistant may serve on a full-time, half-time, or other basis. A full-time assistant’s 
responsibilities should take, on average, 20 hours per week. A half-time assistantship 
should require an average of 10 hours per week. 
 
According to USM policy, each institution must establish stipend levels for 
graduate assistants that are competitive with peer institutions, to the extent allowed by 
available fiscal resources. Further, each institution must establish minimum stipend 
amounts annually, with discretion to award stipends above the minimum level. 
 
Public Employee Relations Board 
 
The Public Employee Relations Act (Chapter 114 of 2023) substantially restructured 
collective bargaining by public employees, including establishing PERB as the 
replacement for three separate boards – among them the former State Higher Education 
Labor Relations Board – to oversee collective bargaining for all public employees. PERB 
may investigate and take appropriate action in response to complaints of unfair labor 
practices, including strikes and lockouts. The State and its officers, employees, agents, or 
representatives are prohibited from engaging in unfair labor practices. PERB also 
administers elections for exclusive representatives. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 141/ Page 3 
Certification of an Employee Organization 
 
In order to be certified, an employee organization must submit a petition showing that at 
least 30% of the eligible employees in a bargaining unit wish to be represented by the 
petitioning organization. Other employee organizations may participate in the election if 
they prove that 10% of the eligible employees in the bargaining unit wish to be represented 
by them. There must also be a provision for “no exclusive representative” on the ballot. 
PERB must conduct the election by secret ballot, which may be in person, by mail, or 
electronic. Interest in union representation can be shown by a union authorization card or 
a union membership card as specified. 
 
An employee organization may request a preferred method of voting; if there is a dispute 
between two or more employee organizations, PERB may designate the method of voting. 
 
PERB must certify as exclusive representative the employee organization receiving the 
votes in an election from a majority of the employees voting in the election. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Public Employee Relations Board 
 
PERB reimbursable revenues and expenditures increase minimally for each election. 
Actual revenues and expenditures depend on the number of elections held, the number of 
members, and the number and duration of any disputes. PERB anticipates increased costs 
peaking over three fiscal years (fiscal 2027 through 2029) and then tapering off.  
 
Higher Education Institutions 
 
Higher education expenditures increase minimally for USM institutions and MSU to 
reimburse PERB for expenses related to collective bargaining. As SMCM reports that it 
has no graduate assistants (including no postdoctoral interns) on its staff or faculty, SMCM 
is not likely to be affected – at least not in the near term. 
 
Actual costs depend on whether eligible graduate assistants decide to collectively bargain 
and the actual reimbursable costs that can be assigned to the institutions. USM advises that 
currently 10 USM institutions have graduate assistants; thus, the number of bargaining 
units increases by a maximum of 10 throughout USM. 
 
Administrative expenditures may increase minimally at USM institutions and MSU (and 
potentially SMCM should staffing change) to expand collective bargaining to eligible 
graduate assistants. Several institutions advise that additional full-time staff are necessary, 
although most do not specify how many. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 141/ Page 4 
Salary expenditures for eligible graduate assistants may increase; however, any increases 
depend on actual negotiations and current salaries and benefits. Health and retirement 
benefit costs may also increase, to the extent they are negotiated. The State shares in the 
cost of salary and fringe benefit increases for State-supported employees at USM, MSU, 
and SMCM. 
 
The University of Maryland, College Park Campus advises that approximately 
4,300 employees currently have collective bargaining rights on campus, and the bill 
extends eligibility to approximately 4,400 additional individuals. The University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County has almost 900 eligible graduate assistants. USM notes that 
funding for graduate assistants is often provided through grants and other programs that 
include a maximum cap on expenses. An increase in the overall cost of an assistantship 
due to negotiated increase in pay or benefits may decrease the number of graduate assistants 
that can be supported, if alternative forms of funding are not found.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 166 and HB 211 of 2025; SB 823 and HB 493 of 2024; and SB 247 
and HB 275 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 84 (Senators Kramer and Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University;  
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Public Employee Relations Board; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4