START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 181

J1, C2 6lr1442
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Woods
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Health – Restaurants – Disclosure of Main Food Allergens

3 FOR the purpose of requiring restaurants to make available to each customer a certain
4 written disclosure of each main food allergen, if any, that the restaurant knows or
5 reasonably should know is an ingredient in each menu item; and generally relating
6 to restaurants and the disclosure of main food allergens.

7 BY renumbering
8 Article – Health – General
9 Section 21–330.3 and 21–330.4
10 to be Section 21–330.4 and 21–330.5, respectively
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 13–517(a)(1)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Education
20 Section 13–517(a)(4)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Health – General
25 Section 21–330.3
26 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0181*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 181

1 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
3 Article – Health – General
4 Section 21–1214
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

7 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
8 That Section(s) 21–330.3 and 21–330.4 of Article – Health – General of the Annotated Code
9 of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 21–330.4 and 21–330.5, respectively.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
11 as follows:

12 Article – Education

13 13–517.

14 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

15 (4) (i) “Facility” means an agency, an association, a corporation, a firm,
16 a partnership, or any other entity.

17 (ii) “Facility” does not include a grocery store or restaurant that is
18 subject to [§ 21–330.3] § 21–330.4 of the Health – General Article.

19 Article – Health – General

20 21–330.3.

21 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “MAIN FOOD ALLERGEN” HAS THE MEANING STATED
22 IN 21 U.S.C. § 321.

23 (B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO PREPACKAGED FOODS THAT ARE
24 SUBJECT TO FEDERAL LABELING REQUIREMENTS FOR MAIN FOOD ALLERGENS
25 UNDER 21 U.S.C. § 343.

26 (C) (1) A RESTAURANT SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE TO EACH CUSTOMER A
27 WRITTEN DISCLOSURE OF EACH MAIN FOOD ALLERGEN, IF ANY, THAT THE
28 RESTAURANT KNOWS OR REASONABLY SHOULD KNOW IS CONTAINED AS AN
29 INGREDIENT IN EACH MENU ITEM.

30 (2) THE WRITTEN DISCLOSURE SHALL USE THE COMMON NAMES OF
31 THE MAIN FOOD ALLERGEN OR STANDARDIZED PICTOGRAMS TO COMMUNICATE THE
32 PRESENCE OF A MAIN FOOD ALLERGEN.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 181 3

1 (D) A RESTAURANT MAY SATISFY THE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT
2 ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION BY:

3 (1) INCLUDING A WRITTEN DISCLOSURE ON THE RESTAURANT’S
4 MENU;

5 (2) MAKING THE WRITTEN DISCLOSURE AVAILABLE IN A DIGITAL
6 FORMAT, INCLUDING THROUGH THE USE OF A QUICK RESPONSE (QR) CODE THAT
7 LINKS TO THE RESTAURANT’S DIGITAL MENU; OR

8 (3) MAKING THE WRITTEN DISCLOSURE AVAILABLE THROUGH:

9 (I) A SEPARATE ALLERGEN–SPECIFIC MENU;

10 (II) AN ALLERGEN CHART;

11 (III) AN ALLERGEN GRID;

12 (IV) AN ALLERGEN BOOKLET; OR

13 (V) ANY OTHER WRITTEN MATERIAL.

14 21–1214.

15 (a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, any person who
16 violates any provision of Subtitle 3 of this title or any rule or regulation adopted under
17 Subtitle 3 of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to:

18 (i) For a first offense, a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
19 not exceeding 90 days, or both; and

20 (ii) For a second offense, a fine not exceeding $2,500 or imprisonment
21 not exceeding 1 year, or both.

22 (2) A person who violates § 21–330.1 of this title is not subject to paragraph
23 (1) of this subsection.

24 (b) In addition to any criminal penalties imposed under this section, a person who
25 violates any provision of Subtitle 3 of this title or any rule or regulation adopted under
26 Subtitle 3 of this title or any term, condition, or limitation of any license or registration
27 issued under Subtitle 3 of this title:

28 (1) Is liable for a civil penalty not exceeding $5,000, to be collected in a civil
29 action in the District Court for any county; and
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 181

1 (2) May be enjoined from continuing the violation.

2 (c) Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation under this section.

3 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4