START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 141

P4, F5 6lr0645
HB 211/25 – APP (PRE–FILED) CF SB 84

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: July 23, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections and Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Personnel – Collective Bargaining – Graduate Assistants

3 FOR the purpose of providing collective bargaining rights to certain graduate assistants at
4 certain public institutions of higher education; establishing a separate collective
5 bargaining unit for the graduate assistants; and generally relating to collective
6 bargaining for graduate assistants at public institutions of higher education.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
9 Section 3–101 and 3–102(b)(9) and (d)(2)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – State Personnel and Pensions

15 3–101.

16 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

17 (b) “Board” means the Public Employee Relations Board.

18 (c) “Chancellor” has the meaning stated in § 12–101 of the Education Article.

19 (d) “Collective bargaining” means:

20 (1) good faith negotiations by authorized representatives of employees and
21 their employer with the intention of:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0141*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 141

1 (i) 1. reaching an agreement about wages, hours, and other
2 terms and conditions of employment; and

3 2. incorporating the terms of the agreement in a written
4 memorandum of understanding or other written understanding; or

5 (ii) clarifying terms and conditions of employment;

6 (2) administration of terms and conditions of employment; or

7 (3) the voluntary adjustment of a dispute or disagreement between
8 authorized representatives of employees and their employer that arises under a
9 memorandum of understanding or other written understanding.

10 (e) “Employee organization” has the meaning stated in § 22–101 of the State
11 Government Article.

12 (f) “Exclusive representative” has the meaning stated in § 22–101 of the State
13 Government Article.

14 (g) (1) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” means employees who
15 have been granted the following status by the Board of Trustees of the Maryland School for
16 the Deaf:

17 (i) after–school program counselors;

18 (ii) American Sign Language specialists;

19 (iii) athletic trainers;

20 (iv) behavior specialists;

21 (v) clerical aides;

22 (vi) dorm counselors;

23 (vii) employment specialists;

24 (viii) instructional technology resource specialists;

25 (ix) librarians;

26 (x) literacy and reading specialists;

27 (xi) occupational therapists;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 141 3

1 (xii) orientation and mobility specialists;

2 (xiii) physical therapists;

3 (xiv) school counselors;

4 (xv) school IEP coordinators;

5 (xvi) school nurses;

6 (xvii) school social workers;

7 (xviii) speech–language pathologists;

8 (xix) student support specialists;

9 (xx) teachers;

10 (xxi) teacher aides;

11 (xxii) transition coordinators; and

12 (xxiii) work–to–learn specialists.

13 (2) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” does not include officers
14 or supervisory employees at the Maryland School for the Deaf.

15 (H) “GRADUATE ASSISTANT” MEANS A GRADUATE STUDENT AT A SYSTEM
16 INSTITUTION, MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY, OR ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF
17 MARYLAND WHO IS A TEACHING, ADMINISTRATIVE, OR RESEARCH ASSISTANT OR IN
18 A COMPARABLE POSITION, A FELLOW, OR A POSTDOCTORAL INTERN.

19 [(h)] (I) “President” means:

20 (1) with regard to a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the
21 Education Article, the president of the constituent institution;

22 (2) with regard to a center or institute, as those terms are defined in §
23 12–101 of the Education Article, the president of the center or institute;

24 (3) with regard to the University System of Maryland Office, the
25 Chancellor of the University System of Maryland; and

26 (4) with regard to Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of
27 Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College, the president of the institution.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 141

1 [(i)] (J) “System institution” means:

2 (1) a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the Education
3 Article;

4 (2) a center or institute, as those terms are defined in § 12–101 of the
5 Education Article; and

6 (3) the University System of Maryland Office.

7 3–102.

8 (b) This title does not apply to:

9 (9) an employee of the University System of Maryland, Morgan State
10 University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, or Baltimore City Community College who is:

11 (i) a chief administrator or in a comparable position;

12 (ii) a deputy, associate, or assistant administrator or in a
13 comparable position;

14 (iii) a member of the faculty, including a faculty librarian;

15 (iv) [a] AN UNDERGRADUATE student employee[, including a
16 teaching assistant or a comparable position, fellow, or post doctoral intern];

17 (v) a contingent, contractual, temporary, or emergency employee,
18 EXCEPT FOR A GRADUATE ASSISTANT;

19 (vi) a contingent, contractual, or temporary employee whose position
20 is funded through a research or service grant or contract, or through clinical revenues,
21 EXCEPT FOR A GRADUATE ASSISTANT; or

22 (vii) an employee whose regular place of employment is outside the
23 State of Maryland;

24 (d) (2) (i) Each system institution, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s
25 College of Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College shall have separate
26 bargaining units.

27 (ii) Appropriate bargaining units shall consist of:

28 1. all eligible nonexempt employees, as described in the
29 federal Fair Labor Standards Act, except eligible sworn police officers;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 141 5

1 2. all eligible exempt employees, as described in the federal
2 Fair Labor Standards Act; [and]

3 3. all eligible sworn police officers; AND

4 4. ALL ELIGIBLE GRADUATE ASSISTANTS.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
6 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5