START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 161 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Tax Credit - Retail Service Station Conversions 
 
 
This bill authorizes local governments to grant a property tax credit for certain converted 
retail service stations. The bill also authorizes the State to pay each county or municipality 
that grants the tax credit an amount equal to 50% of the property tax revenue that would 
have been collected if the tax credit had not been granted. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027 to reimburse 
local governments for property tax credits that are granted. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent the property tax credit is granted. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit against 
the county or municipal property tax imposed on real property if the use of the real property 
has been converted from a retail service station to another retail use, a residential use, or a 
mixed retail and residential use. “Retail use” does not include use as a discount store or a 
self-service storage facility. “Discount store” is a retail store that offers for sale (1) a 
combination and variety of convenience and consumer shopping goods and (2) the majority 
of the items in the inventory at a price not to exceed $5. Local governments may provide 
for (1) the amount and duration of the property tax credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 161/ Page 2 
for the property tax credit; (3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform 
processing of requests for the property tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to 
carry out the property tax credit. 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that a property tax credit that is authorized be 
granted primarily to defray costs associated with the removal of underground storage tanks 
and the remediation of any contamination associated with underground storage tanks. 
 
Current Law:  None applicable. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase in any fiscal year that local 
governments grant the property tax credit authorized by the bill, as the bill authorizes the 
State to reimburse local governments for 50% of the property tax revenue that would have 
been collected if the tax credit had not been granted. The amount of any expenditure 
increase depends on the amount of property tax credits that are granted in any fiscal year. 
The State Department of Assessments and Taxation reports that there are approximately 
2,300 properties that are classified as a retail service station. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 to 
the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue decrease depends 
on the number of converted retail service stations, the assessed value of each, local property 
tax rates, and the amount and duration of the property tax credit. The State may reimburse 
local governments for 50% of the property tax revenue that would have been collected if 
the tax credit had not been granted, which will offset the overall local revenue loss if a 
reimbursement is made. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in the conversion of retail service 
stations may be meaningfully impacted by the authorization of a property tax credit for 
retail service station conversion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 341 and SB 344 of 2025, HB 12 and SB 67 of 2024, and HB 889 of 
2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 58 (Senator Brooks) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation, Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 161/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3