START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 128

F1 6lr0786
HB 713/21 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr2084

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: September 5, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Education – Therapy Dogs – Policy for Handling and Use in
3 Schools

4 FOR the purpose of requiring each county board of education to allow, subject to certain
5 requirements and policies, the use of therapy dogs in public schools in the county;
6 and generally relating to therapy dogs in public schools.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Education
9 Section 4–148
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Education

15 4–148.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “HANDLER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO PROVIDES CARE AND
19 TRAINING FOR A THERAPY DOG.

20 (3) “THERAPY DOG” MEANS A DOG THAT IS:

21 (I) TRAINED TO PROVIDE AFFECTION AND COMFORT TO

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0128*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 128

1 CHILDREN WHO NEED EMOTIONAL SUPPORT IN A SCHOOL SETTING; AND

2 (II) CERTIFIED OR REGISTERED AS A THERAPY DOG.

3 (B) (1) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL ALLOW THE USE OF THERAPY DOGS IN
4 PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY.

5 (2) EACH THERAPY DOG USED IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL SHALL BE
6 ACCOMPANIED BY A HANDLER.

7 (C) (1) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL ADOPT A POLICY FOR THE USE AND
8 HANDLING OF THERAPY DOGS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTY.

9 (2) THE POLICY REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
10 INCLUDE:

11 (I) LOCAL OR NATIONAL CERTIFICATION OR REGISTRATION
12 REQUIREMENTS FOR THERAPY DOGS;

13 (II) GUIDELINES FOR HANDLERS OF THERAPY DOGS;

14 (III) GUIDELINES FOR WHEN AND WHERE THERAPY DOGS AND
15 HANDLERS ARE ALLOWED IN SCHOOL BUILDINGS;

16 (IV) NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PARENTS, STUDENTS,
17 AND SCHOOL FACULTY AND STAFF; AND

18 (V) GUIDELINES FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF STUDENTS AND
19 STAFF WITH ALLERGIES TO DOGS OR WHO ARE UNCOMFORTABLE AROUND DOGS.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2