START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 138 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 138 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Third-Degree Sexual Offense - Burglary 
 
 
This bill establishes that it is a third-degree sexual offense to engage in sexual contact with 
another person without the other person’s consent in connection with a burglary in the 
first‑, second‐, or third‐degree. A person who conspires to, attempts to, or commits this 
offense is (1) a Tier I sex offender if the victim is not a minor; (2) a Tier II sex offender if 
the victim is a minor who is at least age 13; or (3) a Tier III sex offender if the victim is a 
minor who is younger than age 13. The bill applies prospectively to acts committed on or 
after October 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in State expenditures due to the bill’s application 
of an enhanced incarceration penalty to these acts and changes in sex offender 
classifications. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in local revenues from fines imposed in 
circuit court cases. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Depending on the nature of the offense, engaging in unlawful sexual 
contact with another person may be classified as a third‐degree or fourth‐degree sexual 
offense. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 138/ Page 2 
Third-Degree Sexual Offense:  Under the State’s prohibition against third‑degree sexual 
offense, a person may not:   
 
 
engage in sexual contact with another without the consent of the other; and 
(1) employ or display a dangerous weapon, or a physical object that the victim 
reasonably believes is a dangerous weapon; (2) suffocate, strangle, disfigure, or 
inflict serious physical injury on the victim or another in the course of committing 
the crime; (3) threaten, or place the victim in fear, that the victim, or an individual 
known to the victim, imminently will be subject to death, suffocation, strangulation, 
disfigurement, serious physical injury, or kidnapping; or (4) commit the crime while 
aided and abetted by another; 
 
engage in sexual contact with another if the victim is a substantially cognitively 
impaired individual, a mentally incapacitated individual, or a physically helpless 
individual, and the person performing the act knows or reasonably should know of 
the victim’s condition; 
 
engage in sexual contact with another if the victim is younger than age 14, and the 
person performing the sexual contact is at least 4 years older than the victim; 
 
engage in a sexual act with another if the victim is age 14 or 15, and the person 
performing the sexual act is at least age 21; or 
 
engage in vaginal intercourse with another if the victim is age 14 or 15, and the 
person performing the act is at least age 21. 
 
A violator is guilty of the felony of third-degree sexual offense and subject to imprisonment 
for a maximum of 10 years. 
 
Fourth-Degree Sexual Offense:  The fourth-degree sexual offense statute prohibits a person 
from (1) engaging in sexual contact with another without the consent of the other or 
(2) except as prohibited under the third-degree sexual offense statute, engaging in a sexual 
act or vaginal intercourse with a victim who is age 14 or 15 and the person performing the 
act is at least 4 years older than the victim. Fourth-degree sexual offense is a misdemeanor, 
punishable by imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. However, 
an increased penalty of imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $1,000 maximum fine 
applies to a person who has been convicted on a prior occasion not arising from the same 
incident of violations of specified sexual crimes under State law. The specified crimes are:  
first-degree rape; second-degree rape; third-degree sexual offense; fourth-degree sexual 
offense; attempted rape in the first degree; attempted rape in the second degree; attempted 
sexual offense in the first-degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); attempted sexual 
offense in the second degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); continuing course of 
conduct with a child; and sexual abuse of a minor. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 138/ Page 3 
First‐Degree Burglary:  A person may not break and enter the dwelling of another with 
the intent to commit theft. A violator is guilty of first-degree burglary, a felony punishable 
by up to 20 years imprisonment. In addition, a person may not break and enter the dwelling 
of another with the intent to commit a crime of violence. A violator is guilty of home 
invasion, a felony punishable by up to 25 years imprisonment. 
 
Second‐Degree Burglary:  A person may not break and enter the storehouse of another 
with the intent to commit theft, a crime of violence, or arson in the second degree. A 
violator is guilty of second-degree burglary, a felony punishable by up to 15 years 
imprisonment. 
 
A person may not break and enter the storehouse of another with the intent to steal, take, 
or carry away a firearm. A violator is guilty of second-degree burglary, a felony punishable 
by up to 20 years imprisonment and/or a maximum fine of $10,000. 
 
Third‐Degree Burglary:  A person may not break and enter the dwelling of another with 
the intent to commit a crime. A violator is guilty of burglary in the third degree, a felony 
punishable by up to 10 years imprisonment. 
 
Sex Offender Registration:  Generally, a person convicted of a sex crime or other specified 
crime in Maryland, including kidnapping and false imprisonment, is required to register 
with the State sex offender registry upon release from incarceration or release from court 
if the person did not receive a sentence with a term of incarceration. Offenders who are 
required to register in other states and who come to Maryland are required to register upon 
entering Maryland. Offenders from other states who may not be required to register in the 
home state are required to register in Maryland if the crime would have required 
registration in Maryland if committed in Maryland. 
 
A Tier I sex offender must register in person every six months with a local law enforcement 
unit for 15 years. A Tier II sex offender must register in person every six months with a 
local law enforcement unit for 25 years. A Tier III sex offender must register in person 
every three months with a local law enforcement unit for the life of the registrant.  
 
An individual convicted of a fourth-degree sexual offense is a Tier I sex offender. An 
individual convicted of a third-degree sexual offense is a Tier III sex offender if the 
conviction was for engaging in sexual contact with a victim who is younger than age 14 
and the defendant was at least 4 years older than the victim. Other acts that qualify as a 
third-degree sexual offense may result in classification as a Tier II or Tier III sex offender. 
 
State Revenues:  Since offenders subject to the bill’s provisions must commit a felony 
burglary, cases affected by the bill are heard in the circuit courts. As a result, the bill does 
not affect State revenues from fines imposed in District Court cases. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 138/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  Given that an offender subject to the bill’s provisions would also be 
sentenced for a burglary, the bill’s fiscal impact exists only to the extent that (1) an offender 
serves a longer sentence as a result of the reclassification of his/her sexual offense from a 
fourth degree to a third degree or (2) the bill’s provisions result in a defendant being 
classified as a higher level sex offender than under current law. 
 
The number of people convicted of a third-degree sexual offense as a result of the bill is 
expected to be minimal. Offenders subject to the bill’s provisions will likely be housed in 
State correctional facilities, since the bill requires the sexual offense to be committed 
during the commission of a burglary and persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months 
are incarcerated in State correctional facilities. 
 
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services advises that it does not 
anticipate a fiscal impact from the bill’s provisions. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues may decrease as a result of fewer fines being imposed in cases 
heard in the circuit courts. While a fourth-degree sexual offense may be subject to a 
maximum fine of $1,000, there is no monetary penalty associated with a third‐degree 
sexual offense. 
 
Local Expenditures:  As previously stated, persons serving a sentence longer than 
18 months are incarcerated in State correctional facilities. Given that the bill’s enhanced 
penalty is predicated on the commission of a burglary in the first-, second-, or third-degree, 
it is unlikely that offenders subject to the bill’s provisions are housed in local detention 
facilities or will be housed in local detention facilities in the future.  
 
Additional Comments:  The bill classifies a person convicted of engaging in sexual 
contact with another in connection with the commission of specified burglaries as a 
third-degree sexual offense. The bill requires an individual convicted of this offense to 
register as a Tier II sex offender if the victim is a minor who is at least age 13. Under 
current law, sexual contact with a minor who is younger than age 14 by a defendant who 
is at least 4 years older is a third-degree sexual offense that is eligible for registration as a 
Tier III sex offender, which is a more serious sex offender category. Therefore, in a limited 
number of cases, the bill may result in a defendant being registered as a lower level sex 
offender than under current law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 138/ Page 5 
Cross File:  SB 230 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5