START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 177 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 177 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Bicycles, Play Vehicles, and Unicycles - Crosswalks 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle at an intersection, 
if facing a red signal, to enter the intersection to cross the highway in the direction of a 
pedestrian control “walk” signal displayed for the portion of the highway on which the 
bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle is traveling, unless otherwise directed by a traffic control 
device. (Under current law, a person riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle is subject 
to all traffic control signals at an intersection.) Before entering an intersection in these 
circumstances, a person riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle must yield the 
right‑of‑way to any vehicle or pedestrian lawfully using the intersection. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may decrease in certain counties, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
For purposes of the Maryland Vehicle Law, “bicycle” means a vehicle that (1) is designed 
to be operated by human power; (2) has two or three wheels, with one being more than 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 177/ Page 2 
14 inches in diameter; and (3) has a drive mechanism other than pedals directly attached to 
a drive wheel. In general, the term includes an electric bicycle, a moped, and an electric 
low‑speed scooter.  
 
“Play vehicle” means a vehicle that has two or more wheels, is propelled only by human 
power, and is not a bicycle or a wheelchair. A “unicycle” is not defined for purposes of the 
vehicle law. 
 
A “traffic control device” is defined as any sign, signal, marking, or device that is not 
inconsistent with the Maryland vehicle law and is placed by authority of an authorized 
public body or official to regulate, warn, or guide traffic. 
 
Maryland Vehicle Law – Bicycles, Play Vehicles, and Unicycles 
 
The Maryland Vehicle Law specifies that every person operating a bicycle in a public 
bicycle area has all the rights granted to and is subject to all the duties required of the driver 
of a vehicle, except for rules of the road that by their very nature cannot apply or as 
otherwise provided in Title 21, Subtitle 12 of the Transportation Article. At an intersection, 
a person riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle is subject to all traffic control signals, 
as specified. 
 
Additionally, a person who is lawfully riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a 
sidewalk or sidewalk area or in or through a crosswalk generally has the same rights and 
restrictions applicable to pedestrians under the vehicle law. In such circumstances, a person 
riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle must yield the right‑of‑way to a pedestrian or an 
individual riding on an electric personal assistive mobility device.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may decrease in certain, more densely populated 
jurisdictions where the bill’s changes reduce the need to install special signage for 
bicyclists at signalized intersections. The magnitude of this decrease varies by jurisdiction, 
as discussed below. 
 
In response to similar legislation introduced in 2025, the Maryland Association of Counties 
advised that there would be a negligible impact on county governments. Harford County 
and the City of Frederick each advise that the bill is not anticipated to affect their finances 
or operations.  
 
Montgomery County advises that the bill eliminates its need to install special signage for 
bicyclists regarding leading pedestrian intervals (LPIs) at various intersections throughout 
the county, at a cost of $2,000 to $5,000 per intersection. An LPI gives pedestrians the 
opportunity to enter the crosswalk at an intersection three to seven seconds before vehicles 
are given a green indication and allowed to proceed. The Montgomery County Department 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 177/ Page 3 
of Transportation (MCDOT) advises that the use of LPIs raises awareness among drivers 
about the presence of pedestrians and improves overall pedestrian safety. 
 
Under current law, bicyclists are generally not permitted to use LPIs. MCDOT advises that 
bicyclists can use LPIs if they are riding on a sidewalk; however, bicyclists riding on a 
highway (including in a bike lane) may only use LPIs if MCDOT installs signage at a given 
intersection stating that bicyclists may use the pedestrian walk signal. According to 
MCDOT, the total cost associated with LPIs is $2,000 to $5,000 per intersection. MCDOT 
advises that the bill eliminates the need for this signage because bicyclists would 
automatically be permitted to use LPIs under State law. To date, MCDOT has installed 
LPIs at 205 intersections in the county; approximately 197 of these intersections still 
require signage. Accordingly, the bill could generate savings of $394,000 to $985,000 for 
Montgomery County. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 422 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 155 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Montgomery counties; City of Frederick; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3