START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 106

P4, F5 6lr0945
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 6

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Personnel – Collective Bargaining – Nontenure Track Faculty

3 FOR the purpose of providing collective bargaining rights to certain nontenure track faculty
4 at certain State institutions of higher education; establishing a separate collective
5 bargaining unit for certain nontenure track faculty; and generally relating to
6 collective bargaining for nontenure track faculty at public institutions of higher
7 education.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
10 Section 3–101 and 3–102(b)(9) and (12) and (d)(2)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
15 Section 3–102(b)(10), (11), and (13)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – State Personnel and Pensions

21 3–101.

22 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) “Board” means the Public Employee Relations Board.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0106*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 106

1 (c) “Chancellor” has the meaning stated in § 12–101 of the Education Article.

2 (d) “Collective bargaining” means:

3 (1) good faith negotiations by authorized representatives of employees and
4 their employer with the intention of:

5 (i) 1. reaching an agreement about wages, hours, and other
6 terms and conditions of employment; and

7 2. incorporating the terms of the agreement in a written
8 memorandum of understanding or other written understanding; or

9 (ii) clarifying terms and conditions of employment;

10 (2) administration of terms and conditions of employment; or

11 (3) the voluntary adjustment of a dispute or disagreement between
12 authorized representatives of employees and their employer that arises under a
13 memorandum of understanding or other written understanding.

14 (e) “Employee organization” has the meaning stated in § 22–101 of the State
15 Government Article.

16 (f) “Exclusive representative” has the meaning stated in § 22–101 of the State
17 Government Article.

18 (g) (1) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” means employees who
19 have been granted the following status by the Board of Trustees of the Maryland School for
20 the Deaf:

21 (i) after–school program counselors;

22 (ii) American Sign Language specialists;

23 (iii) athletic trainers;

24 (iv) behavior specialists;

25 (v) clerical aides;

26 (vi) dorm counselors;

27 (vii) employment specialists;

28 (viii) instructional technology resource specialists;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 106 3

1 (ix) librarians;

2 (x) literacy and reading specialists;

3 (xi) occupational therapists;

4 (xii) orientation and mobility specialists;

5 (xiii) physical therapists;

6 (xiv) school counselors;

7 (xv) school IEP coordinators;

8 (xvi) school nurses;

9 (xvii) school social workers;

10 (xviii) speech–language pathologists;

11 (xix) student support specialists;

12 (xx) teachers;

13 (xxi) teacher aides;

14 (xxii) transition coordinators; and

15 (xxiii) work–to–learn specialists.

16 (2) “Faculty at the Maryland School for the Deaf” does not include officers
17 or supervisory employees at the Maryland School for the Deaf.

18 (H) “NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY” MEANS FULL–TIME, PART–TIME, OR
19 ADJUNCT NONTENURE TRACK EMPLOYEES OF A SYSTEM INSTITUTION, MORGAN
20 STATE UNIVERSITY, OR ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND WHOSE ASSIGNMENTS
21 INVOLVE ACADEMIC RESPONSIBILITIES, INCLUDING TEACHERS, RESEARCHERS,
22 AND DEPARTMENT HEADS AND THOSE IN COMPARABLE POSITIONS.

23 [(h)] (I) “President” means:

24 (1) with regard to a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the
25 Education Article, the president of the constituent institution;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 106

1 (2) with regard to a center or institute, as those terms are defined in §
2 12–101 of the Education Article, the president of the center or institute;

3 (3) with regard to the University System of Maryland Office, the
4 Chancellor of the University System of Maryland; and

5 (4) with regard to Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of
6 Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College, the president of the institution.

7 [(i)] (J) “System institution” means:

8 (1) a constituent institution, as defined in § 12–101 of the Education
9 Article;

10 (2) a center or institute, as those terms are defined in § 12–101 of the
11 Education Article; and

12 (3) the University System of Maryland Office.

13 3–102.

14 (b) This title does not apply to:

15 (9) an employee of the University System of Maryland, Morgan State
16 University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, or Baltimore City Community College who is:

17 (i) a chief administrator or in a comparable position;

18 (ii) a deputy, associate, or assistant administrator or in a
19 comparable position;

20 (iii) a member of the faculty, including a faculty librarian, EXCEPT
21 FOR NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY;

22 (iv) a student employee, including a teaching assistant or a
23 comparable position, fellow, or post doctoral intern;

24 (v) a contingent, contractual, temporary, or emergency employee,
25 EXCEPT FOR NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY;

26 (vi) a contingent, contractual, or temporary employee whose position
27 is funded through a research or service grant or contract, or through clinical revenues,
28 EXCEPT FOR NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY; or

29 (vii) an employee whose regular place of employment is outside the
30 State of Maryland, EXCEPT FOR NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 106 5

1 (10) an employee whose participation in a labor organization would be
2 contrary to the State’s ethics laws;

3 (11) any managerial or confidential employee of a unit of State government
4 listed in subsection (a)(1)(i) through (iv) and (vi) through (xii) of this section, as defined in
5 regulations adopted by the Secretary;

6 (12) any supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee of a State
7 institution of higher education listed in subsection (a)(1)(v) of this section[, as defined in
8 regulations adopted by the governing board of the institution]; or

9 (13) any employee described in subsection (a)(2) of this section who is a
10 supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee, as defined in regulations adopted by the
11 Secretary.

12 (d) (2) (i) Each system institution, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s
13 College of Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College shall have separate
14 bargaining units.

15 (ii) Appropriate bargaining units shall consist of:

16 1. all eligible nonexempt employees, as described in the
17 federal Fair Labor Standards Act, except eligible sworn police officers;

18 2. all eligible exempt employees, as described in the federal
19 Fair Labor Standards Act; [and]

20 3. all eligible sworn police officers; AND

21 4. NONTENURE TRACK FACULTY.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5