START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 108

E5 6lr1418
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 61

By: Delegate Pasteur
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Division of Correction – Release Preparation Program

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Release Preparation Program in the Division of
4 Correction for the purpose of providing access to formerly incarcerated individuals
5 to State correctional facilities to assist incarcerated individuals with release
6 preparation; altering the purposes of the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement
7 Fund to include providing funds to cover the costs of supporting the Release
8 Preparation Program; and generally relating to the Release Preparation Program.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 36–206
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Correctional Services
16 Section 9–619
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2025 Replacement Volume)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22 36–206.

23 (a) In this section, “Fund” means the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement
24 Fund.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0108*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 108

1 (b) There is a Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund.

2 (c) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funds to cover the costs of:

3 (1) the operation of the Administration;

4 (2) administering and enforcing this title; [and]

5 (3) supporting the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program established
6 under § 1–323 of this article; AND

7 (4) SUPPORTING THE RELEASE PREPARATION PROGRAM
8 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–619 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

9 (d) The Administration shall administer the Fund.

10 (e) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
11 the State Finance and Procurement Article.

12 (2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
13 Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

14 (f) The Fund consists of:

15 (1) fees distributed to the Fund under § 36–205 of this subtitle;

16 (2) revenue distributed to the Fund under § 2–1302.2 of the Tax – General
17 Article;

18 (3) interest earnings of the Fund; and

19 (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
20 Fund, in accordance with any conditions adopted by the Commission for the acceptance of
21 donations or gifts to the Fund.

22 (g) The Fund may be used for:

23 (1) carrying out this title [and];

24 (2) supporting the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program established
25 under § 1–323 of this article; AND

26 (3) SUPPORTING THE RELEASE PREPARATION PROGRAM
27 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–619 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 108 3

1 (h) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
2 manner as other State money may be invested.

3 (2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

4 (i) The Fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as provided for
5 in § 2–1220 of the State Government Article.

6 (j) (1) On or before March 15 each year, the Administration shall publish on
7 its website a detailed report on revenue distributed to and expenditures from the Fund.

8 (2) The report shall also be submitted to the General Assembly in
9 accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

10 Article – Correctional Services

11 9–619.

12 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE RELEASE PREPARATION
13 PROGRAM.

14 (B) THERE IS A RELEASE PREPARATION PROGRAM IN THE DIVISION OF
15 CORRECTION.

16 (C) (1) THE DIVISION OF CORRECTION SHALL ESTABLISH A PROTOCOL
17 FOR REGISTERING FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN THE PROGRAM TO
18 HAVE ACCESS TO STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES FOR THE PURPOSE OF
19 ASSISTING INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WITH RELEASE PREPARATION.

20 (2) THE DIVISION OF CORRECTION SHALL SUBMIT THE PROTOCOL
21 ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO THE OFFICE OF THE
22 ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR APPROVAL.

23 (D) THE PROTOCOL ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
24 SECTION SHALL REQUIRE:

25 (1) THE REGISTRATION OF FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS
26 IN THE PROGRAM TO BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC; AND

27 (2) A FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IN THE PROGRAM TO
28 PROVIDE TO THE DIVISION OF CORRECTION A WRITTEN SCHEDULE DESCRIBING
29 WHEN THE INDIVIDUAL INTENDS TO ACCESS A STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

30 (E) THE DIVISION OF CORRECTION MAY NOT DENY A SCHEDULE PROVIDED
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 108

1 UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(2) OF THIS SECTION UNLESS THE SCHEDULE INTERFERES
2 WITH THE NORMAL FUNCTION OF THE STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4