START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 196 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 196 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Baby Food Testing - Definition of Baby Food 
 
   
This bill alters the definition of “baby food” to include infant formula and infant cereal, 
which subjects such products to current baby food testing, labeling, and related reporting 
requirements, as well as the prohibition on the sale of baby food that contains specified 
toxic heavy metals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any increase in workload for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
can be handled within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on local governments.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Baby food” means food packaged in a jar, pouch, tub, or box sold 
specifically for babies and children younger than age two. “Baby food” does not include 
infant formula.  
 
Per 21 U.S.C. § 321, “infant formula” means a food that purports to be or is represented 
for special dietary use solely as a food for infants by reason of its simulation of human milk 
or its suitability as a complete or partial substitute for human milk.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 196/ Page 2 
Per 7 C.F.R. § 220.2, “infant cereal” means any iron-fortified dry cereal especially 
formulated and generally recognized as cereal for infants that is routinely mixed with breast 
milk or iron-fortified formula prior to consumption.  
 
Testing and Labeling Baby Food in the State 
 
Chapters 953 and 954 of 2024 (Rudy’s Law) prohibit a person, from selling, distributing, 
or offering for sale baby food that contains toxic heavy metals that exceed the limits 
established by U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Each manufacturer of baby food 
must test a representative sample of each production aggregate of the manufacturer’s final 
baby food product for each toxic heavy metal. On request of MDH, a manufacturer of baby 
food must provide the laboratory test results to an authorized agent of the department.  
 
Additionally, each manufacturer of baby food must:  
 
 
make publicly available on their website for each baby food product sold, 
manufactured, delivered, held, or offered for sale in the State (1) the name and level 
of each toxic heavy metal present in the final baby food product; (2) sufficient 
information, such as the product name, universal product code, or lot or batch 
number, to enable consumers to identify the final baby food product; and (3) a link 
to the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance and information about 
the health effects of toxic heavy metals on children; and  
 
if the baby food is tested for a toxic heavy metal subject to an action level, regulatory 
limit, or tolerance established by FDA under 21 C.F.R. § 109, include on the baby 
food product label a (1) Quick Response (QR) Code or other machine-readable code 
that allows consumers to access on the manufacturer’s website of the baby food 
product information page, the test results for the toxic heavy metals and a link to the 
webpage on the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance and 
information about the health effects of the toxic heavy metal on children and 
(2) specified statement regarding the QR Code. 
 
Chapter 713 of 2025 altered baby food labeling requirements to replace the phrase “toxic 
heavy metal” with “toxic element” on a tested baby food product. Specifically, if baby food 
has been tested for a toxic heavy metal subject to the limits established by FDA, the product 
label must say, “for information about toxic element testing on this product, scan the 
QR code.” 
 
Maryland Department of Health  
 
MDH’s Center for Food Processing is responsible for licensing and inspecting facilities 
that make, process, store, hold, or distribute food to sell wholesale to other businesses in 
Maryland. The Center for Facility and Process Review conducts a plan and process review 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 196/ Page 3 
for all food processing plants and prototypical food service facilities. Food processing plans 
are inspected to ensure compliance with applicable State and federal laws and regulations. 
Facilities that manufacture, process, pack, and hold food and operate (receive or distribute) 
across state lines fall under FDA jurisdiction and must comply with federal regulations. 
 
The federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act prohibits the manufacture or sale of any food 
that is adulterated or misbranded. The Food Additives Amendment to the Act authorizes 
FDA to regulate food ingredients. MDH implements the Maryland Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act, which conforms to the federal Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3