START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 174 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 174 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles and Marine Vessels - Transfer-on-Death Designations 
 
 
This bill authorizes (1) an individual who is the sole owner of a vessel, or multiple 
individuals who are specified co-owners of a vessel, to designate a beneficiary to take 
ownership of the vessel on the death of the sole owner, or the last surviving co-owner, 
outside of estate administration and (2) multiple individuals who are specified co-owners 
of a motor vehicle to designate a beneficiary to take ownership of the motor vehicle on the 
death of the last surviving co-owner, outside of estate administration (adding to existing 
law that already allows an individual who is a sole owner of a motor vehicle to designate a 
beneficiary). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) may 
increase, beginning in FY 2027, potentially significantly, as discussed below (under one 
scenario, DNR special fund revenues increase by $269,540 in FY 2027). Transportation 
Trust Fund (TTF) revenues may increase, potentially significantly, as discussed below 
(under one scenario, TTF revenues increase by $1.0 million in FY 2027). General fund 
revenues may decrease each year, potentially only minimally, beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 174/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Vessels – Transfer-on-death Beneficiary Designation by a Sole Owner or Co-owners 
 
An individual who is the sole owner of a vessel, or multiple individuals who co-own a 
vessel in a manner in which the surviving owner or owners automatically acquire 
ownership of a deceased owner’s share (ownership as “joint tenants with right of 
survivorship or tenants by the entirety”) may apply to DNR to designate a beneficiary to 
take ownership of the vessel on the death of the sole owner or the last surviving co-owner. 
The designation of a beneficiary may be shown by the words “transfer‑on‑death” (TOD) 
after the name of the registered owner(s) on a certificate of title. DNR is authorized to 
charge a fee, not to exceed its costs, for issuing the certificate of title. Designation of a 
beneficiary does not affect the ownership of the vessel until the sole owner or last surviving 
co-owner dies. 
 
The designation of a beneficiary may be revoked or changed at any time before the death 
of the sole owner or the last surviving co-owner without the consent of the beneficiary by 
applying to DNR. The designation of a beneficiary is not required to be supported by 
consideration, and the certificate of title of the vessel for which the designation is made is 
not required to be delivered to the beneficiary in order for the designation to be effective. 
 
On the death of the sole owner or the last surviving co-owner, ownership of the vessel 
passes to the beneficiary if the beneficiary survives the sole owner or last surviving  
co-owner. If a designated beneficiary does not survive the sole owner or the last surviving 
co-owner, the vessel is part of the estate of the deceased sole owner or last surviving 
co-owner. 
 
A surviving designated beneficiary must apply to DNR for a new certificate of title for the 
vessel. The application must include (1) the original certificate of title designating the 
beneficiary; (2) a death certificate for the deceased sole owner or each deceased co-owner; 
(3) proof of the identity of the beneficiary; and (4) any applicable taxes or fees. The bill 
does not limit the rights of creditors of vessel owners against beneficiaries and other 
transferees under Maryland law.  
 
DNR is authorized to adopt regulations to carry out these provisions. 
 
Motor Vehicles – Transfer-on-death Beneficiary Designation by Co-owners 
 
The bill adds to existing motor vehicle law that allows an individual who is the sole owner 
of a motor vehicle to designate a TOD beneficiary, by allowing multiple individuals who 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 174/ Page 3 
co-own a motor vehicle as joint tenants with right of survivorship or tenants by the entirety 
to apply to the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to designate a TOD beneficiary to 
take ownership of the motor vehicle on the death of the last surviving co-owner. 
 
The provisions of the bill allowing co-owners of a motor vehicle to designate a TOD 
beneficiary are substantively identical to the bill’s provisions governing designation of a 
TOD beneficiary for a vessel (described above) and current law governing a sole owner’s 
designation of a TOD beneficiary for a motor vehicle.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Motor Vehicles – Transfer-on-death Beneficiary Designation by a Sole Owner  
 
Under current law, an individual who is the sole owner of a motor vehicle may apply to 
MVA to designate a beneficiary to take ownership of the motor vehicle on the death of the 
owner outside of estate administration. The provisions of the bill (applicable to sole owners 
and co-owners of vessels and co-owners of motor vehicles – see Bill Summary) are 
substantively identical to the provisions in § 13-115 of the Transportation Article that allow 
an individual who is the sole owner of a motor vehicle to designate a TOD beneficiary. 
 
Certificate of Title – Fees  
 
DNR charges a $20 fee to issue a certificate of title, a transfer of title, or a duplicate or 
corrected certificate of title. 
 
MVA charges a $40 fee to issue a duplicate certificate of title. 
 
Property of a Deceased Person 
 
Under the Estates and Trusts Article, all property of a decedent (deceased person) is subject 
to the estates of decedents law, and upon the person’s death must pass directly to the 
personal representative (a fiduciary who settles and distributes the estate of the decedent in 
accordance with the terms of any will and the estates of decedents law) for administration 
and distribution. “Property” is all real and personal property of the decedent and any right 
or interest in the property, which does not pass, at the time of the decedent’s death, to 
another person by the terms of the instrument under which it is held, or by operation of 
law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 174/ Page 4 
State Revenues:   
 
State Boat Act Fund  
 
Special fund (State Boat Act Fund) revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the 
extent that owners of vessels apply for a new certificate of title in order to designate a TOD 
beneficiary under the bill. DNR indicates that there are currently approximately 132,770 
vessels with sole ownership, and at least 2,000 vessels with co-owners who could designate 
a beneficiary under the bill. DNR indicates that owners who apply for a new certificate of 
title in order to designate a TOD beneficiary will go through the current replacement or 
corrected title application process and be charged the applicable $20 fee. The number of 
such owners that will apply for a new certificate of title in order to add a TOD beneficiary 
designation cannot be reliably estimated; however, for illustrative purposes only, if 10% 
of the owners of 132,770 vessels with sole ownership and 2,000 vessels with co-ownership, 
apply for a new certificate of title in fiscal 2027, special fund revenues increase by 
$269,540 as result of the bill in fiscal 2027. 
 
DNR advises that adding a TOD beneficiary designation as part of an application for 
issuance of a certificate of title for other reasons (after a purchase, for example) will not 
add any cost to the $20 fee charged for the title.  
 
Transportation Trust Fund  
 
TTF revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent that co-owners of motor 
vehicles apply for a new certificate of title in order to designate a TOD beneficiary under 
the bill. The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) indicates that, in  
fiscal 2025, there were approximately 500,000 vehicles with co-owners on file with MVA. 
It appears likely that MDOT will charge co-owners who apply for a new certificate of title 
in order to designate a TOD beneficiary either a $20 or $40 fee. The number of co-owners 
that will apply for a new certificate of title in order to add a TOD beneficiary designation 
cannot be reliably estimated; however, for illustrative purposes only, if it is assumed the 
fee is $40 and the co-owners of as many as 5% of 500,000 co-owned motor vehicles apply 
for a new certificate of title in fiscal 2027, TTF revenues increase by $1.0 million as a result 
of the bill in fiscal 2027. 
 
This analysis assumes that adding a TOD beneficiary designation as part of an application 
for issuance of a certificate of title for other reasons (after a purchase, for example) will 
not add any cost to the fee otherwise charged by MVA for the title. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 174/ Page 5 
General Fund 
 
General fund revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 due to reduced probate fee 
and inheritance tax revenues collected by the registers of wills, which oversee 
administration of decedents’ estates. Vessels and motor vehicles transferred under the bill’s 
TOD provisions are transferred outside of the probate estate, removing property from the 
probate estate, and probate fees are collected by the registers of wills based on the value of 
the probate estate. The transfers are still subject to inheritance tax if the beneficiary is a 
taxable individual, but if the decedent has no other probate assets, the transfer may not be 
reported, and the tax may not be collected. The extent of any decrease in general fund 
revenues cannot be reliably estimated but may only be minimal, in part because the transfer 
of a vessel or motor vehicle upon the death of the owner or last surviving co-owner may, 
in many cases, be to a person exempt from the inheritance tax (e.g., spouse, child, other 
lineal descendant, or other specified family members – see § 7-203 of the Tax-General 
Article). 
 
Registers of wills’ salaries and office expenses are paid from fees and inheritance tax 
revenues collected by the registers, with the remainder of the revenues deposited in the 
State general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 1011 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 145 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5