START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 176 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 176 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation and Department of General 
Services - Property Appraisal Aids - Geographic Images 
 
 
This bill requires the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to prepare, 
install, and maintain a database of statewide and local geographic images that includes 
(1) geographic information system visualizations and (2) oblique aerial photographic 
imagery. SDAT must (1) by June 30, 2026, develop policies to protect the identity of any 
individual whose image is captured by oblique aerial photographic imagery and (2) report 
these policies to the General Assembly by July 15, 2026. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues increase by a potentially significant 
amount beginning in FY 2029 as discussed below. Special fund expenditures and revenues 
offset in any year where total costs do not exceed $1.0 million. However, general fund 
expenditures increase in any year the cost of the database of geographic images exceeds 
$1.0 million. SDAT can handle the bill’s reporting requirements with existing budgeted 
resources, while the Department of General Services (DGS) can implement the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government property tax revenues increase by a potentially significant 
amount beginning in FY 2029. County expenditures increase by at least $1.0 million 
annually beginning in FY 2027. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 176/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Baltimore City and each county must reimburse the State for 100% of the 
first $1.0 million of annual costs for the database of geographic images and 50% of any 
annual costs for the database in excess of $1.0 million. DGS must procure a uniform system 
that includes any tools or services needed to prepare, install, and maintain the appraisal 
aids for the State. In order to carry out the required procurement, DGS must gather 
information and input on the requirements of the appraisal aids by consulting with SDAT 
and affected or relevant units of State and local government. 
 
Current Law:  Each year, SDAT is required to value one-third of all real property based 
on an inspection prior to the date of finality. Real property is valued and assessed 
once every three years. Prior to June 1, 2018, statute required that the assessments be based 
on a physical inspection; however, Chapter 651 of 2018 repealed the requirement that the 
department value all real property based on an exterior physical inspection of the real 
property. Instead, the department must value real property based on a review of each 
property in each three-year cycle. The review by the department must include a physical 
inspection of a property if (1) the value of improvements to the property is being initially 
established; (2) the value of substantially completed improvements is being established; 
(3) the property is the subject of a recent sale, and the inspection is deemed necessary by 
the department for purposes of market analysis; (4) the property owner requests a physical 
inspection as part of an active appeal; (5) the department is notified by a county finance 
officer that a substantially completed improvement has been made that adds at least 
$1.0 million in value to the property; or (6) the department determines that a physical 
inspection is appropriate. 
 
In any year of a three-year cycle, real property must be revalued if any of the following 
factors causes a change in the value of the real property:  (1) the zoning classification is 
changed at the initiative of the owner or anyone having an interest in the property; (2) a 
change in use or character occurs; (3) substantially completed improvements are made that 
add at least $100,000 in value to the property; (4) an error in calculation or measurement 
of the real property caused the value to be erroneous; (5) a residential use assessment is 
terminated; or (6) a subdivision occurs. 
 
Any increase in full cash value (market value) is phased in equally over the next 
three years. All property is assessed at 100% of full cash value. 
 
SDAT must prepare, install, and maintain a complete record of properties, with appropriate 
indexes and cross indexes, and a system of appraisal aids for each county that consist of 
(1) property location maps and (2) records of new construction, sales, building costs and 
private appraisals. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 176/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires SDAT to prepare, install, and maintain a database 
of statewide and local geographic images that includes (1) geographic information system 
visualizations and (2) oblique aerial photographic imagery. In addition, DGS must procure 
a uniform system that includes any tools or services needed to prepare, install, and maintain 
the appraisal aids. The effects of the bill on each department are discussed below. 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
 
SDAT conducted a pilot study using oblique aerial imagery from November 5, 2014, 
through January 31, 2015, in Anne Arundel and Frederick counties. In both counties, 
assessors from SDAT used oblique aerial imagery to (1) review properties with a transfer 
or permit and (2) review properties house-to-house as if they were in the field. 
 
In Anne Arundel County, the pilot program had the following results:   
 
 
10,435 residential accounts reviewed versus 4,000 residential accounts reviewed 
during the same time period in the previous year; 
 
92% of properties assessed with imagery alone, leaving only 8% of properties to be 
physically inspected; and 
 
$32.0 million added to tax base from the review of approximately 17% of residential 
accounts in the 2016 reassessment group. 
 
In Frederick County, the pilot program had the following results:   
 
 
2,203 residential accounts reviewed versus 1,004 residential accounts reviewed 
during the same time period in the previous year; 
 
95% of properties assessed with imagery alone, leaving only 5% of properties to be 
physically inspected; and 
 
1,100 commercial accounts reviewed using imagery versus 18 commercial accounts 
reviewed during same time period in the previous year. 
 
Based on the results of the pilot study in Anne Arundel and Frederick counties, the 
department estimates that the total statewide assessable real property base could increase 
by approximately $1.25 billion due to increased accuracy of real property assessments. If 
the assessable base increases by an estimated $1.25 billion, this would result in an 
additional State and local property tax revenues of approximately $1.4 million and 
$15.0 million, respectively. However, the actual amount of any property tax revenue 
increase depends on increases to the assessable base achieved using the new assessment 
techniques and when they become available. It is assumed that any revenue increases 
would not be realized until at least fiscal 2028, to allow time for (1) procurement of the 
imaging contract; (2) the department to acquire the necessary equipment; and (3) the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 176/ Page 4 
training of staff to begin using the oblique imaging technology on a statewide basis. As a 
point of reference, State real property taxes are special fund revenues for the ABF and 
dedicated exclusively to pay the debt service on State general obligation bonds. 
 
SDAT estimates the cost of a contract to provide oblique aerial imagery to be 
approximately $1.0 million annually, or $3.0 million per three-year assessment cycle. 
New oblique imagery would be needed each year as one-third of the State’s real property 
is assessed each year, and any new construction or improvements would continually need 
to be updated. The department also notes that the cost of the contract would be offset by 
the projected increase in both State and local property tax revenues. 
 
The bill requires the counties and Baltimore City to reimburse the State for 100% of the 
first $1.0 million of annual costs for the database of geographic images and 50% of any 
annual costs for the database in excess of $1.0 million. Based on SDAT’s estimate of the 
cost for geographic imaging, discussed above, the counties and Baltimore City would be 
required to reimburse the State for $1.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Department of General Services 
 
DGS reports that the bill requires the procurement and implementation of a technology 
system. Based on the expected value of the contract, the Office of State Procurement (OSP) 
must review the solicitation prior to posting and also review the procurement documents 
prior to award, which require Procurement Officer and Procurement Management 
resources. In addition, to receive approval from the Board of Public Works (BPW), 
additional resources from the OSP are needed to prepare the BPW package and agenda. 
DGS indicates that these tasks can likely be handled with existing resources and notes that 
given the complexity of the procurement required by the bill, completion of the 
procurement may be delayed and may affect the timing of other pending procurements. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County expenditures increase by at least $1.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to reimburse SDAT for the cost of the database of geographic 
images. Exhibit 1 shows the total expenditure increase by county based on fiscal 2025 real 
property accounts. It is assumed that total county property tax revenues may increase 
beginning in fiscal 2029, to the extent the new assessment techniques result in an increased 
assessable base, as discussed above. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 176/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
County Reimbursement Payments 
 
County 
Reimbursement Payment 
Allegany 
$17,276 
Anne Arundel 
93,723 
Baltimore City 
99,148 
Baltimore 
127,238 
Calvert 
18,037 
Caroline 
6,985 
Carroll 
28,842 
Cecil 
20,117 
Charles 
29,775 
Dorchester 
9,769 
Frederick 
45,573 
Garrett 
12,651 
Harford 
42,435 
Howard 
46,726 
Kent 
5,628 
Montgomery 
145,622 
Prince George’s 
129,270 
Queen Anne’s 
11,358 
St. Mary’s 
21,282 
Somerset 
7,099 
Talbot 
9,070 
Washington 
25,216 
Wicomico 
19,493 
Worcester 
27,669 
Total 
$1,000,000 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 6 and SB 143 of 2025 and HB 491 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 176/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Department of General 
Services; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6