START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 124 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 124 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Losses From Theft or Fraud 
 
 
This bill allows a subtraction modification against the personal income tax for (1) the 
amount of personal theft loss sustained during the tax year that consists of qualified 
retirement plan assets and that was allowed as a deduction under § 165 of the 
Internal Revenue Code (IRC) before January 1, 2018, and (2) the amount of any related 
expenses or penalties incurred during the tax year. The amount of the subtraction is reduced 
by the amount of any related deduction allowed under § 165 for the tax year. To qualify 
for the subtraction, a taxpayer must attach to the taxpayer’s income tax return a police 
report establishing that the theft or fraud scheme occurred and additional evidence of the 
impacted qualified retirement plan assets. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies 
to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease by more than $1 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the 
bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues may decrease by more than $700,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 165 of the IRC provides for the deduction of losses sustained 
during the tax year that are not compensated for by insurance or otherwise. In the case of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 124/ Page 2 
an individual, the deduction is limited to (1) losses incurred in a trade or business; (2) losses 
incurred in a transaction entered into for profit; and (3) losses of property not connected 
with a trade, business, or transaction entered into for profit if such losses arise from fire, 
storm, shipwreck, or other casualty or from theft (“personal casualty loss”). 
 
The first $100 of a personal casualty loss is nondeductible. The deduction is further limited 
to the amount of personal casualty gains for the tax year, plus the amount of net personal 
casualty loss that exceeds 10% of the individual’s adjusted gross income. For tax years 
2018 through 2025 only, the federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA) limited the 
deductibility of net personal casualty losses to losses attributable to a federally declared 
disaster. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) of 2025 permanently extends the TCJA 
limitations on the federal personal casualty loss deduction but expands allowability to 
personal casualty losses attributable to state declared disasters for tax years after 2025. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  As discussed above, the OBBBA generally limits the scope of the 
personal casualty loss deduction to losses attributable to a federally or state declared 
disaster. (Other personal casualty losses may still be deducted up to the amount of any 
personal casualty gain.) The bill effectively restores the State income tax benefit for 
personal casualty losses that consist of qualified retirement plan assets and arise from a 
theft or fraud scheme. In addition, this fiscal and policy note assumes that the bill also 
extends this income tax benefit to individuals who, regardless of the OBBBA’s changes to 
the federal personal income tax, do not itemize federal deductions but who otherwise incur 
losses that meet the bill’s criteria. 
 
Due to data limitations, a precise estimate of the bill’s effect on State and local revenues is 
not feasible at this time. However, a preliminary analysis based on national elder financial 
abuse statistics suggests that general fund revenue losses may exceed $1 million annually, 
and local income tax revenue losses may exceed $700,000 annually. As noted in the 
U.S. Treasury Department’s 2024 National Money Laundering Risk Assessment, elder 
financial exploitation is associated with over $3 billion in financial losses annually. 
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s 2023 Elder Fraud Report, in 2023, a 
total of $72.4 million in losses were reported by 1,985 Marylanders older than age 60, with 
reported losses averaging about $36,500 per complainant. The report does not specify how 
much of these losses consisted of qualified retirement plan assets.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1390 of 2025 and SB 717 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 124/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of State Police; U.S. Department of the Treasury; 
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3