START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 139 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 139 
(Delegate Rogers) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Tax-Free Day - Veterans' Day 
 
 
This bill establishes Veterans’ Day (November 11), beginning in 2026, as a sales  
tax‑free day for the sale of items to a veteran if the taxable price of the item is less than 
$2,000. In order to qualify for the exemption, an individual (1) must provide to the vendor 
evidence of eligibility for the exemption and (2) may establish that the individual is a 
veteran by producing a valid driver’s license or government‑issued identification card that 
includes a notation indicating that the individual is a veteran. The Comptroller is authorized 
to suspend the sales tax‑free day. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by approximately $41,700 in FY 2027 and 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) revenues decrease by approximately $5,700 
in FY 2027. Future year decreases reflect forecasted sales and use tax growth rates. 
Expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($41,700) 
($43,900) 
($44,600) 
($44,800) 
($45,100) 
SF Revenue 
($5,700) 
($6,000) 
($6,100) 
($6,200) 
($6,200) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($47,500) 
($49,900) 
($50,700) 
($51,000) 
($51,300)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 139/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 6 of the 2007 special session created two annual sales tax‑free 
periods:  one in February for the purchase of specified Energy Star products or solar hot 
water heaters; and one in August for the purchase of any item of clothing or footwear, 
excluding accessories, if the taxable price of the item of clothing or footwear is $100 or 
less. 
 
Chapters 236 and 237 of 2017 exempt from the State sales and use tax the first $40 of the 
taxable price of any backpack or bookbag purchased during the annual sales and use 
tax‑free period for back‑to-school shopping. The tax‑free back-to-school shopping period 
extends from the second Sunday in August through the following Saturday. 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.1 billion in fiscal 2026 and $6.2 billion in fiscal 2027, 
according to the December 2025 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to BMFF the following percentage of the remaining sales and use tax revenues: 
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 139/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18.0% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties, and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County,  
York County, and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal 
hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 
State Revenues:  Total sales and use tax revenues decrease by approximately 
$47,500 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. The estimate is based on the following:   
 
 
the Comptroller’s Office estimates that for fiscal 2026, each current sales  
tax‑free day reduces total sales and use tax revenues by approximately $945,000; 
 
90% of sales to veterans qualify for the sales and use tax exemption; and 
 
veterans comprise 5.3% of the State population according to U.S. Census Bureau 
data. 
 
As noted, any decrease in sales and use tax revenues will also reduce BMFF revenues. 
Based on the estimate above, general fund revenues decrease by approximately $41,700, 
and BMFF revenues decrease by approximately $5,700 in fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 139/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 34 of 2025 and SB 176 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 9 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4