START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 109

F1, F2 6lr0681
HB 86/25 – APP & W&M (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1786

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 13, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations and Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Institutions of Higher Education and Elementary and Secondary Schools – Title
3 VI Coordinators

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the governing board of each institution of higher education
5 in the State and local school systems to designate a Title VI Coordinator to ensure
6 compliance with Title VI of the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964; authorizing a person
7 alleging discrimination under certain provisions of law to file a complaint with a
8 Title VI Coordinator of a local school system, as applicable; and generally relating to
9 Title VI Coordinators in institutions of higher education and local school systems.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Education
12 Section 11–409 and 26–706
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Education
17 Section 26–705(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Education

23 11–409.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0109*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 109

1 (A) THE GOVERNING BODY OF EACH INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION
2 SHALL DESIGNATE A TITLE VI COORDINATOR TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE
3 VI OF THE FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.

4 (B) A TITLE VI COORDINATOR SHALL:

5 (1) HAVE EXPERTISE IN AND OVERSEE COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE VI
6 LAW AND REGULATIONS;

7 (2) PROMOTE EQUAL ACCESS TO AND PARTICIPATION IN THE
8 PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

9 (3) PROVIDE TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES REGARDING
10 TITLE VI LAW AND REGULATIONS;

11 (4) DOCUMENT AND INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS;

12 (5) MAINTAIN RECORDS AND REPORTS; AND

13 (6) PERFORM ANY OTHER RELEVANT DUTIES ESTABLISHED BY THE
14 INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

15 26–705.

16 (a) (1) A person alleging discrimination in violation of § 26–704 of this subtitle
17 may file a complaint with the State Superintendent OR, IF APPLICABLE, THE TITLE VI
18 COORDINATOR OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM OR BOTH.

19 (2) A complaint filed under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall specify
20 the relief or remedy requested.

21 (3) A parent or guardian of a minor alleging discrimination may submit a
22 complaint under this subsection on behalf of the minor.

23 26–706.

24 (A) EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL DESIGNATE A TITLE VI
25 COORDINATOR TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE VI OF THE FEDERAL CIVIL
26 RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.

27 (B) A TITLE VI COORDINATOR SHALL:

28 (1) HAVE EXPERTISE IN AND OVERSEE COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE VI
29 LAW AND REGULATIONS;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 109 3

1 (2) PROMOTE EQUAL ACCESS TO AND PARTICIPATION IN THE
2 PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM;

3 (3) PROVIDE TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES REGARDING
4 TITLE VI LAW AND REGULATIONS;

5 (4) DOCUMENT COMPLAINTS;

6 (5) FORWARD COMPLAINTS TO THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT IN
7 ACCORDANCE WITH § 26–705 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

8 (6) MAINTAIN RECORDS AND REPORTS; AND

9 (7) PERFORM ANY OTHER RELEVANT DUTIES ESTABLISHED BY THE
10 LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
12 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3