START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 118 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 118 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Maryland Money Transmission Act - Definition of Money Transmitter - 
Alteration 
 
 
This bill excludes specified payroll processors from the definition of “money transmitter” 
under the Maryland Money Transmission Act.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) 
decrease by $6,000 annually beginning in FY 2027 from lost licensing fees. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000) 
($6,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A designated agent of a payor who provides payroll processing services 
is excluded from the definition of a money transmitter if: 
 
 
there is a written agreement between the payor and the agent that directs the agent 
to provide payroll processing services on the payor’s behalf; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 118/ Page 2 
 
the payor holds the agent out to employees and other payees as providing payroll 
processing services on the payor’s behalf; and 
 
the payor’s obligation to a payee, including an employee or other party entitled to 
receive funds via the payroll processing services provided by the agent, is not 
extinguished if the agent fails to remit the funds to the payee. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Money Transmitters  
 
“Money transmission” means engaging in the business of selling or issuing payment 
instruments or prepaid access or receiving currency, funds, or other value that substitutes 
for currency and transferring currency, funds, or other value that substitutes for currency 
to another person or a location within or outside the United States by any means, including 
electronically, through the Internet, through a mobile application, through a network of 
persons, or through an informal value transfer system. “Money transmission” includes any 
other activity that the commissioner identifies as money transmission by regulation.  
 
A “money transmitter” is a person who engages in money transmission that is required to 
be licensed by the Office of Financial Regulation (OFR). A money transmitter includes a 
bill payer service and an accelerated mortgage payment service. 
 
To qualify for a money transmitter license, an applicant must satisfy OFR that the applicant 
(1) is of good moral character and has sufficient financial responsibility, business 
experience, and general fitness to engage in the business of money transmission and (2) has 
a certain net worth. An applicant must pay a $2,000 annual licensing fee. New applicants 
must also pay a $1,000 investigation fee and meet certain bonding requirements. Fees are 
paid to the Nondepository Special Fund administered by OFR. 
 
Powers of the Commissioner 
 
OFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in 
Maryland. These include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust 
companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as well as nondepository entities 
such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance companies, 
installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, credit services 
businesses, debt management services providers, debt settlement services providers, 
consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies.  
 
State Revenues:  MD Labor advises that there are 10 companies currently licensed as 
payroll processors, but 7 provide money transmission services besides payroll services. 
The provisions of the bill therefore cause 3 of those companies to no longer qualify as 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 118/ Page 3 
money transmitters and subsequently no longer need their license. As a result, MD Labor 
loses $6,000 in annual special fund licensing fee revenue. Licenses expire on December 31 
each year, so the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date means that OFR loses licensing 
revenues beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3