START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 169

E2 6lr1357
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Ruff
Requested: October 27, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Procedure – Expungement of Records – Good Cause

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing a person to file a petition for expungement of any
4 misdemeanor or felony conviction a certain period of time after the completion of the
5 sentence, parole, probation, and any other form of mandatory treatment associated
6 with the conviction; authorizing a court to grant a petition on a showing of good
7 cause; providing that a denial of a petition may not be appealed and a subsequent
8 petition may not be filed for a certain period of time; and generally relating to
9 expungement of records.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Criminal Procedure
12 Section 10–113
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Criminal Procedure

18 10–113.

19 (A) (1) A PERSON MAY FILE A PETITION FOR EXPUNGEMENT OF ANY
20 MISDEMEANOR CONVICTION NOT EARLIER THAN 5 YEARS AFTER THE COMPLETION
21 OF THE SENTENCE, PAROLE, PROBATION, AND ANY OTHER FORM OF MANDATORY
22 TREATMENT ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONVICTION FOR WHICH EXPUNGEMENT IS
23 BEING REQUESTED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0169*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 169

1 (2) A PERSON MAY FILE A PETITION FOR EXPUNGEMENT OF ANY
2 FELONY CONVICTION NOT EARLIER THAN 7 YEARS AFTER THE COMPLETION OF THE
3 SENTENCE, PAROLE, PROBATION, AND ANY OTHER FORM OF MANDATORY
4 TREATMENT ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONVICTION FOR WHICH EXPUNGEMENT IS
5 BEING REQUESTED.

6 (B) A PETITION UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE FILED IN THE COURT IN
7 WHICH THE PROCEEDING BEGAN.

8 (C) ON THE FILING OF A PETITION FOR EXPUNGEMENT UNDER THIS
9 SECTION, THE COURT SHALL HOLD A HEARING.

10 (D) A COURT MAY GRANT A PETITION FOR EXPUNGEMENT UNDER THIS
11 SECTION ON A SHOWING OF GOOD CAUSE.

12 (E) IN MAKING A FINDING OF GOOD CAUSE UNDER THIS SECTION, THE
13 COURT SHALL CONSIDER:

14 (1) THE NATURE OF THE CRIME;

15 (2) THE PERSON’S HISTORY AND CHARACTER;

16 (3) THE PERSON’S RISK TO PUBLIC SAFETY;

17 (4) THE PERSON’S SUCCESS AT REHABILITATION;

18 (5) THE AMOUNT OF TIME SINCE THE CONVICTION; AND

19 (6) THE IMPACT THE CHARGE HAS ON THE PERSON’S ABILITY TO
20 SECURE EMPLOYMENT, EDUCATION, HOUSING, PUBLIC ASSISTANCE, LICENSING,
21 AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR ECONOMIC STABILITY.

22 (F) IF THE COURT DENIES A PETITION FOR AN EXPUNGEMENT UNDER THIS
23 SECTION:

24 (1) THE DENIAL MAY NOT BE APPEALED; AND

25 (2) THE PERSON WHO FILED THE PETITION MAY NOT FILE A
26 SUBSEQUENT PETITION FOR EXPUNGEMENT UNDER THIS SECTION FOR THE SAME
27 CONVICTION FOR AT LEAST 3 YEARS.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2