START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 108 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 108 
(Delegate Pasteur) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Division of Correction - Release Preparation Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Release Preparation Program in the Division of Correction (DOC) 
within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). DOC must 
establish and submit for approval to the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) a protocol 
for registering formerly incarcerated individuals in the program to have access to State 
correctional facilities for the purpose of assisting incarcerated individuals with release 
preparation. The bill also alters the stated purpose of the Cannabis Regulation and 
Enforcement Fund (CREF) to include providing funds to cover the costs of supporting the 
Release Preparation Program; it likewise alters the allowable uses of CREF to include 
supporting the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the overall fiscal effect of the bill cannot be quantified without 
actual experience under the bill, CREF special fund expenditures may increase beginning 
in FY 2027. As a result of any such increase, if sufficient fund balance is not available to 
cover any of those costs in any given year, special fund revenues to CREF increase 
correspondingly, and the amount of cannabis sales and use tax revenue remaining for 
distribution to the general fund and various other special funds (in accordance with current 
law) decreases, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 due to the 
redistribution of cannabis sales and use tax revenues, including direct allocations. Local 
government expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 108/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The protocol established by DOC under the bill must require (1) the 
registration of formerly incarcerated individuals in the program to be made available to the 
public and (2) a formerly incarcerated individual in the program to provide to DOC a 
written schedule describing when the individual intends to access a State correctional 
facility. DOC may not deny a schedule provided unless the schedule interferes with the 
normal function of the State correctional facility. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Release from Division of Correction  
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning issuance of an identification card to incarcerated 
individuals on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Current regulations specify that, when feasible, a parole release plan must be completed 
before a parole hearing. A release plan must include the name of the parolee’s employer or 
evidence of other legitimate means of financial support, the location at which the parolee 
will reside, and the nature of any community services necessary to meet the special needs 
of the parolee. 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry 
Services 
 
Chapters 936 and 937 of 2024 established the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of 
Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by DPSCS. The task force must 
(1) identify and assess the reentry services that exist in the State; (2) identify gaps in reentry 
services; (3) assess the markers of successful reentry; (4) ensure that the recommendations 
of the task force equally consider returning citizens regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan 
to establish a Division of Returning Citizens within DPSCS for specified purposes; and 
(6) develop a plan to expand specified services for individuals after release from 
incarceration. 
 
Chapters 112 and 113 of 2025 extended the termination date of the task force to 
June 30, 2027, and the deadline for submission of the task force’s required report to 
October 31, 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 108/ Page 3 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund 
 
The Performance Incentive Grant Fund within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy is intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of Chapter 515 
of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, to provide grants for specified programs and 
services, including providing for pretrial risk assessments, services to reduce pretrial 
detention, diversion programs, specialty courts, reentry programs, and ensuring that the 
rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced. Money expended from the fund for 
programs to reduce recidivism and control correctional costs is supplemental to and is not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for such 
purposes. 
 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund  
 
CREF is administered by the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) to cover its 
operating costs and the costs to administer and enforce the Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
Title of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. In addition, the fund is used to 
support the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program to promote qualifying partnerships 
between operational cannabis licensees and social equity licensees. The fund generally 
consists of fees collected by MCA (including application and registration fees) and tax 
revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis sufficient to defray the entire cost of operating 
the administration. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
DPSCS expenditures may increase to implement the Release Preparation Program; 
however, without actual experience under the bill, the overall fiscal and operational effect 
of the bill cannot be quantified. While DPSCS can likely establish the required protocol 
for registering formerly incarcerated individuals in the program with existing resources, 
the department may need additional staff to handle implementation of the program 
depending on (1) the actual protocols established and approved and (2) the number of 
currently incarcerated individuals and formerly incarcerated individuals who choose to 
participate in the program. For illustrative purposes only, the cost of hiring  
one program coordinator beginning October 1, 2026 (including salary, fringe benefits, 
one‑time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses) is $90,008 in fiscal 2027, 
increasing to $121,011 by fiscal 2031. 
 
Because the bill alters the purpose and allowable uses of CREF to include supporting the 
new program, it is assumed that any increase in costs for DPSCS to implement the program 
are borne by CREF.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 108/ Page 4 
Effect on the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund and the Distribution of Sales 
and Use Tax Revenues  
 
As noted above, it is assumed that any costs incurred by DPSCS to implement the new 
program are paid by CREF, which is administered by MCA. If CREF special fund 
expenditures increase as a result of the bill, in any given year in which the CREF fund 
balance is not sufficient to cover any of those costs, special fund revenues to CREF (from 
cannabis sales and use tax revenues) increase to backfill revenues needed for other 
authorized uses of the fund. As a result, the amount of sales and use tax revenue remaining 
for distribution to the general fund, various other special funds, and local governments 
decreases. (See the Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and Revenues 
for a description of the current law distribution of cannabis sales and use tax revenues.) 
For illustrative purposes only, see Exhibit 1 for resulting impacts on the distribution of 
cannabis sales and use tax revenues if CREF expenditures increase by $100,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 and there is insufficient fund balance to cover any of those costs.  
 
Municipal revenues are also affected, as each county must distribute to a municipality 
located in the county 50% of the county’s allocation that is attributable to the cannabis 
sales and use tax revenue generated by a dispensary located in that municipality. 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (CRRF) expenditures (for the distribution of 
CRRF funds by the Comptroller to counties, as required by current law) decrease 
correspondingly to the decrease in CRRF revenues beginning in fiscal 2027.  
County revenues decrease further as a result of the decreased distributions from CRRF 
beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Accordingly, county (and municipal) expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 108/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Illustrative Example of the Effect on the Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Use Tax 
Revenue  
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Funds Available 
for Distribution  
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($55,000) 
($55,000) 
($55,000) 
CRRF 
(35,000) 
(35,000) 
(35,000) 
(35,000) 
(35,000) 
CPHF 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
CBAF 
(5,000) 
(5,000) 
0 
0 
0 
County Revenues 
$(5,000) 
$(5,000) 
$(5,000) 
$(5,000) 
$(5,000) 
 
CBAF:  Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
CPHF:  Cannabis Public Health Fund 
CRRF:  Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
 
Notes:  The decrease in county revenues is in the aggregate. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
It is assumed that OAG can likely handle the review and approval of the protocol 
established and submitted by DPSCS using existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 61 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 108/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 108/ Page 7 
Appendix – Adult-use Cannabis Sales and Use Tax and 
Revenues 
 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of 
adult‑use cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 
(Chapter 604) increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of 
adult‑use cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated 
approximately $71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and 
use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate 
went into effect, totaled $26.9 million; collections are on track to exceed $100.0 million in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the Department 
of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) Fund an amount sufficient to defray the 
operating and administrative costs of the Maryland Cannabis Administration and the Office 
of Social Equity, respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and 
DoSEM are then distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through 
fiscal 2028, after which the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (through fiscal 2033 only), which is 
administered by the Comptroller’s Office with oversight assistance from the Office of 
Social Equity; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund, which is administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund (through 
fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the Department of Commerce; and 5% as a 
separate direct allocation to counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7