START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 158 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 158 
(Delegate Woods) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Maternal Health Monitoring Pilot 
Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a Maternal Health Monitoring Pilot Program in the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to support pregnant and postpartum Medicaid 
recipients who have a higher risk of pregnancy complications because of “maternal 
hypertension” or “maternal diabetes.” The pilot must operate during fiscal 2027 and 2028 
and be administered by at least one Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) through 
a “technology vendor,” as specified. For fiscal 2028, the Governor must include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $600,000 to the program. MDH must ensure that 
participation in the pilot program represents the geographic diversity of the State and 
includes a statistically relevant number of participants. By October 1, 2028, MDH must 
report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by up to $300,000 (50% general funds, 
50% federal funds) in FY 2027 and 2028 for the pilot program, as discussed below, and by 
$86,000 (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) in FY 2028 to complete the required 
report; federal fund revenues increase accordingly. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation for FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$150,000 
$150,000 
$43,000 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$86,000 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($43,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note: () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
   
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 158/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH must select at least one MCO to administer the pilot program and 
pay an MCO $2,000 per participant to administer the pilot program. The total amount paid 
to participating MCOs for the pilot program may not exceed $600,000. 
 
A participating MCO must contract with a technology vendor to offer remote patient 
monitoring (RPM) services to participants, reimburse the vendor for the cost of providing 
RPM services and devices, and ensure participants have access to remote monitoring 
services. 
 
The technology vendor must provide preprogrammed technology specific to each 
participant and ensure that (1) RPM occurs during the participants’ second and 
third trimesters and for up to three months postpartum; (2) RPM services are delivered to 
each participant; and (3) each participant is trained on how to use the RPM device. The 
technology vendor must employ a clinical team that includes a nurse licensed in Maryland, 
a dietician-nutritionist licensed in Maryland, and a certified diabetes care and education 
specialist. The technology vendor must assign a program manager to support 
implementation of the pilot program and coordinate efforts between MDH and the MCO(s). 
 
The clinical team must support each participant by (1) monitoring and reviewing the 
participant’s health data; (2) establishing (in collaboration with a participating MCO) an 
escalation pathway to be complied with if the participant’s RPM readings and symptoms 
require immediate attention from the participant’s health care provider (obstetrician or 
maternal-fetal medicine physician); and (3) providing health coaching on condition 
management, health behavior modification, and nutrition.  
 
Current Law:  Chapters 669 and 670 of 2022 require Medicaid to provide coverage for 
self-measured blood pressure monitoring for all Medicaid recipients diagnosed with 
uncontrolled high blood pressure. Coverage must include (1) the provision of validated 
home blood pressure monitors and (2) reimbursement of health care provider and other 
staff time used for patient training, transmission of blood pressure data, interpretation of 
blood pressure readings and reporting, and the delivery of co-interventions, including 
educational materials or classes, behavioral change management, and medication 
management. 
 
“Self-measured blood pressure monitoring” means the regular management of blood 
pressure by the patient outside the clinical setting, either at home or elsewhere, requiring 
the use of a home blood pressure measurement device by the patient. “Validated home 
blood pressure monitor” means a blood pressure measurement device that has been 
validated for accuracy and is listed in the U.S. Blood Pressure Validated Device Listing. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 158/ Page 3 
Coverage is available to any Medicaid participant who qualifies based on medical necessity 
and is capable of using the equipment. Participants may receive up to 60 days of monitoring 
per episode of care, and up to four episodes of care per year. MDH reimburses providers 
at a rate of $125 per member per month to cover equipment installation in the patient’s 
home, patient education on how to use the device, and ongoing monitoring of the data 
collected. The cost of the equipment is covered separately under MDH’s durable medical 
equipment benefit. 
 
As part of the Postpartum Maternal Health Collaborative, Maryland established a project 
at a hospital in Prince George’s County to address pregnant and postpartum individuals 
with hypertensive conditions through collaboration with Maryland’s Perinatal Quality 
Collaborative, MCOs, local health departments (LHDs), and community-based 
organizations through frequent meetings and close communication. As part of the 
collaborative, all nine of Medicaid’s MCOs provide remote blood pressure monitoring to 
the population of pregnant and postpartum individuals with hypertension, in addition to 
partnering with a home visiting service from an LHD. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, the pilot program must operate during fiscal 2027  
and 2028. MDH must select at least one MCO to administer the pilot program and cannot 
pay MCOs more than $600,000 to do so. Further, in fiscal 2028, the Governor must 
appropriate $600,000 for the pilot program. By October 1, 2028, MDH must report its 
findings and recommendations related to the program to the Governor and the  
General Assembly. 
 
Given the bill’s requirement that the program operate over two years (in both fiscal 2027 
and 2028), this analysis assumes that (1) the cap on payment to the MCO controls the total 
amount of funding provided (no more than $600,000 for that purpose); (2) to operate as 
required in fiscal 2027 and 2028, discretionary funding must be provided in fiscal 2027; 
(3) funding for the program is split evenly across both years; and (4) provision of that 
discretionary funding reduces the amount of the mandated appropriation for fiscal 2028 
($600,000) that may be expended to $300,000. (Should the full mandated amount still be 
appropriated in fiscal 2028, this analysis assumes that one-half of that amount would not 
be expended and would revert due to the total cap on spending. Under an alternative 
scenario, discretionary funding is not provided in fiscal 2027 so the program does not 
operate that year; instead, the program operates only in fiscal 2028 and the full mandated 
appropriation of $600,000 is provided and expended that year.) 
 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by up to $300,000 (50% general funds, 
50% federal funds) in fiscal 2027 and 2028 to reimburse at least one MCO for 
administering the pilot program, which may serve up to 150 participants each fiscal year. 
Medicaid expenditures increase in fiscal 2029 by an estimated $86,000 (50% general funds, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 158/ Page 4 
50% federal funds) for costs associated with evaluating the program and preparing the final 
report, which is due by October 1, 2028. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 
MDH advises that full claims and encounter data for pilot program participants for 
fiscal 2028 (the second year of the pilot program) will not be available until January 2029 
due to the six-month MCO claims run-out period. Thus, additional time would be needed 
to complete a comprehensive evaluation of the pilot program. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that Medicaid must apply for a § 1115(a) 
demonstration waiver from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
to implement the bill. However, it is unclear whether CMS would approve the 
demonstration waiver as the bill requires MDH to establish a pilot program for services 
that are already covered, which may not be considered sufficiently innovative to be 
approved as a demonstration waiver. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1538 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4