START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 145 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 145 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Election Misinformation, Election Disinformation, and Deepfakes 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from knowingly or with reckless disregard using or 
disseminating a specified “deepfake” to produce materially false information relating to 
elections, with violations subject to criminal penalties of a fine of up to $5,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to five years. The bill also (1) requires the State Administrator of 
Elections to take certain actions to correct and/or remove (from any online platform) 
election misinformation or election disinformation and (2) authorizes the State Board of 
Elections (SBE), in consultation with the State Administrator, to file a civil action to 
recover any costs of correction of election misinformation or election disinformation. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) and general fund revenues 
may increase annually beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Expenditures are not 
directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Prohibition Against Use of Deepfakes to Produce Materially False Information 
 
The bill prohibits a person from knowingly or with reckless disregard using or 
disseminating a deepfake to produce materially false information if the person has the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 145/ Page 2 
intent to use the deepfake to (1) impede, influence, prevent, or attempt to impede, influence, 
or prevent a voter’s decision to cast a ballot; (2) misrepresent facts relating to voter 
registration, voting methods, election results, electoral processes, or official duties of an 
election official; or (3) induce or attempt to induce another individual to sign or not sign a 
petition for a question to appear on a ballot. 
 
A person who violates the prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of 
up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to five years. 
 
“Deepfake” means an image, an audio recording, or a video recording that has been 
intentionally created or manipulated with the use of generative artificial intelligence or 
other digital technology to create a realistic but false depiction of a person that an ordinary 
person would conclude is an actual visual or audio representation of the person depicted. 
 
“Influence” includes the use of pressure, deception, trickery, or direct or indirect authority 
to induce action or to change the decision or act of another, regardless of the medium used. 
 
The bill’s prohibition does not apply: 
 
 
to a deepfake that is satire or parody; 
 
to a specified radio or television broadcast of a deceptive and fraudulent deepfake 
(1) that is part of a candidate advertisement the broadcaster is required to broadcast 
under federal law; (2) that is part of a news broadcast that clearly identifies that the 
deepfake may contain deceptive audio or visual media; or (3) that the broadcaster 
has been paid to broadcast, if the broadcaster made a good faith effort to establish 
that it is not a deceptive and fraudulent deepfake; or 
 
to a deceptive and fraudulent deepfake published by a website or regularly published 
newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation (including an 
Internet or electronic publication) that routinely carries news and commentary of 
general interest, if the website or periodical clearly states that the materially 
deceptive audio or visual media does not accurately represent the speech or conduct 
of the candidate. 
 
Efforts to Correct and/or Remove Election Misinformation or Disinformation 
 
If the State Administrator receives a credible report that election misinformation or election 
disinformation, including a deepfake, has been or is being communicated, disseminated, or 
distributed, the State Administrator (1) must communicate, disseminate, or distribute to the 
public accurate information to correct the election misinformation or election 
disinformation; (2) may seek an injunction for the removal of the election misinformation 
or election disinformation from any online platform; and (3) may issue a subpoena for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 145/ Page 3 
records related to the dissemination or distribution of the election misinformation or 
election disinformation, including information related to the targeted audience. 
 
“Election misinformation” means incorrect or misleading information regarding the time, 
place, or manner of an election, election results, or voting rights in the State. 
 
“Election disinformation” means incorrect or misleading information regarding the time, 
place, or manner of an election, election results, or voting rights in the State that is 
knowingly and deliberately disseminated. 
 
The bill authorizes SBE, in consultation with the State Administrator, to file a civil action 
against a person, campaign, political action committee, or other legal entity if SBE (1) finds 
that the entity published election misinformation or election disinformation and (2) incurs 
costs to communicate, disseminate, or distribute to the public accurate information to 
correct the election misinformation or election disinformation. SBE may seek damages, 
court costs, and attorney’s fees in such an action. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Influencing or Attempting to Influence a Voter’s Decision Whether to Vote 
 
A person may not willfully and knowingly influence or attempt to influence (1) a voter’s 
voting decision through the use of force, threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, reward, or 
offer of reward or (2) a voter’s decision whether to go to the polls to cast a vote or vote by 
other lawful means, through the use of force, fraud, threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, 
reward, or offer of reward. 
 
Chapter 126 of 2024 defines “influence,” under those prohibitions, to include the use of 
pressure, deception, trickery, or direct or indirect authority to induce action or to change 
the decision or act of another, regardless of the medium used. 
 
A person who violates the prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of 
up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to five years. A person who violates the 
prohibition against influencing or attempting to influence, through specified means, a 
voter’s decision whether to vote, without knowing that the act is illegal, is subject to a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000. 
 
Portal to Report Election Misinformation and Disinformation 
 
Chapter 126 of 2024 also requires that SBE (1) maintain a portal on its website that the 
public may use to report election misinformation and election disinformation and 
(2) conduct a periodic review of material submitted by the public through the portal and, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 145/ Page 4 
to the extent necessary, issue corrective information or refer submissions to the  
State Prosecutor. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues may increase annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to 
the extent criminal penalties are collected under the bill. Fines imposed for criminal 
violations of the Election Law Article are distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund, 
which holds funds for public campaign financing of gubernatorial tickets under the Public 
Financing Act. The extent of any increase cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
General fund revenues may also increase annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent 
SBE recovers damages, in a civil action, for any costs incurred to correct election 
misinformation or disinformation that were supported by general funds. SBE indicates that 
it currently monitors and corrects election misinformation and disinformation, but the bill 
would allow the board to recover damages for any costs incurred for corrections. The extent 
of any increase cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 361 and HB 525 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 141 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Prosecutor’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland Public Television; 
Office of the Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4