START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 126

E4 6lr1606
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 27

By: Delegate Pippy
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Regulated Firearms – Seven–Day Waiting Period – Exceptions

3 FOR the purpose of excepting a sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm from a certain
4 waiting period requirement if the purchaser, renter, or receiver of the firearm is a
5 law enforcement officer, a retired law enforcement officer who retired in good
6 standing, or an individual with a certain permit; and generally relating to
7 purchasing, renting, or transferring a regulated firearm.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Public Safety
10 Section 5–123 and 5–124
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Public Safety

16 5–123.

17 (a) (1) [A] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A licensee
18 may not sell, rent, or transfer a regulated firearm until after 7 days following the time a
19 firearm application is executed by the firearm applicant, in triplicate, and the original is
20 forwarded by the prospective seller or transferor to the Secretary.

21 (2) THE REQUIREMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
22 THAT THE SALE, RENTAL, OR TRANSFER OF A REGULATED FIREARM MAY NOT OCCUR
23 UNTIL AFTER 7 DAYS FOLLOWING THE TIME AN APPLICATION IS EXECUTED DOES

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0126*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 126

1 NOT APPLY TO A SALE, RENTAL, OR TRANSFER OF A REGULATED FIREARM IF THE
2 INDIVIDUAL WHO PURCHASES, RENTS, OR RECEIVES THE REGULATED FIREARM IS:

3 (I) A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER;

4 (II) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS RETIRED AS A LAW ENFORCEMENT
5 OFFICER IN GOOD STANDING FROM A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; OR

6 (III) AN INDIVIDUAL TO WHOM A PERMIT TO WEAR, CARRY, OR
7 TRANSPORT A HANDGUN HAS BEEN ISSUED UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS
8 ARTICLE.

9 (b) A licensee shall complete the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm
10 within 90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being
11 disapproved.

12 (c) (1) If the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm is not completed
13 within 90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being
14 disapproved, a licensee shall return the firearm application to the Secretary within 7 days.

15 (2) The Secretary shall void a firearm application returned under
16 paragraph (1) of this subsection as an incomplete sale, rental, or transfer.

17 (d) (1) (i) A licensee who sells, rents, or transfers a regulated firearm in
18 compliance with this subtitle shall forward a copy of the written notification of the
19 completed transaction to the Secretary within 7 days after delivery of the regulated firearm.

20 (ii) The notification shall contain an identifying description of the
21 regulated firearm, including its caliber, make, model, any manufacturer’s serial number,
22 and any other special or peculiar characteristic or marking by which the regulated firearm
23 may be identified.

24 (2) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all notifications
25 received of completed sales, rentals, and transfers of regulated firearms in the State.

26 5–124.

27 (a) (1) (I) [A] SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
28 A person who is not a licensee may not sell, rent, transfer, or purchase a regulated firearm
29 until after 7 days following the time a firearm application is executed by the firearm
30 applicant, in triplicate, and the original is forwarded by a licensee to the Secretary.

31 (II) THE REQUIREMENT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
32 PARAGRAPH THAT A PERSON MAY NOT SELL, RENT, TRANSFER, OR PURCHASE A
33 REGULATED FIREARM UNTIL 7 DAYS AFTER AN APPLICATION IS EXECUTED DOES
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 126 3

1 NOT APPLY TO A SALE, RENTAL, OR TRANSFER OF A REGULATED FIREARM IF THE
2 INDIVIDUAL WHO PURCHASES, RENTS, OR RECEIVES THE REGULATED FIREARM IS:

3 1. A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER;

4 2. AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS RETIRED AS A LAW
5 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IN GOOD STANDING FROM A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;
6 OR

7 3. AN INDIVIDUAL TO WHOM A PERMIT TO WEAR, CARRY,
8 OR TRANSPORT A HANDGUN HAS BEEN ISSUED UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS
9 ARTICLE.

10 (2) As an alternative to completing a secondary sale of a regulated firearm
11 through a licensee, a prospective seller, lessor, or transferor and a prospective purchaser,
12 lessee, or transferee may complete the transaction through a designated law enforcement
13 agency.

14 (b) A firearm applicant for a secondary sale of a regulated firearm through a
15 licensee shall pay to the licensee a processing fee not exceeding $20.

16 (c) A person shall complete the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm
17 within 90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being
18 disapproved.

19 (d) (1) If the sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm is not completed
20 within 90 days after the firearm application was stamped by the Secretary as not being
21 disapproved, a person shall return the firearm application to the Secretary within 7 days.

22 (2) The Secretary shall void a firearm application returned under
23 paragraph (1) of this subsection as an incomplete sale, rental, or transfer.

24 (e) (1) (i) A person who sells, rents, or transfers a regulated firearm in
25 compliance with this subtitle shall forward a copy of the written notification of the
26 completed transaction to the Secretary within 7 days after delivery of the regulated firearm.

27 (ii) The notification shall contain an identifying description of the
28 regulated firearm, including its caliber, make, model, any manufacturer’s serial number,
29 and any other special or peculiar characteristic or marking by which the regulated firearm
30 may be identified.

31 (2) The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all notifications
32 received of completed sales, rentals, and transfers of regulated firearms in the State.

33 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
34 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 126
END OF PAGE 4