START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 104 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 104 
(Delegate Mireku-North) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Unhoused Individuals - Rights and Affirmative Defense 
 
 
This bill establishes that unhoused individuals have certain rights relating to engaging in 
“life‐sustaining activities.” The bill prohibits certain governmental entities, officials, or 
agents from imposing specified penalties for exercising a right established under the bill or 
for offering aid to unhoused individuals on or about public places. However, these same 
authorities may arrest or impose civil or criminal penalties on unhoused individuals under 
specified circumstances. Furthermore, the bill establishes an affirmative defense of 
necessity for certain criminal prosecutions relating to trespass or disturbing the peace. 
Finally, the bill repeals the authority of a municipality to prohibit vagrancy. The provisions 
of the bill must supersede any local law or ordinance comparable in subject matter except 
to the extent that the local law or ordinance provides broader applicability or more 
protections for unhoused individuals than the bill. The bill has a severability clause.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (multiple fund types) increase, as discussed below. The 
bill may also have a significant operational impact on affected agencies, including the State 
Treasurer’s Office (STO) and the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
Revenues are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local government expenditures, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 104/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Select Definitions 
 
“Adequate alternative indoor space” means an indoor space that (1) is legally and 
physically accessible to an unhoused individual without requiring the individual to waive 
any constitutional or statutory right provided under federal, State, or local law as a 
condition of access; (2) is available indefinitely to an unhoused individual at no charge and 
without requiring a daily reapplication; (3) is compliant with the federal Americans with 
Disabilities Act; and (4) is able to accommodate a spouse or domestic partner and other 
family members, support individuals, and any possessions that an unhoused individual 
wishes to bring to the space. It does not include an indoor space located outside the 
jurisdiction in which an unhoused individual resides unless transportation is available at no 
cost to the individual to ensure the individual is able to address ongoing personal or 
professional matters within the jurisdiction. 
 
“Life‐sustaining activity” means moving, resting, sitting, standing, lying down, sleeping, 
eating, drinking, or protecting oneself from the elements. “Life‐sustaining activity” 
includes storing personal property, as needed, to safely shelter the property from the 
elements.  
 
“Unhoused individual” means an individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate 
nighttime residence. “Unhoused individual” includes an individual who (1) shares the 
housing of another individual due to loss of housing, economic hardship, or similar reason; 
(2) lives in a motel, a hotel, a trailer park, or camping grounds due to a lack of access to an 
“adequate alternative indoor space”; (3) lives in an emergency or transitional shelter;  
(4) lives in a place unfit for human habitation; (5) lives in a car, a park, an abandoned 
building, substandard housing, a transportation station, or a similar setting; (6) is a minor 
abandoned in a hospital; or (7) is a minor awaiting a foster care placement. 
 
Rights of Unhoused Individuals/Protected Activities  
 
The bill establishes that all unhoused individuals have the right to:   
 
 
be on or about “public places” within the State without being discriminated against 
on the basis of actual or perceived housing status; 
 
engage in life‐sustaining activities on or about public places, provided that such 
activities do not hinder or obstruct the ordinary course of a private or public entity; 
or obstruct the normal movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in such a manner 
that creates a hazard to others, unless an “adequate alternative indoor space” is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 104/ Page 3 
available and has been offered to the individual, including transportation for the 
individual and the individual’s belongings;  
 
use and move freely in public places without being discriminated against on the 
basis of actual or perceived housing status; 
 
privacy in personal property stored on or about public places to the same extent as 
personal property stored in a private dwelling;  
 
pray, meditate, worship, or practice religion on or about public places without being 
discriminated against on the basis of actual or perceived housing status;  
 
occupy a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle parked on or about a public place 
that is not obstructing the normal movement of traffic;  
 
relocate a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle being used for life‐sustaining 
activities before receiving a parking ticket or the vehicle being towed;  
 
retrieve items from a towed motor vehicle or recreational vehicle; 
 
reclaim a towed motor vehicle or recreational vehicle from storage free of charge or 
at a reduced rate on consideration of the individual’s ability to pay any costs; and 
 
receive any additional interventions offered to unhoused individuals by local human 
services, social services, public health, and law enforcement agencies when 
adequate alternative indoor space is not available.  
 
Civil and Criminal Penalties 
 
The State, an agency of the State, a political subdivision of the State, or an official or agent 
of the State, an agency of the State, or a political subdivision of the State acting under color 
of law may not (1) impose a civil or criminal penalty against an unhoused individual for 
exercising a right described above or (2) impose a civil or criminal penalty against any 
individual for soliciting, sharing, accepting, or offering food, water, money, or other 
donations to unhoused individuals on or about public places. However, these entities and 
individuals acting under color of law may arrest or impose civil or criminal penalties on an 
unhoused individual who has engaged in criminal activity that is not a protected activity 
described above. 
 
Defense of Necessity 
 
In a prosecution for criminal trespass (§ 6‐402, § 6‐409, or § 6‐410 of the Criminal Law 
Article) or disturbing the peace or disorderly conduct under § 10‐201 of the Criminal Law 
Article (or any similar local law or ordinance), a defendant may assert an affirmative 
defense of necessity if (1) the defendant committed the alleged criminal act while engaging 
in a life‐sustaining activity and (2) the defendant, at the time of committing the criminal 
act, was not offered access to an adequate alternative indoor space and a reasonable storage 
option for personal property. A defense of necessity creates a rebuttable presumption that 
an adequate alternative indoor space was not available to the defendant. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 104/ Page 4 
Declaration and Expressed Intent of the General Assembly 
 
Under the bill, the General Assembly declares that threatening or imposing civil or criminal 
punishments on unhoused individuals for undertaking life‐sustaining activities, including 
sleeping or taking shelter in an unobtrusive manner on public land in the absence of 
adequate alternative indoor spaces, violates unhoused individuals’ right to be free from 
cruel and unusual punishment and excessive fines guaranteed by Article 25 of the Maryland 
Declaration of Rights.  
 
The bill also expresses the intent of the General Assembly that the courts must liberally 
construe the bill’s provisions to maximize the protections afforded by it to unhoused 
individuals in the State.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Article 25 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights and the Eighth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution 
 
Article 25 of the Maryland Declaration of Rights prohibits State courts from requiring 
excessive bail, imposing excessive fines, and inflicting cruel or unusual punishment. Under 
the Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, “[e]xcessive bail shall not be required, nor 
excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.”  
 
U.S. Supreme Court Decision 
 
In City of Grants Pass v. Johnson, No. 23-175 (decided June 28, 2024), the U.S.  
Supreme Court held that a local ordinance that prohibits homeless individuals from using 
blankets, pillows, or cardboard boxes for protection from the elements while sleeping 
within the city limits is a generally applicable prohibition on camping on public property 
and does not violate the ban on cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment 
to the U.S. Constitution.  
 
Municipalities – Authorized Prohibitions 
 
Section 5-207 of the Local Government Article authorizes a municipality to prohibit 
vagrancy, vice, gambling, and houses of prostitution within the municipality. 
 
Trespass 
 
Statute includes multiple prohibitions against trespassing on property. For example, under 
§ 6‐402 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not enter or trespass on property that is 
posted conspicuously against trespass by (1) signs placed where they reasonably may be 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 104/ Page 5 
seen or (2) paint marks that meet specified requirements. Under § 6‐403 of the Criminal 
Law Article, a person may not wantonly enter or cross over private property after having 
been notified by the owner or the owner’s agent not to do so, unless entering under a good 
faith claim of right or ownership. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a $500 maximum fine. For a second violation 
occurring within two years of the first violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for 
up to six months and/or a fine up to $1,000. For each subsequent violation occurring within 
two years after the preceding violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a fine up to $2,500. 
 
Section 6-409 of the Criminal Law Article applies to refusals to leave public buildings or 
grounds during regular business hours or during the time the location is regularly closed to 
the public, subject to specified conditions. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor 
punishable by imprisonment for up to six months and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. The same 
penalty applies to violations § 6-410, which prohibits a person from committing wanton 
trespass on the property of Government House. 
 
Disturbing the Peace and Disorderly Conduct – § 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Section 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article contains a variety of prohibitions that 
constitute disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct.  
 
Generally, a person may not (1) willfully and without lawful purpose obstruct or hinder the 
free passage of another in a public place or on a public conveyance; (2) willfully act in a 
disorderly manner that disturbs the public peace; or (3) willfully fail to obey a reasonable 
and lawful order that a law enforcement officer makes to prevent a disturbance to the public 
peace. 
 
A person who enters the land or premises of another or a beach, as specified, may not 
willfully act in a disorderly manner or disturb the peace of persons on the land, premises, 
or beach by making an unreasonably loud noise. Additionally, a person from any location 
may not, by making an unreasonably loud noise, willfully disturb the peace of another on 
the other’s land or premises, in a public place, or on a public conveyance. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 60 days 
and/or a maximum fine of $500.  
 
“Public place” means a place to which the public or a portion of the public has access and 
a right to resort for business, dwelling, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. Airport 
terminals, bus stations, subway stations, public buildings, public parking lots, and  
public streets, sidewalks, and rights of way are specifically included as public places under 
§ 10-201. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 104/ Page 6 
“Public conveyance” means a conveyance to which the public or a portion of the public 
has access to and a right to use for transportation, including specified modes of 
transportation. For purposes of a prosecution, a public conveyance or a public place need 
not be devoted solely to public use. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA), the State 
statutorily waives its own common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA 
applies to tortious acts or omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel 
performed in the course of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made 
without malice or gross negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign 
or governmental immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the 
state employee committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004). 
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award.  
 
The State does not waive its immunity for punitive damages. Attorney’s fees are included 
in the liability cap under MTCA. Under MTCA, attorneys may not charge or receive a fee 
that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 25% of a judgment.  
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act 
 
The Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA) defines local government to include 
counties, municipal corporations, Baltimore City, and various agencies and authorities of 
local governments such as community colleges, county public libraries, special taxing 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 104/ Page 7 
districts, nonprofit community service corporations, sanitary districts, housing authorities, 
and commercial district management authorities.  
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). However, for 
claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if the liability of a local government arises from 
intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a constitutional right committed by 
a law enforcement officer, the following limits on liability apply:  (1) the combined award 
for both economic and noneconomic damages may not exceed a total of $890,000 for all 
claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, regardless of the number of claimants 
or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a wrongful death action in which there 
are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not 
exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the 
award. 
 
A local government must provide its employees a legal defense in any action that alleges 
damages resulting from tortious acts or omissions committed by an employee within the 
scope of employment with the local government. LGTCA further establishes that the local 
government is liable for tortious acts or omissions of its employees acting within the scope 
of employment, so long as the employee did not act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA 
prevents local governments from asserting a common law claim of governmental immunity 
from liability for such acts or omissions of its employees. A person may not execute against 
an employee on a judgment rendered for tortious acts or omissions committed by the 
employee within the scope of employment with a local government. However, an employee 
is fully liable for all damages awarded in an action in which it is found that the employee 
acted with actual malice. In circumstances involving actual malice, the judgment may be 
executed against the employee and the local government may seek indemnification for any 
sums it is required to pay under LGTCA.  
 
A local government is not liable for punitive damages. However, a local government, 
subject to the liability limits, may indemnify an employee for a judgment for punitive 
damages entered against the employee. A local government may not enter into an 
agreement that requires indemnification for an act or omission of an employee that may 
result in liability for punitive damages.  
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures increase for the State Insurance Trust 
Fund (SITF) and the Transportation Trust Fund for payments of claims brought under the 
bill. The volume of litigation and the value of civil claims under the bill cannot be reliably 
determined at this time.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 104/ Page 8 
State Treasurer’s Office 
 
STO advises that the bill may significantly increase SITF expenditures for MTCA claims, 
including claims for infringing on the rights of an unhoused individual secured by the 
Maryland Declaration of Rights or the Maryland Constitution pursuant to the bill. A State 
employee or State police officer may be liable for damages in a civil or law enforcement 
action for depriving an individual of or infringing on an individual right secured by the 
Maryland Declaration of Rights or the Maryland Constitution. STO further notes that the 
bill is unclear as to the type of damages to be awarded or which cap would apply (the 
general $400,000 cap or the $890,000 for intentional torts and constitutional violations 
involving law enforcement officers). 
 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
MDOT did not respond to a request for information regarding the fiscal and operational 
impact of the bill. However, for a bill with similar provisions introduced last year, MDOT 
advised that that bill results in fiscal and operational impacts, including increased legal risk 
to the Maryland Aviation Administration (MAA) if the airport does not properly 
accommodate unhoused individuals or violates their rights. 
 
Airport staff, including security and janitorial teams, may need additional training on 
interactions with unhoused individuals, and new procedures may also need to be developed 
for handling issues such as trespassing or loitering. If the bill increases the number of 
unhoused individuals in public spaces, MAA staff needs to ensure their activities do not 
obstruct traffic or create safety hazards. Additional measures to manage public areas and 
maintain sanitation may be required, likely resulting in increased operational costs related 
to maintenance of facilities. 
 
An increase in legal challenges and lawsuits related to events at the airport may result in 
increased legal costs and increased insurance premiums. 
 
MDOT previously advised that for reasons similar to the ones stated above, the bill also 
has significant operational implications for the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) 
Police department, including additional patrols in areas that are typically not designated 
for regular patrols. 
 
It should also be noted that while most State agencies are covered by the liability limits of 
MTCA, MTA’s tort liability is governed by the Transportation Article. Unlike MTCA, the 
Transportation Article does not include a limit on liability.  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 104/ Page 9 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures may increase significantly for payment and 
litigation of claims under LGTCA and increased operational expenditures for local 
governments, as described below. 
 
The Maryland Association of Counties (MACo) advises that the bill has a significant 
impact on local government finances and operations. According to MACo, in addition to 
altering how social workers, human service agencies, and public safety officials can 
interact with unhoused individuals, the bill’s requirement to offer adequate shelter 
consistent with specified standards before taking any other diversion or enforcement 
measures presents a challenge. Counties may experience increased litigation costs, 
insurance premiums, and public health challenges. MACo advises that the magnitude of 
these increased costs is difficult to calculate but is considered to be significant.  
 
The Maryland Municipal League advises that the bill increases costs, perhaps significantly, 
for local governments primarily in new social services, shelter, and public order 
management costs, and increased legal risk and litigation costs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect, including increased 
operational expenditures, on small businesses located in areas that attract significant 
numbers of unhoused individuals as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 484 and HB 487 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 49 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9