START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 159 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 159 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Mail Theft 
 
 
This bill establishes a new offense that establishes graduated penalties for violations of the 
general theft statute (under § 7-104 of the Criminal Law Article) involving the theft of 
“mail” (mail theft) based on the number of items of mail stolen. The bill also establishes 
prohibitions involving the use or possession of an “arrow key.” A sentence for a conviction 
for mail theft or an arrow key offense under the bill may be separate from and consecutive 
to or concurrent with a sentence for any other crime based on the acts establishing the 
violation. The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts for felony 
mail theft and arrow key violations. Finally, the bill repeals the existing offense of taking 
and breaking open a letter. Instead, the bill prohibits a person from knowingly and 
intentionally opening “mail” addressed to another without the permission of the other or 
the other’s representative. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to one month and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 159/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Arrow key” means a key designed exclusively for allowing an employee of the U.S. Postal 
Service (USPS) or a common carrier or delivery service to access a mailbox or other 
depository for storing mail. 
 
“Mail” means an item that has been or is intended to be delivered by USPS or a common 
carrier or delivery service to a person whose address appears on the item. Mail includes an 
addressed letter, a postal card, or a package. 
 
Exhibit 1 lists the penalties for a violation of § 7-104 of the Criminal Law Article  
(general theft) involving mail based on the number of items of mail stolen, mail theft 
involving an arrow key, and possession of an arrow key with the intent to use it to commit 
mail theft or allow it to be used to commit mail theft. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Mail Theft and Arrow Key Offenses under the Bill 
 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Offense 
Penalties 
Theft of at least 1 but less than 16 items of 
mail 
Misdemeanor – imprisonment for up to 
6 months and/or a maximum fine of 
$1,000  
 
Theft of 16 or more items of mail 
Felony – imprisonment for up to two years 
and/or a maximum fine of $2,000 
Theft of at least 1 item of mail using an 
arrow key 
Felony – imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a maximum fine of 
$5,000 
Possession of an arrow key with the intent 
to use or allow the use of the arrow key 
to commit mail theft  
Felony – imprisonment for up to 
three years and/or a maximum fine of 
$3,000 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 159/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Opening a Letter without Permission – Repealed and Replaced Under the Bill 
 
A person is prohibited from taking and breaking open a letter that is not addressed to them 
without permission from the person to whom the letter is addressed or the personal 
representative of the addressee’s estate. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject 
to imprisonment for six days and a fine of $15. 
 
General Theft Statute – § 7-104 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Under the general theft statute, a person may not, under specified circumstances,  
(1) willfully or knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over property; (2) obtain 
control over property by willfully or knowingly using deception; (3) possess stolen 
property knowing that it has been stolen or believing that it probably has been stolen; 
(4) obtain control over property knowing that the property was lost, mislaid, or delivered 
under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or nature or amount of the property; or 
(5) obtain the services of another that are available only by compensation by deception or 
with knowledge that the services are provided without the provider’s consent. A violator 
is required to restore the owner’s property or pay the owner the value of the property or 
services and is subject to the penalties in Exhibit 2. 
 
Postal Service-related Theft under Federal Law 
 
It is a federal crime to steal or receive stolen mail, as specified under 18 USC § 1708. On 
conviction, a violator is subject to imprisonment for up to five years and/or a 
$250,000 maximum fine. 
 
It is also a federal crime to steal any property used by USPS, as specified under 
18 USC § 1707. On conviction, a violator is subject to (1) if the value of the stolen property 
does not exceed $1,000, imprisonment for up to one year and/or a maximum fine of 
$100,000 or (2) if the value of stolen property is more than $1,000, imprisonment for up to 
three years and/or a maximum fine of $250,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill 
increases the workload in existing cases and may result in new cases. OPD estimates the 
increase is equivalent to one additional attorney statewide. The Department of Legislative 
Services advises that the bill is not anticipated to result in additional cases or clients for 
OPD sufficient to require additional personnel. Moreover, while the bill may result in an 
increased level of effort in certain cases where a more stringent penalty may apply under 
the bill, the magnitude of any such increase is expected to be minimal. Thus, the effect on 
OPD caseloads is likely absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 159/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 2 
Penalties for General Theft 
 
Value of Property and/or Services 
Maximum Penalty 
Less than $100* 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine 
At least $100 but less than $1,500* 
Misdemeanor – 6 months imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine (first conviction) or 
1 year imprisonment and/or $500 fine 
(second or subsequent conviction) 
Less than $1,500 (four or more prior theft 
convictions)** 
Misdemeanor – 5 years imprisonment 
and/or $5,000 fine 
At least $1,500 but less than $25,000 
Felony – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$10,000 fine 
At least $25,000 but less than $100,000 
Felony – 10 years imprisonment and/or 
$15,000 fine 
$100,000 or more 
Felony – 20 years imprisonment and/or 
$25,000 fine 
 
* Subject to two-year statute of limitations. 
** Subject to specified notice requirements. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, there were 21 violations (charges) 
and 1 guilty disposition for violations of opening a letter without permission under  
§ 3-905 of the Criminal Law Article in the District Court during fiscal 2024. There were 
16 violations and 1 guilty disposition for this offense in the District Court during 
fiscal 2025. Data for general theft violations does not distinguish if violations involved the 
theft of mail or packages. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 410 and HB 805 of 2025 and SB 373 of 2024.   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 159/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 171 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5