START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 143

C5, M5 6lr0875
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 92

By: Delegate Charkoudian
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Electric Company Contracts, Capacity Market Models, and Regional
3 Transmission Organizations – Studies

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Public Service Commission, in consultation with the
5 Maryland Energy Administration, to study the benefits and costs of requiring each
6 electric company to demonstrate that it has contracted for a certain amount of its
7 load–serving capacity for certain years; requiring the Commission and the
8 Administration jointly, in consultation with neighboring states, to study the benefits
9 and costs of, and make recommendations on, potential options for certain actions
10 with regard to withdrawing from the PJM Interconnection, LLC capacity market
11 model, developing a certain multistate compact, withdrawing from PJM
12 Interconnection, LLC, and establishing or joining an alternative regional
13 transmission organization; and generally relating to studies on contracts for
14 electricity supply and actions related to electric capacity market models and regional
15 transmission organizations.

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That:

18 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (2) “Administration” means the Maryland Energy Administration.

20 (3) “Commission” means the Public Service Commission.

21 (4) “PJM” means PJM Interconnection, LLC.

22 (b) The General Assembly finds and declares that:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0143*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 143

1 (1) PJM’s actions have resulted in increased costs and decreased
2 affordability for electricity ratepayers; and

3 (2) PJM has failed to:

4 (i) adequately address concerns about the impact of rate increases
5 on ratepayers; or

6 (ii) be responsive to State energy policies.

7 (c) The Commission, in consultation with the Administration, shall study the
8 benefits and costs of requiring each electric company in the State to demonstrate to the
9 Commission that it has contracted for at least 80% of its load–serving capacity over the
10 next 5–year period.

11 (d) In consultation with neighboring states, the Commission and the
12 Administration jointly shall study the benefits and costs of, and make recommendations
13 on, potential options for:

14 (1) withdrawing from the PJM capacity market model and developing a
15 multistate compact to engage in the fixed resource requirement alternative to secure
16 electric capacity through:

17 (i) entering into contracts with private entities; or

18 (ii) competitive capacity auctions; and

19 (2) withdrawing from PJM and:

20 (i) establishing an independent regional transmission organization;
21 or

22 (ii) joining an existing regional transmission organization operating
23 in another region or state.

24 (e) On or before December 31, 2026, the Commission and the Administration
25 jointly shall submit a report to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
26 Government Article, the General Assembly on their findings and recommendations under
27 subsections (c) and (d) of this section.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
29 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2