START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 175 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 175 
(Delegate Ziegler, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax Credit - Venison Donation - Alterations 
 
 
This bill repeals the $300 limit on the amount of venison donation tax credits an individual 
may claim against the State income tax for any tax year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, 
and remains effective until the termination of Chapters 769 and 770 of 2024 (currently 
scheduled for June 30, 2029). The bill applies to tax year 2026 and beyond (through 
tax year 2028, per the existing sunset provisions of Chapters 769 and 770). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $380,000 annually in 
FY 2027 through 2029, as discussed below. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the 
bill’s change with existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($380,000) 
($380,000) 
($380,000) 
$0 
$0 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($380,000) 
($380,000) 
($380,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 175/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Venison Donation Tax Credit and Grant Program 
 
Chapters 769 and 770 reauthorized, with modifications, the nonrefundable venison 
donation income tax credit for tax years 2024 through 2028. (The credit was previously 
authorized for tax years 2018 through 2022, and the program terminated June 30, 2023.) 
Per Chapters 769 and 770, an individual who hunts and harvests an antlerless deer for 
donation to a charitable venison donation program may claim a nonrefundable credit of up 
to $75 of expenses incurred to butcher and process an antlerless deer for human 
consumption if the hunting and harvesting of the deer complies with State hunting laws 
and regulations. An individual may not claim more than $300 in tax credits in any tax year 
unless the individual harvested each deer for which the credits are claimed in accordance 
with a deer management permit. Any amount of unused credit may not be carried over to 
any other tax year. The program terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
Chapter 446 of 2021 established the Venison Donation Grant Program within the 
Department of Natural Resources to provide grants to defray the cost of butchering and 
processing deer that are donated to venison donation programs. Subject to the availability 
of funds, a county, a municipal corporation, or a charitable organization may apply for a 
grant from the program for the costs of butchering and processing deer that are (1) hunted 
in compliance with State hunting laws and regulations; (2) donated to a program 
administered by the applicant that provides nutritional support of food for low-income 
individuals or the homeless; and (3) have a dressed weight of at least 50 pounds. The grant 
program is not subject to termination. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $380,000 annually in 
fiscal 2027 through 2029 due to an increase in the amount of tax credits claimed against 
the personal income tax for tax years 2026 through 2028. This estimate is based on venison 
donation tax credit claims for tax years 2018 through 2020 (as reported by the 
Comptroller’s Office in a 2022 report to the General Assembly) and assumes that taxpayers 
will claim the credit for a similar number of donations under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 483 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 175/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Food Center Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
caw/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3