START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 114 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 114 
(Delegate Allen) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Accidents - Required Testing for Impaired Driving (Mateo's 
Law) 
 
 
This bill requires any person involved in a motor vehicle accident that results in the death 
of, or life-threatening injury to, another person to submit to breath and blood testing for 
potential alcohol and/or drug impairment. (Under current law, a person in these 
circumstances is only required to submit to breath and/or blood testing if the person is 
detained by a police officer who has reasonable grounds to believe that the person has been 
driving while under the influence of alcohol, impaired by alcohol and/or drugs, or impaired 
by a controlled dangerous substance (CDS)). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase by 
$1,295,000 in FY 2027 for the Department of State Police (DSP) to conduct additional 
testing, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing 
operating costs. Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues from fines imposed in 
District Court cases generated by the bill. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1,295,000 
1,711,700 
1,737,400 
1,763,400 
1,789,700 
Net Effect 
($1,295,000) 
($1,711,700) 
($1,737,400) 
($1,763,400) 
($1,789,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues from fines imposed in the 
circuit courts. Potential minimal increase in local expenditures to process additional blood 
tests for alcohol and drug content. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 114/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person who drives or attempts to drive a motor vehicle is deemed to have 
consented to take a test of breath or blood, or both, if the person is detained by a police 
officer on suspicion of committing an alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offense. 
However, a person must submit to this testing, as directed by a police officer, if the person 
is involved in a motor vehicle accident that results in death or life-threatening injury to 
another and the police officer detains the person due to a reasonable belief that the person 
was driving or attempting to drive while under the influence of alcohol, under the influence 
of alcohol per se, impaired by alcohol and/or drugs, or impaired by a CDS. 
 
If a police officer directs that a person be tested, then the test must be administered by 
qualified personnel who comply with the testing procedures specified in statute. Medical 
personnel who perform the required tests are not liable for civil damages from 
administering the tests, unless gross negligence is proved. 
 
However, as mentioned previously, a person may not be compelled to submit to a test to 
determine the alcohol or drug concentration of their blood or breath unless they are 
involved in a motor vehicle accident that results in death or a life-threatening injury to 
another and detained by a police officer on reasonable belief that they were potentially 
impaired by alcohol and/or drugs. In Birchfield v. North Dakota, 136 S. Ct. 2160 (2016), 
the U.S. Supreme Court determined that, absent exigent circumstances, a blood test cannot 
be administered without the consent of a suspected drunk driver unless a search warrant is 
obtained. Additionally, in Missouri v. McNeely, 569 U.S. 141 (2013), the 
U.S. Supreme Court held that the natural dissipation of alcohol from a suspected drunk 
driver’s blood does not create a per se exigency; exigent circumstances must be evaluated 
on a case-by-case basis based on a totality of the circumstances. 
 
A police officer who stops a driver with reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of 
alcohol- and/or drug-related driving provisions has taken place must detain the person and 
request the person to take a test. The police officer must advise the person of the 
administrative sanctions that must be imposed for refusal to take a test and notice and 
hearing procedures. For a test refusal, an offender’s license or driving privilege must be 
suspended by the Motor Vehicle Administration for 270 days for a first offense and 
two years for a second or subsequent offense. A person operating a commercial vehicle 
who refuses to take a test for alcohol or drug concentration is subject to more stringent 
administrative sanctions. No modification of the license suspension is permitted for a 
refusal, unless the driver participates in the Ignition Interlock System Program for at least 
one year. 
 
A police officer is required to advise a person detained on suspicion of an alcohol- and/or 
drug-related driving offense of the additional criminal penalties that may be imposed if the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 114/ Page 3 
person is convicted of an alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offense and knowingly 
refused to take a test requested at the time of the suspected violation. If a person is 
convicted of an alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offense and the trier of fact finds 
beyond a reasonable doubt that the person knowingly refused to take the requested test, the 
person is subject to a penalty in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed for the 
alcohol- and/or drug-related driving conviction. A person who knowingly refuses to take a 
test of blood or breath under these circumstances is subject to maximum penalties of 
imprisonment for two months and/or a fine of $500. The court may not impose the 
additional penalty unless the State’s Attorney serves notice of the alleged test refusal on 
the defendant or the defendant’s counsel before acceptance of a guilty plea or within 
specified timeframes before a trial in a circuit court or the District Court. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may increase minimally to the extent that the 
expansion of blood and breath testing required by the bill leads to additional fines being 
imposed in the District Court for drunk or drugged driving offenses. 
 
State Expenditures:  Using one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase by 
$1,295,049 in fiscal 2027, reflecting the cost for DSP to (1) hire staff to conduct the 
additional testing required under the bill and (2) procure additional blood kits and testing 
supplies. Any other impacts on units of State government from the bill can be absorbed 
with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Department of State Police 
 
Under the bill, every driver involved in a vehicle accident that results in the death of or 
serious injury to another person must submit to a test of breath and a test of blood. The bill 
applies this requirement regardless of whether a police officer has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the driver committed an alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offense. 
 
According to DSP, there were 29,378 injury crashes in the State during calendar 2024 (the 
most recent calendar year for which finalized data is available). DSP notes that 556 of those 
crashes resulted in fatalities and estimates that 2,900 involved serious injuries. DSP advises 
that, as the State entity that is responsible for testing all blood kits related to drunk and 
drugged driving, it tested 464 blood kits in calendar 2025. DSP further advises that of that 
total, 27 kits were linked to arrests for drunk or drugged driving that involved a fatal or 
life-threatening vehicle crash. 
 
DSP anticipates that the bill’s changes significantly increase the number of blood tests it 
must complete. Assuming that there are two drivers involved in each accident who must 
be tested, it is estimated that testing would be required for 6,912 individuals. However, 
DSP advises that a significant number of those individuals are likely to refuse a blood test. 
Assuming a refusal rate of 45% (which approximately corresponds to the percentage of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 114/ Page 4 
individuals who refuse to take a breath or blood test when arrested for drunk or drugged 
driving in Maryland), it is estimated that approximately 3,775 additional blood tests would 
be required each year as a result of the bill after accounting for existing testing. 
 
DSP advises that, assuming this approximate quantity of additional tests are required 
annually, it would need to hire five forensic scientists to perform additional blood tests. 
However, until a true workflow is established, and DSP has some actual experience under 
the bill, DSP advises that it must initially hire two forensic scientists to handle the increased 
workload that the bill places on the State crime lab. Additionally, DSP advises that each 
blood kit costs $17 and testing supplies to process each blood test cost $370. According to 
DSP, any additional breath tests it must perform under the bill result in only an operational, 
rather than fiscal, impact. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that given several factors (e.g., accidents 
involving multiple vehicles, the refusal rate for drivers who present no indication of alcohol 
or drug use, etc.), the actual number of additional blood tests DSP must conduct under the 
bill cannot be determined without actual experience under the bill. However, assuming that 
the assumptions and scenario described above are a close approximation of required testing 
under the bill, general fund expenditures for DSP increase by $1,295,049 in fiscal 2027, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of DSP hiring two full-time forensic scientists to conduct additional blood testing and 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, costs for blood testing kits and 
testing supplies, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$181,189 
Blood Testing Kits and Testing Supplies 
1,095,578  
Operating Expenses 
   18,282 
FY 2027 DSP Expenditures 
$1,295,049 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover  
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
As noted above, costs associated with testing kits vary based on actual experienced testing 
volume. Additional general fund expenditures are incurred if DSP determines that more 
than two forensic scientists are required based on established workflow and actual testing 
volume. Should DSP require additional resources beyond the positions and supplies in this 
estimate, the department can request funding for those resources through the annual budget 
process. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 114/ Page 5 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary anticipates that the bill’s expansion of mandatory breath and blood testing 
will result in an increase the number of violations (charges) filed in the District Court 
related to alcohol and drug impairment; however, the Judiciary advises that any increase 
in its workload as a result of the bill is not expected to be significant. Accordingly, the 
Judiciary can absorb any impact from the bill’s changes using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) advises that the bill may increase the 
number of individuals subject to administrative penalties, including points assessments and 
orders requiring the use of ignition interlock devices. According to OAH, it can handle any 
increase in its caseload resulting from the bill with existing resources. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local revenues may increase minimally should expanded testing under 
the bill lead to additional fines in circuit court cases for drunk or drugged driving offenses. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally to the extent that local police 
departments purchase more blood kits and process additional blood tests for alcohol and 
drug content due to the bill’s changes. The bill is not expected to materially affect local 
incarceration expenditures. Harford and Montgomery counties advise that the bill’s 
provisions do not materially affect their finances or operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 565 and HB 1486 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 110 (Senator Charles) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Montgomery counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5