START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 104

E2, L6 6lr1364
HB 487/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED) CF SB 49

By: Delegate Mireku–North
Requested: October 28, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Unhoused Individuals – Rights and Affirmative Defense

3 FOR the purpose of establishing that unhoused individuals have certain rights relating to
4 engaging in life–sustaining activities; prohibiting certain governmental entities,
5 government officials, or government agents from imposing certain penalties for
6 exercising a right established under this Act or for offering certain aid to unhoused
7 individuals on or about public places; establishing an affirmative defense of necessity
8 for certain criminal prosecutions relating to trespass or disturbing the peace;
9 repealing the authority of a municipality to prohibit vagrancy; and generally relating
10 to unhoused individuals.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
13 Section 3–2701 through 3–2705 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 27. Rights of
14 Unhoused Individuals”
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Local Government
19 Section 5–207
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0104*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 104

1 SUBTITLE 27. RIGHTS OF UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS.

2 3–2701.

3 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
4 INDICATED.

5 (B) (1) “ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACE” MEANS AN INDOOR
6 SPACE THAT:

7 (I) IS LEGALLY AND PHYSICALLY ACCESSIBLE TO AN
8 UNHOUSED INDIVIDUAL WITHOUT REQUIRING THE INDIVIDUAL TO WAIVE ANY
9 CONSTITUTIONAL OR STATUTORY RIGHT PROVIDED UNDER FEDERAL, STATE, OR
10 LOCAL LAW AS A CONDITION OF ACCESS;

11 (II) IS AVAILABLE INDEFINITELY TO AN UNHOUSED INDIVIDUAL
12 AT NO CHARGE AND WITHOUT REQUIRING A DAILY REAPPLICATION;

13 (III) IS COMPLIANT WITH THE FEDERAL AMERICANS WITH
14 DISABILITIES ACT; AND

15 (IV) IS ABLE TO ACCOMMODATE:

16 1. A SPOUSE OR DOMESTIC PARTNER AND OTHER
17 FAMILY MEMBERS;

18 2. SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS; AND

19 3. ANY POSSESSIONS THAT AN UNHOUSED INDIVIDUAL
20 WISHES TO BRING TO THE SPACE.

21 (2) “ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACE” DOES NOT INCLUDE
22 AN INDOOR SPACE LOCATED OUTSIDE THE JURISDICTION IN WHICH AN UNHOUSED
23 INDIVIDUAL RESIDES UNLESS TRANSPORTATION IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST TO THE
24 INDIVIDUAL TO ENSURE THE INDIVIDUAL IS ABLE TO ADDRESS ONGOING PERSONAL
25 OR PROFESSIONAL MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION.

26 (C) (1) “LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITY” MEANS MOVING, RESTING,
27 SITTING, STANDING, LYING DOWN, SLEEPING, EATING, DRINKING, OR PROTECTING
28 ONESELF FROM THE ELEMENTS.

29 (2) “LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITY” INCLUDES STORING PERSONAL
30 PROPERTY, AS NEEDED, TO SAFELY SHELTER THE PROPERTY FROM THE ELEMENTS.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 104 3

1 (D) “MOTOR VEHICLE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 11–135 OF THE
2 TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

3 (E) (1) “PUBLIC PLACE” MEANS:

4 (I) PROPERTY THAT IS OWNED OR LEASED, IN WHOLE OR IN
5 PART, BY ANY STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY;

6 (II) PROPERTY ON WHICH THERE IS AN EASEMENT FOR PUBLIC
7 USE; OR

8 (III) FEDERAL PROPERTY ON WHICH A LOCAL GOVERNMENT HAS
9 THE AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE LOCAL LAWS.

10 (2) “PUBLIC PLACE” INCLUDES:

11 (I) A PLAZA;

12 (II) A COURTYARD;

13 (III) A PARKING LOT;

14 (IV) A SIDEWALK;

15 (V) A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITY;

16 (VI) A PUBLIC BUILDING;

17 (VII) A SHOPPING CENTER;

18 (VIII) AN UNDERPASS OR OTHER LAND ADJACENT TO A ROADWAY;
19 AND

20 (IX) A PARK.

21 (F) “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 15–1001 OF
22 THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

23 (G) (1) “UNHOUSED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO LACKS A
24 FIXED, REGULAR, AND ADEQUATE NIGHTTIME RESIDENCE.

25 (2) “UNHOUSED INDIVIDUAL” INCLUDES AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 104

1 (I) SHARES THE HOUSING OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL DUE TO
2 LOSS OF HOUSING, ECONOMIC HARDSHIP, OR SIMILAR REASON;

3 (II) LIVES IN A MOTEL, A HOTEL, A TRAILER PARK, OR CAMPING
4 GROUNDS DUE TO A LACK OF ACCESS TO AN ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR
5 SPACE;

6 (III) LIVES IN AN EMERGENCY OR TRANSITIONAL SHELTER;

7 (IV) LIVES IN A PLACE UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION;

8 (V) LIVES IN A CAR, A PARK, AN ABANDONED BUILDING,
9 SUBSTANDARD HOUSING, A TRANSPORTATION STATION, OR A SIMILAR SETTING;

10 (VI) IS A MINOR ABANDONED IN A HOSPITAL; OR

11 (VII) IS A MINOR AWAITING A FOSTER CARE PLACEMENT.

12 3–2702.

13 (A) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DECLARES THAT THREATENING OR
14 IMPOSING CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PUNISHMENTS ON UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS FOR
15 UNDERTAKING LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING SLEEPING OR TAKING
16 SHELTER IN AN UNOBTRUSIVE MANNER ON PUBLIC LAND IN THE ABSENCE OF
17 ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACES, VIOLATES UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS’
18 RIGHT TO BE FREE FROM CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT AND EXCESSIVE FINES
19 GUARANTEED BY ARTICLE 25 OF THE MARYLAND DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.

20 (B) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE COURTS
21 SHALL LIBERALLY CONSTRUE THIS SUBTITLE TO MAXIMIZE THE PROTECTIONS
22 AFFORDED BY IT TO UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS IN THE STATE.

23 3–2703.

24 (A) ALL UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS HAVE THE RIGHT TO:

25 (1) BE ON OR ABOUT PUBLIC PLACES WITHIN THE STATE WITHOUT
26 BEING DISCRIMINATED AGAINST ON THE BASIS OF ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED HOUSING
27 STATUS;

28 (2) ENGAGE IN LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITIES ON OR ABOUT PUBLIC
29 PLACES, PROVIDED THAT SUCH ACTIVITIES DO NOT:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 104 5

1 (I) HINDER OR OBSTRUCT THE ORDINARY COURSE OF A
2 PRIVATE OR PUBLIC ENTITY; OR

3 (II) OBSTRUCT THE NORMAL MOVEMENT OF PEDESTRIAN OR
4 VEHICULAR TRAFFIC IN SUCH A MANNER THAT CREATES A HAZARD TO OTHERS,
5 UNLESS AN ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACE IS AVAILABLE AND HAS BEEN
6 OFFERED TO THE INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING TRANSPORTATION FOR THE INDIVIDUAL
7 AND THE INDIVIDUAL’S BELONGINGS;

8 (3) USE AND MOVE FREELY IN PUBLIC PLACES WITHOUT BEING
9 DISCRIMINATED AGAINST ON THE BASIS OF ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED HOUSING
10 STATUS;

11 (4) PRIVACY IN PERSONAL PROPERTY STORED ON OR ABOUT PUBLIC
12 PLACES TO THE SAME EXTENT AS PERSONAL PROPERTY STORED IN A PRIVATE
13 DWELLING;

14 (5) PRAY, MEDITATE, WORSHIP, OR PRACTICE RELIGION ON OR
15 ABOUT PUBLIC PLACES WITHOUT BEING DISCRIMINATED AGAINST ON THE BASIS OF
16 ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED HOUSING STATUS;

17 (6) OCCUPY A MOTOR VEHICLE OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKED
18 ON OR ABOUT A PUBLIC PLACE THAT IS NOT OBSTRUCTING THE NORMAL MOVEMENT
19 OF TRAFFIC;

20 (7) RELOCATE A MOTOR VEHICLE OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE BEING
21 USED FOR LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITIES BEFORE RECEIVING A PARKING TICKET OR
22 THE VEHICLE BEING TOWED;

23 (8) RETRIEVE ITEMS FROM A TOWED MOTOR VEHICLE OR
24 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE;

25 (9) RECLAIM A TOWED MOTOR VEHICLE OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
26 FROM STORAGE FREE OF CHARGE OR AT A REDUCED RATE ON CONSIDERATION OF
27 THE INDIVIDUAL’S ABILITY TO PAY ANY COSTS; AND

28 (10) RECEIVE ANY ADDITIONAL INTERVENTIONS OFFERED TO
29 UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS BY LOCAL HUMAN SERVICES, SOCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC
30 HEALTH, AND LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES WHEN ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE
31 INDOOR SPACE IS NOT AVAILABLE.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 104

1 (B) THE STATE, AN AGENCY OF THE STATE, A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
2 THE STATE, OR AN OFFICIAL OR AGENT OF THE STATE, AN AGENCY OF THE STATE,
3 OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE ACTING UNDER COLOR OF LAW MAY
4 NOT:

5 (1) IMPOSE CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PENALTIES AGAINST AN UNHOUSED
6 INDIVIDUAL FOR EXERCISING A RIGHT DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
7 SECTION; OR

8 (2) IMPOSE A CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PENALTY AGAINST ANY INDIVIDUAL
9 FOR SOLICITING, SHARING, ACCEPTING, OR OFFERING FOOD, WATER, MONEY, OR
10 OTHER DONATIONS TO UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS ON OR ABOUT PUBLIC PLACES.

11 (C) THE STATE, AN AGENCY OF THE STATE, A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF
12 THE STATE, OR AN OFFICIAL OR AGENT OF THE STATE ACTING UNDER COLOR OF
13 LAW MAY ARREST OR IMPOSE CIVIL OR CRIMINAL PENALTIES ON AN UNHOUSED
14 INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS ENGAGED IN CRIMINAL ACTIVITY THAT IS NOT A PROTECTED
15 ACTIVITY UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

16 3–2704.

17 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO A PROSECUTION FOR:

18 (1) CRIMINAL TRESPASS UNDER § 6–402, § 6–409, OR § 6–410 OF THE
19 CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR A SIMILAR LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE; AND

20 (2) DISTURBING THE PEACE OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT UNDER §
21 10–201 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR ANY SIMILAR LOCAL LAW OR
22 ORDINANCE.

23 (B) IN A PROSECUTION FOR AN OFFENSE LISTED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
24 SECTION, A DEFENDANT MAY ASSERT AN AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE OF NECESSITY IF:

25 (1) THE DEFENDANT COMMITTED THE ALLEGED CRIMINAL ACT
26 WHILE ENGAGING IN A LIFE–SUSTAINING ACTIVITY; AND

27 (2) THE DEFENDANT, AT THE TIME OF COMMITTING THE CRIMINAL
28 ACT, WAS NOT OFFERED ACCESS TO AN ADEQUATE ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACE
29 AND A REASONABLE STORAGE OPTION FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY.

30 (C) A DEFENSE OF NECESSITY RAISED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
31 (B) OF THIS SECTION CREATES A REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION THAT AN ADEQUATE
32 ALTERNATIVE INDOOR SPACE WAS NOT AVAILABLE TO THE DEFENDANT.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 104 7

1 3–2705.

2 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL SUPERSEDE ANY LOCAL LAW OR
3 ORDINANCE COMPARABLE IN SUBJECT MATTER EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT THAT THE
4 LOCAL LAW OR ORDINANCE PROVIDES BROADER APPLICABILITY OR MORE
5 PROTECTIONS FOR UNHOUSED INDIVIDUALS THAN THIS SUBTITLE.

6 Article – Local Government

7 5–207.

8 (a) A municipality may establish and maintain:

9 (1) a fire department; and

10 (2) a police force.

11 (b) A municipality may:

12 (1) provide for the removal of fire hazards;

13 (2) control the use and handling of dangerous and explosive materials; and

14 (3) prevent the discharge of firearms or other explosive instruments.

15 (c) A municipality may:

16 (1) pay rewards for information relating to crime committed in the
17 municipality;

18 (2) prohibit [vagrancy,] vice, gambling, and houses of prostitution in the
19 municipality;

20 (3) enforce all ordinances relating to disorderly conduct and nuisances
21 equally:

22 (i) within the municipality; and

23 (ii) up to one–half mile outside the municipal limits, except where
24 there is a conflict with the powers of another municipality; and

25 (4) prohibit minors from being on the streets and in public places at certain
26 hours of the night.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 104

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
2 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
3 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other
4 provisions or any other application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid
5 provision or application, and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared
6 severable.

7 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8