START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 179

L6, P1 6lr0690
HB 1038/25 – ECM & HGO (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 13, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters and Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Department of Commerce – Complaint Portal and Annual Report

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Commerce to create and maintain a
4 complaint portal for reporting when a governmental unit takes longer than a certain
5 period of time to process a certain application for a license, form, certificate,
6 certification, permit, or registration; requiring the Department to submit an annual
7 report to certain committees of the General Assembly on the complaints submitted
8 to the portal; and generally relating to the Department of Commerce.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Economic Development
11 Section 2.5–111
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Economic Development

17 2.5–111.

18 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “GOVERNMENTAL UNIT” MEANS:

19 (1) A COUNTY;

20 (2) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

21 (3) A STATE UNIT;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0179*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 179

1 (4) A LOCAL UNIT; OR

2 (5) ANY OTHER PUBLIC BODY OR UNIT ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE
3 WITH A STATE OR LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR RESOLUTION.

4 (B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
5 DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE AND MAINTAIN A PORTAL ON THE DEPARTMENT’S
6 WEBSITE THAT THE PUBLIC MAY USE TO FILE A COMPLAINT IF A GOVERNMENTAL
7 UNIT TAKES LONGER THAN 60 DAYS TO PROCESS AN APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE,
8 FORM, CERTIFICATE, CERTIFICATION, PERMIT, OR REGISTRATION FOR A BUSINESS
9 OR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

10 (2) A PERSON MAY NOT FILE A COMPLAINT ON THE PORTAL CREATED
11 AND MAINTAINED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF A STATE OR
12 LOCAL LAW, AN ORDINANCE, OR A RESOLUTION EXPLICITLY AUTHORIZES THE
13 GOVERNMENTAL UNIT AGAINST WHICH THE COMPLAINT WOULD HAVE BEEN FILED
14 TO TAKE LONGER THAN 60 DAYS TO PROCESS THE APPLICATION.

15 (C) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 15, 2026, AND EACH SEPTEMBER 15
16 THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT ON THE COMPLAINTS
17 FILED THROUGH THE PORTAL DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
18 SECTION, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE,
19 TO THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE WAYS AND
20 MEANS COMMITTEE.

21 (2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
22 SUBSECTION SHALL IDENTIFY, WITH RESPECT TO EACH COMPLAINT RECEIVED
23 DURING THE PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNMENTAL UNIT RESPONSIBLE
24 FOR THE LICENSE, FORM, CERTIFICATE, CERTIFICATION, PERMIT, OR
25 REGISTRATION.

26 (3) IN REPORTING THE DATA REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION,
27 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS TO ANONYMIZE THE DATA
28 TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF THE BUSINESS OR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION TO
29 WHICH THE COMPLAINT IS RELATED.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2