START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 135 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 135 
(Delegate Schindler, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Economic Development - Tax Increment Financing - Noncontiguous Areas 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing body of a political subdivision, including Baltimore City, 
to designate, by resolution, a noncontiguous “blighted area” within its jurisdiction as a 
development district under the Tax Increment Financing Act. “Blighted area” means an 
area in which a majority of buildings have declined in productivity by reason of 
obsolescence, depreciation, or other causes to an extent that they no longer justify 
fundamental repairs and adequate maintenance.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase beginning as early as FY 2027, 
as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  All counties and municipalities in Maryland, except Baltimore City, are 
authorized to utilize tax increment financing (TIF) under Title 12, Subtitle 2 of the 
Economic Development Article (the Tax Increment Financing Act). Baltimore City has 
separate authority to use TIF as provided in the city charter. Counties and municipalities 
(including Baltimore City) may issue bonds to finance the development of an industrial, 
commercial, or residential area. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 135/ Page 2 
TIF is a public financing method that uses future gains in tax revenues to finance current 
improvements. The increase in the property tax revenue generated by new commercial 
development in a specific area, the TIF district, pays for bonds issued to finance site 
improvements, infrastructure, and other project costs located on public property. In a 
TIF district, the local government “freezes” the existing property tax base and uses the 
property tax revenue from this base as it would normally use such funds. The difference 
between the current tax base and the frozen base in each future year is termed the 
incremental valuation. The local government apportions the property tax revenue on the 
incremental valuation to a special account for certain purposes, including to pay debt 
service on the bonds and to potentially pay for additional public expenditures in the TIF 
district. The TIF district ceases to exist upon the retirement of the bonds, and after that 
time, all property tax revenue may be appropriated by normal means. 
 
Under the Tax Increment Financing Act, a development district must be a contiguous area 
and authority to issue bonds is generally limited to the local governing body. However, the 
revenue authority of Prince George’s County may issue bonds in accordance with an 
ordinance adopted by the governing body of the county, and local revenues may be pledged 
to debt issued by the Maryland Economic Development Corporation in specified 
circumstances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill expands the authority of local governments under the Tax 
Increment Financing Act to include noncontiguous blighted areas, which may increase 
overall use of the Act to facilitate development in those areas. Accordingly, local revenues 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027 from TIF bond revenues and, eventually, from 
increased taxes associated with the redevelopment. Local expenditures also increase 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027 as bond proceeds are used for authorized purposes, 
including development-related expenditures and debt service payments on TIF bonds. 
 
Even though the bill integrates Baltimore City into the Tax Increment Financing Act, 
specifically for designation of a noncontiguous blighted area as a development district, 
there is no impact on Baltimore City. The city’s charter already allows for noncontiguous 
areas to be designated as TIF districts, and that existing authority has recently been used to 
do so.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in and adjacent to blighted areas potentially 
benefit from additional spending by local governments under the Tax Increment Financing 
Act. Small businesses that provide construction and related services also potentially benefit 
from additional demand for their services.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 135/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 942 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 287 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Commerce; Baltimore City; cities of Annapolis and Bowie; Calvert, Howard, and  
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3