START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 182 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 182 
(Delegate Stein) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Presidential Electors - Selection and Voting 
 
 
This bill modifies provisions governing the nomination and election of presidential electors 
in the State and the casting of electors’ votes, primarily by (1) requiring electors to pledge 
to cast their votes for President and Vice President in a manner consistent with the party or 
unaffiliated presidential candidate which nominated them for elector and (2) establishing 
procedures for the appointment of substitute electors in the event of a vacancy in the office 
of elector and establishing that an elector vacates the office if the elector refuses to present 
a ballot, presents an unmarked ballot, or presents a ballot marked in violation of their 
pledge.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented with existing resources.     
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Nomination and Election of Presidential Electors 
 
“Presidential elector” means an elector for President and Vice President of the 
United States.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 182/ Page 2 
For each presidential elector, a political party or an unaffiliated presidential candidate must 
submit to the State Board of Elections (SBE) the names of two qualified individuals, with 
one individual designated “presidential elector nominee” and the other “alternate 
presidential elector nominee.” The submissions must be accompanied by pledges from the 
individuals that they agree to serve, if selected, and to mark their ballots for the nominees 
for President and Vice President of the party that nominated the individual or, if nominated 
by an unaffiliated presidential candidate, for the unaffiliated presidential candidate and the 
candidate’s vice-presidential running mate. If, after the nomination of a candidate for 
President or Vice President by a political party and before the meeting of presidential 
electors, the candidate dies or withdraws as a candidate for that office, the pledge applies 
to the successor candidate for that office nominated by the political party. 
 
The bill adds to existing law which indicates that the names of the candidates for 
presidential elector may not be printed on the ballot, though a vote for the candidates for 
President and Vice President of a political party is considered to be and counted as a vote 
for each of the presidential electors nominated by the party. The bill adds to that existing 
law by indicating that a vote for unaffiliated candidates for President and Vice President is 
considered to be and counted as a vote for each of the nominees for presidential elector 
submitted by the unaffiliated presidential candidate to SBE.  
 
Meeting of Presidential Electors 
 
 
State Administrator of Elections Presides at the Meeting  
 
The bill requires the State Administrator of Elections to preside at the meeting of 
presidential electors that is held in the State House after the presidential general election 
on the date established in federal law (the first Tuesday after the second Wednesday in 
December) to cast the electors’ votes.  
 
 
Filling of Any Vacancies  
 
The bill establishes procedures for the State Administrator to fill any vacancies in the office 
of presidential elector, which includes the position of any presidential elector not present 
to vote. The procedures generally result in the appointment of an alternate presidential 
elector or, if there is an insufficient number of alternates present to fill a vacancy, the 
appointment of any immediately available individual who is qualified to serve and chosen 
through nomination by and plurality vote of the remaining presidential electors (or simply 
appointed if all presidential elector positions are vacant). To qualify as a substitute 
presidential elector, an individual who has not executed the pledge required of presidential 
elector nominees and alternate presidential elector nominees must pledge to serve and mark 
their ballots for President and Vice President consistent with the pledge of the individual 
to whose presidential elector position they have succeeded. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 182/ Page 3 
Casting of Ballots  
 
The bill also establishes procedures for the casting of ballots by the electors, which includes 
an examination, by the State Administrator, of the completed ballots presented by each 
presidential elector. The State Administrator must accept as cast all ballots of presidential 
electors whose votes are consistent with their pledges and may not count a presidential 
elector’s presidential or vice-presidential ballot if the elector has not marked both ballots 
or has marked a ballot in violation of the elector’s pledge. 
 
A presidential elector who refuses to present a ballot, presents an unmarked ballot, or 
presents a ballot marked in violation of their pledge vacates the office of elector, creating 
a vacant position to be filled according to the procedures mentioned above. The 
State Administrator then distributes ballots to and collects ballots from the substitute 
presidential elector. The State Administrator follows these procedures until all of the 
State’s electoral votes have been cast and recorded. 
 
Submission of Certificate of Ascertainment and Transmittal of Certificate of the Vote 
 
In submitting the State’s certificate of ascertainment of appointed electors (after the 
general election and before the meeting of electors) to the Archivist of the United States, 
in accordance with federal law, the Governor must certify the State’s presidential electors 
and state in the certificate that the presidential electors will serve as presidential electors 
unless a vacancy occurs before the end of the meeting at which the electors’ votes are cast 
and a substitute presidential elector is appointed, in which case the Governor will submit 
an amended certificate of ascertainment.  
 
After the vote of the State’s presidential electors, if the final list of presidential electors 
differs from any list the Governor previously included on a certificate of ascertainment, the 
bill specifies procedures for an amended certificate of ascertainment to be prepared and 
substituted for the previously submitted certificate of ascertainment. The bill also specifies 
procedures for a certificate of the vote of the electors to be prepared and transmitted in 
accordance with federal law.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Presidential Electors  
 
 
Nomination 
 
Prior to a presidential general election, each political party and candidate nominated by 
petition must nominate candidates for presidential elector of the party or candidate and 
certify the names of the presidential elector candidates to SBE. The number of presidential 
elector candidates nominated must be the number Maryland is entitled to elect (equal to 
the combined number of U.S. Senators and Representatives). 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 182/ Page 4 
 
Election 
 
At the general election for President and Vice President of the United States, the number 
of presidential electors to which the State is entitled must be elected at large by the voters 
of the entire State. The names of the candidates for presidential elector may not be printed 
on the ballot, though a vote for the candidates for President and Vice President of a political 
party is considered to be and counted as a vote for each of the presidential electors 
nominated by the party. 
 
 
Federal Requirements 
 
Under 3 U.S.C. § 5, as amended by the Electoral Count Reform Act of 2022 (ECRA), not 
later than six days before the time fixed for the meeting of presidential electors, the 
executive of each state must issue a certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors, 
pursuant to applicable laws of the state enacted prior to Election Day. The executive of 
each state must transmit the certificate to the Archivist of the United States immediately 
after its issuance and by the most expeditious method available. 
 
Under 3 U.S.C. § 7, as amended by ECRA, the electors must meet and give their votes on 
the first Tuesday after the second Wednesday in December following their appointment. 
 
Each state may, by law, provide for the filling of vacancies which may occur in its college 
of electors when such college meets to give its electoral vote. Federal law specifies 
procedures for making certificates of the votes of electors and transmitting them together 
with the certificates of ascertainment of appointment of electors, including sending the 
certificates to the President of the Senate and the Archivist of the United States.  
 
 
Meeting of Electors at the State House 
 
Under State law, the presidential electors meet in the State House on the day established 
by federal law. If there is any vacancy in the office of elector, the electors present must fill 
the vacancy, whether it is caused by absence or other reason. The electors must cast their 
votes for the candidates for President and Vice President who received a plurality of the 
votes cast in the State.  
 
National Popular Vote Agreement  
 
Chapters 43 and 44 of 2007 established Maryland as a member of the National Popular 
Vote Agreement, under which Maryland will commit its presidential electors to the 
national popular vote winner (President and Vice President) in a presidential election upon 
the agreement taking effect. The agreement takes effect when it is enacted in substantially 
the same form by states cumulatively possessing a majority of the electoral votes and the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 182/ Page 5 
enactments of the agreement have taken effect in each of those states. (The bill accounts 
for the possibility of the National Popular Vote Agreement taking effect in the future and 
its provisions would equally apply to that circumstance, where the State’s presidential 
electors cast votes for the national popular vote winner instead of the candidates for 
President and Vice President who win a plurality of votes in the State.) 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 237 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5