START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 101 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 101 
(Delegate Simmons) 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Appropriations 
 
 
Public Broadcasters - Debate for Candidates for Statewide Office - Required 
Participants 
 
 
This emergency bill requires a public broadcaster (receiving State funding) that holds a 
debate between candidates for statewide office to (1) invite all candidates who are certified 
to the ballot in the general election (and not base eligibility or invitations on campaign 
fundraising or polling metrics, or party affiliation) and (2) provide equitable opportunity to 
the candidates to contribute and respond in the debate. A public broadcaster who holds a 
debate in violation of the bill is subject to loss of the use of State funding for the remainder 
of the fiscal year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Requirements for Debates Between Candidates for Statewide Office in a General Election 
 
Under provisions governing the Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission (MPBC), the 
bill requires a public broadcaster that holds a debate between candidates for statewide 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 101/ Page 2 
office to (1) invite to participate all candidates for that statewide office who are certified to 
the ballot in the general election in accordance with the applicable provisions of the 
Election Law Article and (2) provide equitable opportunity to each participating candidate 
to contribute and respond in the debate. A public broadcaster may not condition eligibility 
for or invitations to the debate on campaign fundraising metrics, party affiliation, or polling 
metrics. 
 
“General election” includes a special general election. “Public broadcaster” means a 
broadcaster that receives funds, including grants or loans, from the State in a given 
fiscal year. 
 
The bill does not require a public broadcaster to invite a candidate to participate in a debate 
who (1) is a write-in candidate or (2) has formally or informally suspended or terminated 
the candidate’s campaign. 
 
Loss of Funding for Violation of the Requirements 
 
If a public broadcaster holds a debate in violation of the bill’s requirements, for the 
remainder of the fiscal year in which the debate occurs (1) the public broadcaster may not 
use State funds and (2) a unit of State government may not provide funds to the public 
broadcaster. 
 
MPBC must submit a proposed amended appropriation to the Secretary of Budget and 
Management to request that any remaining State funds from a public broadcaster that 
violates the bill’s requirements be reappropriated to another program for the current 
fiscal year. The Governor must approve a submitted amended appropriation. 
 
Intent of the General Assembly  
 
The bill expresses legislative intent to (1) promote open, democratic discourse; 
(2) strengthen public confidence in the State’s democratic institutions; and (3) ensure that 
State funding for public broadcasters is conditioned on the invitation of all candidates to a 
debate who are certified to the ballot for a general election for statewide office. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission 
 
 
Responsibilities 
 
MPBC must operate a system of State, regional, and local facilities to provide educational 
and cultural radio and television programs in the State. The commission is responsible for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 101/ Page 3 
and must control the preparation, content, programming, and scheduling of (1) all of its 
programs for the general public and (2) with the approval of the State Board of Education, 
all educational television and radio programs used in the public schools and adult education 
programs of the State. 
 
 
Limitations on Programs and Use of Facilities 
 
The facilities of MPBC may not be used for, and the programs may not be devoted to 
(1) presenting biased or one-sided aspects of partisan politics; (2) advocating or opposing 
any present or prospective political candidacy; or (3) advocating or opposing any 
legislation currently being considered or prepared. Each facility must be used in 
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC). 
 
Federal Equal Opportunities Requirement 
 
Under federal law (Section 315 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 315), 
FCC-licensed broadcasting stations, that permit a legally qualified candidate for public 
office to use their station, must afford equal opportunities to all other candidates for that 
office. However, the equal opportunities requirement does not apply to an appearance by a 
legally qualified candidate on any (1) bona fide newscast; (2) bona fide news interview; 
(3) bona fide news documentary (if the candidate’s appearance is incidental to the 
presentation of the subject(s) covered by the documentary); and (4) on-the-spot coverage 
of bona fide news events (including but not limited to political conventions and activities 
incidental to a convention). 
 
Arkansas Educational Television Commission v. Forbes 
 
In the U.S. Supreme Court case Arkansas Educational Television Commission v. Forbes 
(1998), a state-owned public television broadcaster denied an independent congressional 
candidate, that had little popular support, permission to participate in a debate sponsored 
by the broadcaster. The candidate filed suit, claiming, among other things, that he was 
entitled under the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution to participate in the debate. 
The court held that the broadcaster’s decision to exclude the candidate, because he had not 
generated appreciable public interest, was a reasonable, viewpoint-neutral exercise of 
journalistic discretion consistent with the First Amendment. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 101/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Maryland Public Television; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4