START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 163

F1 6lr1071
HB 147/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF SB 79

By: Delegates Wu, Kaufman, T. Morgan, Pasteur, Patterson, and Ziegler
Requested: October 2, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Education – Student Technology Use Policy – Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a county board of education to develop and adopt a policy on
4 the use of personal electronic devices during school hours; requiring the policy to
5 restrict or limit the use of personal electronic devices by students during school
6 hours, except under certain circumstances; and generally relating to county boards
7 of education and a student technology use policy.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Education
10 Section 7–137
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Education

16 7–137.

17 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICE” MEANS ANY
18 PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICE FOR INDIVIDUAL USE, INCLUDING A SMARTPHONE,
19 A TABLET, A LAPTOP, A SMARTWATCH, OR SMARTGLASSES.

20 (B) (1) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL DEVELOP AND ADOPT A POLICY
21 PROHIBITING OR LIMITING THE USE OF PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICES BY
22 STUDENTS DURING SCHOOL HOURS.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0163*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 163

1 (2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION,
2 THE POLICY SHALL INCLUDE:

3 (I) FOR ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS, A
4 PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF A PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICE DURING SCHOOL
5 HOURS; AND

6 (II) FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS, A LIMITATION ON THE USE
7 OF A PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICE DURING SCHOOL HOURS.

8 (C) A POLICY DEVELOPED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT PROHIBIT A
9 STUDENT FROM USING A PERSONAL ELECTRONIC DEVICE:

10 (1) FOR ANY PURPOSE DOCUMENTED IN THE STUDENT’S
11 INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM OR SECTION 504 PLAN;

12 (2) TO MONITOR OR ADDRESS A STUDENT’S DOCUMENTED HEALTH
13 ISSUE; OR

14 (3) WHEN DIRECTED BY AN EDUCATOR OR ADMINISTRATOR FOR
15 EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES.

16 (D) A POLICY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION SHALL BE:

17 (1) PUBLISHED ON THE WEBSITE OF THE COUNTY BOARD;

18 (2) PUBLISHED IN THE SCHOOL’S STUDENT HANDBOOK; AND

19 (3) REVIEWED EVERY 2 YEARS:

20 (I) FOR ELEMENTARY AND MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS, BY THE
21 DEPARTMENT; AND

22 (II) FOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS, BY THE COUNTY BOARD.

23 (E) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
24 TO ENFORCE THE POLICY ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION, INCLUDING
25 APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINARY MEASURES FOR VIOLATIONS, INCLUDING IN–SCHOOL
26 SUSPENSIONS.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2