START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 153

C9, N1 6lr1043
HB 339/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED) CF SB 12

By: Delegates Lehman, Pena–Melnyk, Ruth, Stewart, and Terrasa
Requested: October 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Residential Rental Apartments – Air–Conditioning Requirement

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a landlord to provide air–conditioning to certain residential
4 rental units in a certain manner; and generally relating to air–conditioning
5 requirements for residential rental units.

6 BY adding to
7 Article – Real Property
8 Section 8–122
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Real Property

14 8–122.

15 (A) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS IN
16 APARTMENT BUILDINGS WITH FOUR OR MORE INDIVIDUAL DWELLING UNITS.

17 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT
18 THAT IS:

19 (I) LOCATED ON PROPERTY LISTED ON THE NATIONAL
20 REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0153*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 153

1 (II) PART OF A HOUSING AUTHORITY OF BALTIMORE CITY
2 DEVELOPMENT BUILT BETWEEN 1940 AND 1950, INCLUSIVE; OR

3 (III) A ROWHOUSE PUBLIC HOUSING UNIT ACQUIRED AND
4 REHABILITATED BY THE HOUSING AUTHORITY OF BALTIMORE CITY BETWEEN 1960
5 AND 1997, INCLUSIVE.

6 (B) A LANDLORD SHALL PROVIDE AIR–CONDITIONING IN EACH
7 RESIDENTIAL UNIT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AS
8 FOLLOWS:

9 (1) BEGINNING JUNE 1, 2026, FOR NEWLY CONSTRUCTED
10 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS; AND

11 (2) BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2026, FOR RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS
12 THAT UNDERGO RENOVATION THAT INCLUDES THE REPLACEMENT OR SUBSTANTIAL
13 UPGRADE OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS OR HEATING SYSTEMS.

14 (C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE NECESSARY FOR PURPOSES OF REASONABLE
15 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR, EACH YEAR FROM JUNE 1 TO SEPTEMBER 30, BOTH
16 INCLUSIVE, A LANDLORD SHALL PROVIDE AIR–CONDITIONING IN EACH
17 RESIDENTIAL UNIT AS FOLLOWS:

18 (1) FOR AN AIR–CONDITIONING SYSTEM THAT IS NOT UNDER THE
19 CONTROL OF THE TENANT, THE LANDLORD SHALL MAINTAIN THE TEMPERATURE IN
20 THE UNIT AT NOT GREATER THAN 80 DEGREES FAHRENHEIT AT 3 FEET ABOVE THE
21 FLOOR LEVEL IN EACH HABITABLE SPACE IN THE UNIT; AND

22 (2) FOR AN AIR–CONDITIONING SYSTEM THAT IS UNDER THE
23 CONTROL OF THE TENANT, THE LANDLORD SHALL ENSURE THAT THE
24 AIR–CONDITIONING SYSTEM IS IN GOOD WORKING ORDER AND IS CAPABLE OF
25 MAINTAINING THE TEMPERATURE IN THE UNIT AT NOT GREATER THAN 80 DEGREES
26 FAHRENHEIT AT 3 FEET ABOVE THE FLOOR LEVEL IN EACH HABITABLE SPACE IN
27 THE UNIT.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
29 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
30 application to any building construction or renovation for which the building permit is
31 issued before the effective date of this Act.

32 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
33 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2