START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 181 
(Delegate Woods) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health – Restaurants – Disclosure of Main Food Allergens 
 
   
This bill requires a restaurant to offer a written disclosure of each “main food allergen” 
that a restaurant knows or reasonably should know is contained as an ingredient in each 
menu item. The disclosure must use the common names of the main food allergen or 
standardized pictograms. The disclosure may be (1) written on the menu; (2) available in 
digital format (such as a QR code linked to a digital menu); (3) a separate allergen-specific 
menu; (4) an allergen chart, grid, or booklet; or (5) any other written material. The bill does 
not apply to prepackaged foods that are subject to federal labeling requirements for main 
food allergens. A restaurant that violates the bill’s requirement is subject to existing civil 
and criminal penalty provisions for food establishments. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can work with local health 
departments (LHDs) to enforce the bill using existing budgeted resources. The application 
of existing penalties is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  LHDs can enforce the bill with existing budgeted resources. The application 
of existing penalties is not anticipated to materially affect local finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Main food allergen,” as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 321, means (1) milk, egg, 
fish, Crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, wheat, peanuts, soybeans, and sesame; and (2) a food 
ingredient that contains protein derived from a food specified above, except a highly 
refined oil derived from an above ingredient. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 181/ Page 2 
Current Law:  “Food establishment” means a food service facility or a food processing 
plant. “Food service facility” means (1) a place where food or drink is prepared for sale or 
service on the premises or elsewhere or (2) any operation where food is served to or 
provided for the public, with or without charge. Restaurant is not defined under the 
Health‑General Article.  
 
Chapters 251 and 252 of 2013 require food establishments to display a poster related to 
food allergies, as designed and made available by MDH.  
 
A food establishment other than a cottage food business that violates any provision of 
Subtitle 3 of the Health-General Article – including the requirement to display a poster 
related to food allergies – is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to (1) for 
a first offense, a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days; and (2) for a 
second offense, a fine of up to $2,500 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. The food 
establishment is also liable for a civil penalty of up to $5,000 and may be enjoined from 
continuing the violation.   
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.15.03.12) and the federal Food Allergen 
Labeling and Consumer Protection Act, a food service facility must ensure that each item 
of packaged food has a label that includes, among other things, the food source of any main 
food allergens, unless the common name of the ingredient already identifies the allergen.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Small business restaurants must comply with the bill’s main food 
allergens disclosure requirement or be subject to civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2