START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 195 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 195 
(Delegate Queen) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission - Authority to Conduct Studies 
on the Use of Emerging Technology - Collaboration 
 
 
This bill requires the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) to conduct 
studies of the State lottery and gaming program to identify the latest trends and emerging 
technology to create a safer, more transparent gambling environment, including 
cybersecurity technology, the use of artificial intelligence, and digital identity verification, 
as specified. If SLGCC does not have the resources or expertise to:  (1) conduct required 
studies of the State lottery and gaming program or (2) consider the use of technology, 
remote surveillance, and other similar measures to carry out specified sports wagering 
duties, SLGCC must collaborate with a higher education institution in the State, a 
foundation, or a private entity to analyze best practices or contract with one of those entities 
to conduct the study or perform the analysis. SLGCC must require the Director of the 
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) or the director’s designee to 
communicate and participate fully in a study authorized by the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by as much as $100,000 in FY 2027 only 
for SLGCA to hire a consultant to conduct the required studies and analysis. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 195/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SLGCC must conduct studies of the State lottery and gaming program to:   
 
 
identify any defect in lottery and video lottery facility operations statute or 
regulations of SLGCA that may allow operational or administrative abuses or 
evasions; 
 
guard against the use of those statutes and regulations to conduct organized crime; 
 
ensure that SLGCA’s regulations are proper and related statute and regulations are 
administered to serve their purpose; and 
 
analyze the gaming industry within and outside the State to determine whether 
Maryland’s gaming program is competitive and maximizing revenues for the State. 
 
SLGCC must conduct studies of:   
 
 
the operation and administration of similar laws in other states or countries; 
 
federal laws that may affect the operation of the State lottery or gaming activities; 
 
literature on lotteries and gaming activities, including problem gambling programs; 
and 
 
the reaction of State citizens to existing and potential features of the State lottery 
and gaming program.  
 
SLGCC must submit to the Governor and the General Assembly a monthly report and an 
annual report on State lottery and gaming revenues, total prize disbursements, and other 
expenses for the preceding month and year, respectively. Additionally, SLGCC must 
submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly whenever a matter requires an 
immediate change in a State law to prevent an abuse or evasion or rectify an undesirable 
condition in the operation or administration of the State lottery and gaming program. 
 
SLGCC must regulate sports wagering and the conduct of sports wagering to the same 
extent that SLGCC regulates the operation of video lottery terminals and table games. 
SLGCC must consider the use of technology, remote surveillance, and other similar 
measures to carry out specified sports wagering duties. 
 
State Expenditures:  SLGCA advises that existing staff do not have the expertise to 
conduct the studies and analysis required by the bill. Thus, SLGCC must either collaborate 
with a higher education institution in the State, a foundation, or a private entity to analyze 
best practices or contract with one of those entities to conduct the studies and perform the 
analysis. Bowie State University and Morgan State University both report that they need 
to hire several employees if they are selected as a collaborator or contractor under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 195/ Page 3 
Thus, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) assumes that SLGCC contracts with 
a private entity to perform the studies and analysis as that is likely the most cost-effective 
option to meet the bill’s requirements. Based on a prior consultant’s costs for a SLGCA 
study, DLS estimates that general fund expenditures increase by as much as $100,000 in 
fiscal 2027 for SLGCC to hire a consultant to conduct the studies and perform the analysis. 
The bill does not specify a timeline or a frequency for the studies and analysis, so DLS 
assumes it is a one-time occurrence.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3