START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 160

L6, N1, P3 6lr0678
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Schindler, Behler, Fair, Kaufman, Palakovich Carr, and Woorman
Requested: August 11, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State and Local Government – Real Property – Confederate Naming Prohibited

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a State entity or a political subdivision of the State from
4 assigning a Confederate name to real property owned by the State or political
5 subdivision; and generally relating to prohibiting Confederate naming of State and
6 local real property.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – General Provisions
9 Section 9–101 and 9–102 to be under the new title “Title 9. State and Local
10 Government Real Property Naming”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – General Provisions

16 TITLE 9. STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT REAL PROPERTY NAMING.

17 9–101.

18 (A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
19 INDICATED.

20 (B) “CONFEDERATE NAME” MEANS A NAME THAT COMMEMORATES THE
21 CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA OR ANY PERSON WHO SERVED VOLUNTARILY
22 WITH THE CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0160*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 160

1 (C) “POLITICAL SUBDIVISION” MEANS:

2 (1) A COUNTY;

3 (2) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

4 (3) AN UNINCORPORATED TOWN;

5 (4) A SCHOOL DISTRICT; OR

6 (5) A SPECIAL DISTRICT.

7 (D) “REAL PROPERTY” INCLUDES STREETS, BUILDINGS, PARKS, AND
8 SUBDIVISIONS.

9 (E) “STATE ENTITY” INCLUDES ALL UNITS AND AGENCIES IN THE
10 EXECUTIVE, LEGISLATIVE, AND JUDICIAL BRANCHES OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

11 9–102.

12 A STATE ENTITY OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE MAY NOT
13 ASSIGN A CONFEDERATE NAME TO REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE STATE OR
14 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
16 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
17 application to any real property, as defined under § 9–101 of the General Provisions Article,
18 as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, that has a Confederate name, as defined under § 9–101
19 of the General Provisions Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, before the effective
20 date of this Act.

21 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2