START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 149

E4 6lr1591
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1592

By: Delegate Charkoudian
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Fire Prevention – Assistant Fire Marshals, Residential Rental High–Rise
3 Property Fire Safety Equipment, and Fire Alarm System Technicians

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing a county or municipal corporation to designate certain fire
5 marshals with the approval of the State Fire Marshal or to request that the State
6 Fire Marshal designate certain fire marshals and requiring the State Fire Marshal
7 to adopt certain regulations governing the qualifications, training, standards, and
8 certification of designees; requiring installation of certain fire prevention in certain
9 high–rise residential buildings; requiring the State Fire Prevention Commission to
10 adopt certain regulations relating to fire alarm system technicians; and generally
11 relating to fire safety.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Public Safety
14 Section 6–304, 9–102, 9–901, and 9–902
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Public Safety

20 6–304.

21 (a) (1) A county or municipal corporation of the State may designate WITH
22 THE APPROVAL OF THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL, OR MAY REQUEST THAT THE STATE
23 FIRE MARSHAL DESIGNATE, a fire marshal or appropriate fire official to serve as

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0149*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 149

1 assistant State fire marshal to carry out this title, including issuing orders, in that county
2 or municipal corporation.

3 (2) An assistant State fire marshal may not receive compensation from the
4 State.

5 (3) The State Fire Marshal shall carry out this title in a county or
6 municipal corporation that [has not] DOES NOT HAVE A designated [an] assistant State
7 fire marshal.

8 (b) (1) [An assistant State fire marshal shall have at least completed National
9 Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1031 – Fire Inspector I, or the equivalent, as
10 determined by the State Fire Marshal.] THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL SHALL ADOPT
11 REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS DESIGNATED
12 AS AN ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL OR A SPECIAL ASSISTANT STATE FIRE
13 MARSHAL UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, INCLUDING:

14 (I) MINIMUM TRAINING, CERTIFICATION, AND OTHER
15 STANDARDS RELATING TO FIRE INSPECTION;

16 (II) MINIMUM TRAINING, CERTIFICATION, AND OTHER
17 STANDARDS FOR FIRE PLAN REVIEW, A FIRE PLAN EXAMINER, OR FIRE PLAN
18 ENGINEERING STAFF;

19 (III) MINIMUM TRAINING, CERTIFICATION, AND OTHER
20 STANDARDS RELATING TO FIRE INSPECTION;

21 (IV) ACCEPTABLE MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE ELIGIBILITY
22 OF AN INDIVIDUAL TO SERVE AS AN ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL OR A SPECIAL
23 ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL; AND

24 (V) POLICIES FOR APPLICATION FOR, REVIEW OF, EXPIRATION
25 OF, RENEWAL OF, AND PROBATIONARY STATUS FOR THE POSITIONS OF ASSISTANT
26 STATE FIRE MARSHAL AND SPECIAL ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL.

27 (2) The State Fire Marshal may administer an examination based on
28 NFPA [Standard 1031] STANDARDS AS RELEVANT FOR THE REQUIREMENTS LISTED
29 IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION before designating an individual as an
30 assistant State fire marshal OR SPECIAL ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL.

31 (c) (1) The State Fire Marshal may designate as a special assistant State fire
32 marshal:

33 (i) a law enforcement officer involved in arson investigations;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 149 3

1 (ii) any other suitable individual who meets the standards
2 established under this section; or

3 (iii) on the advice of an assistant State fire marshal, a member of a
4 fire department if:

5 1. the designee is a full–time employee of the fire
6 department;

7 2. the designee performs fire inspections or fire
8 investigations for the fire department; and

9 3. the fire department is organized and operates in the State.

10 (2) A special assistant State fire marshal serves at the pleasure of the State
11 Fire Marshal.

12 (3) A special assistant State fire marshal may not receive compensation
13 from the State.

14 (4) Each special assistant State fire marshal shall assist the State Fire
15 Marshal in carrying out the duties of the State Fire Marshal under this title.

16 (d) The Commission may remove an assistant or special assistant State fire
17 marshal for just cause by a majority decision:

18 (1) on the recommendation of the State Fire Marshal; and

19 (2) after an administrative hearing.

20 9–102.

21 (a) (1) In this section, “high–rise building” means a building [for human
22 occupancy that is:

23 (i) seven or more stories above grade level; or

24 (ii) over 75 feet in height] WHERE THE FLOOR OF AN OCCUPIABLE
25 STORY IS GREATER THAN 75 FEET ABOVE THE LOWEST LEVEL OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
26 VEHICLE ACCESS.

27 (2) “High–rise building” does not include:

28 (i) a structure or building used exclusively for open–air parking; or

29 (ii) a building used exclusively for agricultural purposes.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 149

1 (b) This subtitle applies throughout the State, including Baltimore City.

2 (c) (1) An automatic smoke alarm shall be provided in each sleeping area
3 within each residential occupancy, including one– and two–family dwellings, lodging or
4 rooming houses, hotels, dormitories, and apartment buildings, as defined in NFPA 101: Life
5 Safety Code as adopted by the State Fire Prevention Commission.

6 (2) (i) Beginning July 31, 2025, smoke detectors shall be installed in
7 accordance with location and spacing requirements established by the National Fire
8 Protection Association in each interior public corridor in a residential rental high–rise
9 building.

10 (ii) A county may not require upgrades to fire safety systems not
11 specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph as a condition of issuing a permit for the
12 installation of smoke detectors required under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

13 (3) (I) IN THIS PARAGRAPH, “SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION” MEANS
14 PERMANENT ALTERATIONS THAT:

15 1. ARE INTENDED TO ENHANCE THE VALUE OF A
16 BUILDING; AND

17 2. COST AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 40% OF THE VALUE OF
18 THE BUILDING AS ASSESSED BY THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND
19 TAXATION.

20 (II) BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2026, AUTOMATIC FIRE
21 SPRINKLERS SHALL BE INSTALLED IN ACCORDANCE WITH NFPA STANDARDS IN
22 EACH RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HIGH–RISE BUILDING THAT IS UNDERGOING A
23 SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION.

24 (III) IN DETERMINING WHETHER A PROPOSED SUBSTANTIAL
25 RENOVATION IS INTENDED TO ENHANCE THE VALUE OF A BUILDING EXCLUSIVE OF
26 LAND VALUE, A COUNTY MAY CONSIDER:

27 1. THE EXISTING PHYSICAL CONDITION OF THE RENTAL
28 HOUSING;

29 2. WHETHER THE EXISTING PHYSICAL CONDITION
30 IMPAIRS OR TENDS TO IMPAIR THE HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SECURITY OF ANY
31 TENANT;

32 3. WHETHER THE DEFICIENCIES IN THE EXISTING
33 PHYSICAL CONDITIONS COULD INSTEAD BE CORRECTED BY IMPROVED
34 MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 149 5

1 4. WHETHER THE PROPOSED RENOVATIONS ARE
2 OPTIONAL OR COSMETIC CHANGES.

3 (IV) A SUBSTANTIALLY RENOVATED RESIDENTIAL RENTAL
4 HIGH–RISE BUILDING SHALL ALSO HAVE THE FOLLOWING FIRE PROTECTION AND
5 LIFE SAFETY FEATURES:

6 1. SMOKE ALARMS OR HEAT DETECTORS IN EVERY
7 SLEEPING AREA;

8 2. STAIRWELLS ENCLOSED WITH AT LEAST 2–HOUR FIRE
9 RESISTANCE RATED CONSTRUCTION WITH AT LEAST 90–MINUTE FIRE RESISTANCE
10 RELATED, SELF–CLOSING, AND SELF–LATCHING DOORS;

11 3. AT LEAST 20–MINUTE FIRE RESISTANCE RATED
12 CORRIDOR DOORS UNLESS PARTIAL SPRINKLER PROTECTION IS PROVIDED;

13 4. SMOKEPROOF EXIT ENCLOSURES VIA NATURAL
14 VENTILATION, MECHANICAL VENTILATION INCORPORATING A VESTIBULE, OR
15 PRESSURIZING THE STAIR ENCLOSURE;

16 5. AT LEAST TWO SMOKE COMPARTMENTS ON EACH
17 FLOOR; AND

18 6. DECREASED MAXIMUM EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL
19 DISTANCES.

20 (d) Smoke alarms shall:

21 (1) be installed in accordance with NFPA 72: National Fire Alarm and
22 Signaling Code as referenced by the State Fire Prevention Code;

23 (2) be listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory to
24 comply with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 217, “Standard for safety for single and
25 multiple station smoke alarms”;

26 (3) be suitable for sensing visible or invisible products of combustion; and

27 (4) sound an alarm suitable to warn the occupants.

28 (e) Local jurisdictions may adopt smoke alarm regulations that are more
29 stringent than the provisions of this subtitle.

30 9–901.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 149

1 (A) In this subtitle[, “fire] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (B) “FIRE ALARM SYSTEM TECHNICIAN” MEANS A PERSON WHO IS ENGAGED
4 IN THE PERFORMANCE, DOCUMENTATION, PLANNING, AND COORDINATION OF THE
5 PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING OF EXISTING FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS AND THEIR
6 COMPONENTS, NOT INCLUDING THE COMMISSIONING OF NEW SYSTEMS.

7 (C) “FIRE sprinkler contractor” means a person who designs, installs, inspects,
8 tests, repairs, or modifies a fire sprinkler system.

9 9–902.

10 (a) (1) The State Fire Prevention Commission shall adopt regulations to
11 establish a program to license and regulate fire sprinkler contractors in the State.

12 [(b)] (2) The State Fire Prevention Commission shall adopt regulations to:

13 [(1)] (I) define fire sprinkler contractor;

14 [(2)] (II) define fire sprinkler system[,] in a manner that does not conflict
15 with § 12–101(l), (m), or (n) of the Business Occupations and Professions Article;

16 [(3)] (III) designate and identify exemptions to the regulations;

17 [(4)] (IV) establish requirements for licensure including professional and
18 technical standards and requirements for liability insurance;

19 [(5)] (V) establish a schedule of fees for licenses that will recover but not
20 exceed the direct and indirect costs associated with the issuance of the licenses; and

21 [(6)] (VI) establish procedures for the State Fire Marshal to deny, suspend,
22 or revoke the license of a person who fails to comply with any regulation adopted by the
23 State Fire Prevention Commission under this subtitle.

24 (B) (1) THE STATE FIRE PREVENTION COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT
25 REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH A PROGRAM TO LICENSE AND REGULATE FIRE ALARM
26 SYSTEM TECHNICIANS AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEM COMPANIES IN THE STATE.

27 (2) THE STATE FIRE PREVENTION COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT
28 REGULATIONS TO:

29 (I) DEFINE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM TECHNICIAN;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 149 7

1 (II) DEFINE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM IN A MANNER THAT DOES NOT
2 CONFLICT WITH § 12–101(L), (M), OR (N) OF THE BUSINESS OCCUPATIONS AND
3 PROFESSIONS ARTICLE;

4 (III) DESIGNATE AND IDENTIFY EXEMPTIONS TO THE
5 REGULATIONS;

6 (IV) ESTABLISH REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSURE, INCLUDING
7 PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR LIABILITY
8 INSURANCE;

9 (V) ESTABLISH A SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR LICENSES THAT WILL
10 RECOVER BUT NOT EXCEED THE DIRECT AND INDIRECT COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
11 THE ISSUANCE OF THE LICENSES; AND

12 (VI) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL
13 TO DENY, SUSPEND, OR REVOKE THE LICENSE OF A PERSON WHO FAILS TO COMPLY
14 WITH ANY REGULATION ADOPTED BY THE STATE FIRE PREVENTION COMMISSION
15 UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7