START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 137 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 137 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Child Custody Evaluators - Qualifications 
 
 
This bill specifies certain requirements for an individual to be appointed by a court as a 
custody evaluator. The bill also prohibits a court from ordering the cost of an assessment 
to be paid, in whole or in part, by a party without giving the parties notice and an 
opportunity to object. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “custody evaluator” is an individual appointed or approved by a court 
to conduct a custody evaluation. The court may, on motion of a party or child’s counsel, 
(1) order an assessment to aid the court in evaluating the health, safety, and welfare or best 
interests of a child in a contested custody or visitation case or (2) appoint a custody 
evaluator determined by the court to be competent to conduct a home study or an evaluation 
of a specific issue.  
 
A court may not appoint an individual as a custody evaluator unless the individual (1) is a 
physician licensed in any state who is board certified in psychiatry or has completed an 
accredited psychiatry residency, as specified; (2) is a State-licensed practitioner in related 
fields, as specified, or has an equivalent level of licensure in another state; or (3) is a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 137/ Page 2 
State‑licensed graduate or master social worker with at least two years of experience in 
one or more areas, as specified, or has an equivalent level of licensure and experience in 
any other state. 
 
The individual must comply with all conditions necessary to maintain professional 
licensure, including completing all mandatory continuing education requirements. The 
individual must have (1) completed a training program that conforms with guidelines 
established by the Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC); (2) complied with the 
continuing educational requirements of the custody evaluator’s field; and (3) experience in 
conducting or observing custody evaluations. The individual must also have demonstrated 
knowledge of and experience in the following topics:  domestic and family violence; child 
neglect and abuse, including sexual abuse; child and adult development; trauma and its 
impact on children and adults; family dynamics and conflict resolution; disability‑related 
issues; and the impact of divorce and separation on children and adults. 
 
A court may waive the requirements above for a court employee or an individual under 
contract with the court who (1) conducted custody evaluations for at least 14 years prior to 
January 1, 2025; (2) has completed a training program that conforms to guidelines 
established by AOC; and (3) completes at least 20 hours per year of continuing education 
relevant to conducting custody evaluations.  
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to Maryland Rule 9‑205.3, a custody evaluation is the study and 
analysis of (1) the needs and development of a child who is the subject of an applicable 
action or proceeding and (2) the abilities of the parties to care for the child and meet the 
child’s needs. A custody evaluator is an individual appointed or approved by the court to 
perform a custody evaluation. On motion of a party or child’s counsel, or on its own 
initiative, the court may order an assessment (including a custody evaluation) to aid the 
court in evaluating the health, safety, welfare, or best interests of a child in a contested 
custody or visitation case. In some jurisdictions, custody evaluators are court employees 
and perform custody evaluations free of charge to litigants. In other jurisdictions, the family 
support services coordinator maintains a list of qualified custody evaluators, and the county 
administrative judge is required to develop and adopt maximum fee schedules for custody 
evaluations. 
 
Maryland Rule 9-205.3 also establishes specified requirements for custody evaluators, 
including those related to education, licensing, and training. These requirements generally 
align with the bill.  
 
COMAR also contains specific requirements governing the professional conduct of 
licensed psychologists who perform child custody evaluations or who otherwise render an 
opinion on legal or physical custody, including standards related to the competence 
necessary to conduct child custody evaluations. (See, generally, COMAR 10.36.09.00-05.)  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 137/ Page 3 
Custody – Evidence of Abuse or Neglect 
 
Under § 9‐101.1 of the Family Law Article, when deciding custody or visitation issues, the 
court must consider evidence of abuse by a party against the other parent of the party’s 
child, the party’s spouse, or any child residing within the party’s household, including a 
child other than the child who is the subject of the custody or visitation proceeding. If the 
court finds that the party has committed abuse against any of these individuals, it must 
make arrangements for custody or visitation that best protect the child who is the subject 
of the proceeding and the victim of the abuse.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 25 and HB 152 of 2025; SB 365 and HB 405 of 2024; and SB 13 and 
HB 285 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 222 (Senators Carozza and West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3