START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 153 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 153 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Residential Rental Apartments - Air-Conditioning Requirement 
 
  
This bill requires a landlord of residential rental units in apartment buildings with four or 
more individual dwelling units to provide air conditioning, from June 1 through 
September 30 each year, as specified. Unless otherwise exempted by the bill, landlords are 
to provide air conditioning in residential rental units (1) beginning June 1, 2026, for newly 
constructed units and (2) beginning October 1, 2026, for existing units that undergo 
renovation that includes the replacement or substantial upgrade of electrical systems or 
heating systems. The bill applies prospectively only and does not have any effect on or 
application to any building construction or renovation for which the building permit is 
issued before the bill’s effective date. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit 
of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  From June 1 through September 30, landlords must provide 
air conditioning in residential units, except as otherwise necessary for reasonable 
maintenance and repairs, according to the following requirements:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 153/ Page 2 
 
for air‐conditioning systems not controlled by the tenant, the landlord must maintain 
a temperature of 80 degrees Fahrenheit or lower, measured three feet above the floor 
in all habitable spaces; or  
 
for air‐conditioning systems controlled by the tenant, the landlord must ensure the 
system is in good working order and capable of maintaining a temperature of 
80 degrees Fahrenheit or lower, measured three feet above the floor in all habitable 
spaces. 
 
The bill’s requirements do not apply to residential rental units that are (1) located in 
property listed on the National Register of Historic Places; (2) part of a Housing Authority 
of Baltimore City development built between 1940 and 1950, inclusive; or (3) a rowhouse 
public housing unit acquired and rehabilitated by the Housing Authority of Baltimore City 
between 1960 and 1997. 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions provide tenants with a mechanism for encouraging 
the repair of serious and dangerous defects/conditions that exist within or as part of any 
residential dwelling unit, or upon common property, as specified. The defects are those in 
which a substantial and serious threat of danger to the life, health, and safety of the 
occupants is present. Statutory provisions provide a remedy and impose an obligation upon 
landlords to repair and eliminate the serious and dangerous conditions and defects. 
 
However, statute does not provide a remedy for the landlord’s failure to repair and 
eliminate minor defects or, in those locations governed by such codes, housing code 
violations of a nondangerous nature. There is a rebuttable presumption that the following 
conditions, when they do not present a serious and substantial threat to the life, health, and 
safety of the occupants, are not covered by the aforementioned statutory provisions:   
 
 
any defect that merely reduces the aesthetic value of the leased premises, such as 
the lack of fresh paint, rugs, carpets, paneling, or other decorative amenities; 
 
small cracks in the walls, floors, or ceilings; 
 
the absence of linoleum or tile on the floors, provided that they are otherwise safe 
and structurally sound; or 
 
the absence of air conditioning. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures in jurisdictions that own/operate residential 
rental units in apartment buildings increase, potentially significantly, to the extent that costs 
are incurred for newly constructed units or planned renovations (as specified) that, absent 
the bill, would not have included air conditioning. The bill creates exemptions for certain 
properties related to the Housing Authority of Baltimore City. However, according to 
information provided by the Maryland Association of Counites for similar legislation in a 
prior year, approximately eight jurisdictions provide public housing to residents, although 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 153/ Page 3 
the majority already abide by certain standards that necessitate the presence of  
air conditioning in all units. Some jurisdictions may also experience increased demand for 
code enforcement related to heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems subject to 
the bill.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, for small 
business landlords that are required to provide air conditioning to rental units under the 
provisions of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 339 of 2025 and HB 1295 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 12 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3