START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 102 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 102 
(Delegate Patterson) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Dependent Children of Active Service Members - Advance 
Enrollment Procedures 
 
 
This bill requires local school systems to allow a dependent child of an active service 
member to apply for advance enrollment in a public school and specifies requirements for 
advance enrollment procedures. The Secretary of Veterans and Military Families, in 
consultation with specified entities, must publish and maintain information on (1) advance 
enrollment procedures and (2) any assistance and services available to service members 
regarding advance enrollment. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources. Multiple school systems advise that they already have advance enrollment 
procedures that conform to the bill’s requirements. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To advance enroll a child, an active service member must provide to the 
local superintendent military orders showing that the service member will be stationed in 
the State during the current or immediately following school year. The local superintendent 
must establish a remote registration process to allow for advance enrollment. The process 
may not charge a fee or require the active service member or other parent or guardian or 
the dependent child to physically appear at a location within the county to complete any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 102/ Page 2 
part of the advance enrollment. Advance enrollment can be finalized within 10 days of the 
published arrival date if the service member provides the local school with (1) satisfactory 
evidence of the child’s dependent status; (2) a copy of the military orders; and (3) proof of 
residence in the county. 
 
The remote registration process must allow active service members or specified individuals 
to note whether the child has an individualized education program (IEP) or a 504 plan in 
the sending state. If the child has an IEP or 504 plan, the local school board must ensure, 
as specified, that the child receives an appropriate education without undue delay 
including, if appropriate, education under an IEP or in accordance with a 504 plan. 
 
A dependent child of an active service member who uses advance enrollment must have 
access to academic courses and programs, including extracurricular activities and athletic 
and social programs, in the same manner as other students enrolled in the school. 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a dependent child of an active service member 
who has used advance enrollment may remain enrolled in the school until the end of the 
current school year, even if the child no longer meets the school’s residency requirements. 
 
Current Law:  An active service member is defined as an individual who is (1) an active 
duty member of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a reserve component of the 
uniformed services on active duty orders. 
 
Under federal law, “uniformed services” means, the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, 
Space Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Public 
Health Service. A “reserve component” means the Army National Guard, Army Reserve, 
Navy Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air National Guard, Air Force Reserve, 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of the Public Health Service. 
 
A local superintendent must allow a dependent child of an active service member who is 
relocating to the State on military orders and is not residing in the county during the 
enrollment period to apply for enrollment in the same manner and at the same time as 
residents of the county. Within 10 days of the published arrival date on the service 
member’s military orders, the service member must provide the school with (1) satisfactory 
evidence of the child’s dependent status; (2) a copy of the military orders; and (3) proof of 
residence in the county. The service member may use specified addresses (including 
temporary military housing) as proof of residence. 
 
Interstate Compact 
 
Since 2010, Maryland has been a member of the Interstate Compact on Educational 
Opportunity for Military Children, which addresses enrollment of dependents of members 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 102/ Page 3 
of the uniformed services when the service member is under active orders. The purpose of 
the Compact is to remove barriers to educational success imposed on children of military 
families because of frequent moves and deployment by their parents. Among other things, 
it seeks to (1) facilitate the timely enrollment of children of military families and 
(2) facilitate the student placement process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 596 and SB 601 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 263 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland School for 
the Deaf; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Baltimore County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Prince George’s 
County Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3