START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 146 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - On-Site Wastewater Systems - Requirements for Inspection and 
Pumping Services and Implementation Dates 
 
 
This bill requires a landlord of property that is served by an on-site wastewater system 
(septic system), by July 1, 2028, and before each new tenant occupies the property 
thereafter, to ensure the septic system has been inspected and pumped out. Beginning 
July 1, 2028, the bill also requires a contract for the sale of real property with a septic 
system to include a provision requiring, as a condition of the sale, that the purchaser ensure 
the system has been inspected and pumped out. The bill does not limit a mortgage company 
or financial institution from requiring a septic system inspection as part of contract terms 
for the sale or transfer of real property. Furthermore, the bill (1) requires the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) to adopt regulations related to the State Board of 
Wastewater Professionals by July 1, 2027, instead of by July 1, 2025; and (2) delays, from 
July 1, 2026, to July 1, 2028, the date by which an individual who provides on‑site 
wastewater services must be licensed by the board. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s delay in the timeline to adopt regulations and license on‑site 
wastewater property transfer professionals may affect special fund revenues as early as 
FY 2027, but any such impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time, as discussed below. 
Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential administrative costs and fee revenues for some local governments 
(primarily local health departments (LHDs)), as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 146/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law 
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, “on-site wastewater system” means (1) a wastewater system designed 
to treat and dispose of effluent on the same property that produces the wastewater or on an 
easement or (2) a holding tank. The term includes a septic or any other on-site sewage 
disposal system. However, the term does not include a wastewater treatment system that 
requires a discharge permit from MDE or that treats 5,000 or more gallons per day.  
 
Under the bill, “delegated approval authority” means the LHD or county agency that has 
received an on-site sewage disposal system delegation of authority by the department. 
 
Regulation and Licensure of On-site Wastewater Property Professionals 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 444 and 445 of 2021, any person (unless exempted) who engages in 
the business of inspecting a septic system must obtain an on-site wastewater property 
transfer inspection license from MDE. Chapters 444 and 445 also required MDE to adopt 
regulations that establish license eligibility criteria, minimum training standards,  
license terms, and fees for license applications and renewals, as specified. These required 
regulations went into effect in 2023. Chapter 419 of 2022, repealed, effective  
June 30, 2025, the on‑site wastewater property transfer inspection license provisions 
established under Chapters 444 and 445. 
 
Chapter 419 also established the board as a unit within MDE to regulate and license 
individuals who provide on-site wastewater services in the State, including septic system 
property transfer inspections. Pursuant to Chapter 419, generally, an individual must be 
licensed by the board before providing on-site wastewater services in the State. However, 
an individual who provides such services in the State may continue to provide such services 
until MDE establishes regulations that implement the licensing requirements established 
under Chapter 419 if the individual (1) complies with all applicable State and local laws 
and regulations; (2) pays a $150 fee to MDE by December 31, 2022; and (3) pays a  
$150 renewal fee every two years thereafter until MDE sets license and any other 
service‑related fees by regulation.  
 
Chapter 419 required MDE to adopt implementing regulations by July 1, 2025. The bill 
requires MDE to adopt implementing regulations for Chapter 419 by July 1, 2027. MDE 
promulgated emergency regulations implementing portions of Chapter 419 by establishing 
licensing provisions for on‑site wastewater property transfer inspectors. The emergency 
regulations took effect December 31, 2025, and expire May 24, 2026.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 146/ Page 3 
Chapter 419 also required that all individuals who provide on-site wastewater services in 
the State be licensed by the board by July 1, 2026. The bill extends this deadline to 
July 1, 2028.  
 
New Requirements to Conduct Septic System Inspections and Pump Outs 
 
Landlords:  Under the bill, septic system inspections and pump outs must be done by an 
individual appropriately licensed under Title 9, Subtitle 11A of the Environment Article, 
as specified.  
 
For purposes of meeting the bill’s requirements regarding landlords, a septic system 
property transfer inspection or pumping service performed in accordance with the bill is 
valid for three years. If an inspection conducted in accordance with the bill identifies a 
failing septic system, the landlord of the property must notify the delegated approval 
authority about the failure and when the system is fixed. 
 
Real Property Sales:  The requirements below do not apply if: 
 
 
 (1) the property transfer involves the transfer of residential real property that is 
between current spouses, a parent and a child, or siblings by whole blood (if the 
property is held in trust); (2) the property’s mortgage is being refinanced; or (3) the 
change in ownership or form of ownership does not involve the introduction of new 
parties; and 
 
the septic system has been inspected within the immediately preceding  
five-year period.  
 
The requirements also do not apply if the property transfer is the initial transfer after the 
construction of the property. 
 
Regarding contracts for the sale of real property that is served by a septic system, settlement 
on a contract may not occur until the vendor and the purchaser receive a report on the 
property transfer inspection and confirmation of the pumping service. At settlement, the 
vendor and purchaser must each certify in writing that they have received and reviewed the 
report and confirmation. Unless otherwise required as part of a real estate contract or 
mortgage, a property transfer inspection or pumping service performed in accordance with 
these requirements is valid for three years. If the inspection above identifies a failing septic 
system, the owner of the property must notify the delegated approval authority about the 
failure and when the system is fixed. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 146/ Page 4 
Requirements for Contracts of Sale 
 
Current law statutory provisions, which are unchanged by the bill, set forth numerous 
requirements regarding statements, disclosures, and notices in contracts for the sale of 
property, including provisions relating to:   
 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges;  
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays;  
 
notice of specified development impact fees;  
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund;  
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence.  
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located.  
 
State Revenues:  Under current law, pursuant to Chapter 419, until MDE and the board 
establish a licensing process by regulation, individuals providing on‑site wastewater 
services must pay an interim biannual $150 fee. Fee revenue under Chapter 419 is 
deposited into the On‑Site Wastewater Professionals Fund. However, MDE was required 
to promulgate licensing regulations for all individuals who provide on‑site wastewater 
services in accordance with Chapter 419 by July 1, 2025, and all individuals providing 
these services must obtain a license from the board by July 1, 2026. As discussed, the bill 
delays the requirement that individuals obtain a license from the board (until July 1, 2028), 
and the deadline for MDE to adopt licensing regulations (until July 1, 2027). 
 
As noted above, MDE promulgated emergency regulations that establish licensing 
requirements for on‑site wastewater property transfer inspectors. Under the emergency 
regulations, licensees must renew their licenses biennially and pay a $150 license fee on 
the same schedule that these individuals would otherwise be paying an interim biannual 
$150 fee. Regulations for other on‑site wastewater professionals are delayed, and it is 
unclear, in the absence of the bill, whether regulations will be in effect in time to meet the 
statutory deadline for on-site wastewater service professionals to obtain a license from the 
board. Because the full regulations are not in effect and no licensing fees have been 
established other than for property transfer inspectors, the Department of Legislative 
Services is unable to reliably evaluate the impact on special fund revenues from the bill’s 
delay in the statutory deadlines. Any impact on special fund revenues begins as early as 
July 1, 2026, when these individuals would, in the absence of the bill, need to be licensed 
in order to continue working in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 146/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  MDE notes that LHDs and local environmental agencies may face 
increased administrative responsibilities and potential costs to the extent that they conduct 
or otherwise oversee septic system inspections. Local fee revenues may increase for some 
jurisdictions from any inspections conducted by LHDs and from permit fees.  
 
For example, Prince George’s County advises that property owners with septic systems 
that fail inspections under the bill may apply for additional permits for septic system repairs 
or installations. The county anticipates an increase in local revenues of approximately 
$17,000 annually. The county also estimates that local expenditures increase by 
approximately $100,000 annually to hire staff to respond to complaints, conduct plan 
review for the repair and remodeling of systems, and to inspect installations.  
 
On the other hand, Baltimore City advises that the bill does not materially affect its finances 
or operations. The Maryland Association of County Health Officers anticipates that LHDs 
can likely handle increased workloads related to issuing additional permits for septic 
systems with existing resources because landlords and property owners are required to 
notify delegated approval authorities (typically LHDs) of failing systems.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business landlords are subject to additional costs due to the 
bill’s requirements to conduct additional inspections and pump outs of septic systems. The 
bill may also result in delays in the turnover of tenants and property transfers depending 
on the availability of qualified septic system property transfer inspectors.  
 
Qualified, licensed individuals performing wastewater system services may meaningfully 
benefit from the increase in demand for their services under the bill.  
 
Because it is unclear – in the absence of the bill – whether regulations fully implementing 
Chapter 419 will be in place in time for on‑site wastewater service professionals to obtain 
a license from the State Board of On‑site Wastewater Service Professionals by the existing 
July 1, 2026 statutory deadline, the bill’s delay of the licensing requirements gives MDE 
and the board additional time to finalize regulations and on‑site wastewater service 
professionals a clearer path to continue working during that interim period. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 747 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 165 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 146/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers;  
Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6