START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 199

N2, D3 6lr0769
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0609

By: Delegate Crosby
Requested: September 4, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Estates – Maryland Uniform Simultaneous Death Act

3 FOR the purpose of conforming the Maryland Uniform Simultaneous Death Act to the
4 Uniform Simultaneous Death Act; providing that a surviving individual who does
5 not survive the death of another individual for a certain period of time is deemed to
6 have predeceased the other individual for purposes relating to the inheritance of
7 property; establishing evidentiary procedures for determining an individual’s death
8 or survival in certain circumstances; providing for liability under this Act in
9 connection with the distribution of disputed assets; and generally relating to the
10 Maryland Uniform Simultaneous Death Act.

11 BY renumbering
12 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
13 Section 10–806 and 10–807
14 to be Section 10–808 and 10–809, respectively
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing
18 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
19 Section 10–801 through 10–805
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY adding to
23 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
24 Section 10–801 through 10–807
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0199*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 199

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That Section(s) 10–806 and 10–807 of Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings of the
3 Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 10–808 and 10–809,
4 respectively.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
6 as follows:

7 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

8 [10–801.

9 Where title to property or its devolution depends upon priority of death and there is
10 no sufficient evidence that the persons have died otherwise than simultaneously, the
11 property of each person shall be disposed of as if he had survived, except as provided
12 otherwise in this subtitle.]

13 [10–802.

14 Where two or more beneficiaries are designated to take successively because of
15 survivorship under another person’s disposition of property and there is not sufficient
16 evidence that these beneficiaries have died other than simultaneously, the property
17 disposed of shall be divided into as many equal portions as there are successive
18 beneficiaries, and these portions shall be distributed to those who would have taken in the
19 event that each designated beneficiary had survived.]

20 [10–803.

21 Where there is no sufficient evidence that two joint tenants or tenants by the entirety
22 have died other than simultaneously, the property held shall be distributed one half as if
23 one had survived and one half as if the other had survived. If there are more than two joint
24 tenants and all of them have so died, the property distributed shall be in the proportion
25 that one bears to the whole number of joint tenants.]

26 [10–804.

27 Where the insured and the beneficiary in a policy of life or accident insurance have
28 died and there is no sufficient evidence that they have died other than simultaneously, the
29 proceeds of the policy shall be distributed as if the insured had survived the beneficiary.]

30 [10–805.

31 This subtitle shall not apply in the case of wills, living trusts, deeds, or contracts of
32 insurance where provision has been made for distribution of property different from the
33 provisions of this subtitle.]
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 199 3

1 10–801.

2 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (B) “CO–OWNER WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP” INCLUDES:

5 (1) A JOINT TENANT;

6 (2) A TENANT BY THE ENTIRETY; AND

7 (3) A CO–OWNER OF PROPERTY OR AN ACCOUNT THAT ENTITLES
8 REMAINING CO–OWNERS TO THE WHOLE OF THE PROPERTY OR ACCOUNT ON THE
9 DEATH OF ANOTHER.

10 (C) (1) “GOVERNING INSTRUMENT” MEANS AN AGREEMENT CREATING
11 OR EXERCISING A POWER OF APPOINTMENT, POWER OF ATTORNEY, OR ANY SIMILAR
12 DISPOSITIVE, APPOINTIVE, OR NOMINATIVE ACTION.

13 (2) “GOVERNING INSTRUMENT” INCLUDES A DEED, A WILL, A TRUST,
14 AN INSURANCE OR ANNUITY POLICY, AN ACCOUNT WITH A PAYABLE–ON–DEATH
15 DESIGNATION, A PENSION, OR A PROFIT–SHARING, RETIREMENT, OR SIMILAR
16 BENEFIT PLAN.

17 (D) (1) “PAYOR” MEANS A PERSON WHO IS AUTHORIZED OR OBLIGATED
18 BY LAW OR OTHER GOVERNING INSTRUMENT TO MAKE PAYMENTS.

19 (2) “PAYOR” INCLUDES:

20 (I) A TRUSTEE;

21 (II) AN INSURER;

22 (III) A BUSINESS ENTITY;

23 (IV) AN EMPLOYER; AND

24 (V) A GOVERNMENT OR A GOVERNMENT AGENCY, SUBDIVISION,
25 OR INSTRUMENTALITY.

26 10–802.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 199

1 (A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY IF APPLICATION WILL RESULT IN
2 ESCHEAT TO THE STATE UNDER § 3–105 OF THE ESTATES AND TRUSTS ARTICLE.

3 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 10–806 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF THE TITLE TO
4 PROPERTY, THE DEVOLUTION OF PROPERTY, THE RIGHT TO ELECT AN INTEREST IN
5 PROPERTY, OR THE RIGHT TO EXEMPT PROPERTY, HOMESTEAD, OR FAMILY
6 ALLOWANCE DEPENDS ON AN INDIVIDUAL’S SURVIVORSHIP OF THE DEATH OF
7 ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS NOT ESTABLISHED BY CLEAR AND
8 CONVINCING EVIDENCE TO HAVE SURVIVED THE OTHER INDIVIDUAL BY AT LEAST
9 120 HOURS IS DEEMED TO HAVE PREDECEASED THE OTHER INDIVIDUAL.

10 10–803.

11 EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 10–806 OF THIS SUBTITLE, FOR PURPOSES OF A
12 PROVISION OF A GOVERNING INSTRUMENT THAT RELATES TO AN INDIVIDUAL
13 SURVIVING AN EVENT, INCLUDING THE DEATH OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, AN
14 INDIVIDUAL WHO IS NOT ESTABLISHED BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE TO
15 HAVE SURVIVED THE EVENT BY AT LEAST 120 HOURS IS DEEMED TO HAVE
16 PREDECEASED THE EVENT.

17 10–804.

18 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 10–806 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF IT IS NOT
19 ESTABLISHED BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT ONE OF TWO
20 CO–OWNERS WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP SURVIVED THE OTHER CO–OWNER BY
21 AT LEAST 120 HOURS:

22 (1) ONE–HALF OF THE PROPERTY SHALL PASS AS IF ONE CO–OWNER
23 HAD SURVIVED BY AT LEAST 120 HOURS; AND

24 (2) ONE–HALF OF THE PROPERTY SHALL PASS AS IF THE OTHER
25 CO–OWNER HAD SURVIVED BY AT LEAST 120 HOURS.

26 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 10–806 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF THERE ARE
27 MORE THAN TWO CO–OWNERS WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP AND IT IS NOT
28 ESTABLISHED BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT AT LEAST ONE OF THE
29 CO–OWNERS SURVIVED THE OTHERS BY AT LEAST 120 HOURS, THE PROPERTY
30 PASSES IN THE PROPORTION THAT ONE BEARS TO THE WHOLE NUMBER OF
31 CO–OWNERS.

32 10–805.

33 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES IN ADDITION TO THE RULES OF EVIDENCE.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 199 5

1 (B) DEATH OCCURS WHEN AN INDIVIDUAL IS DETERMINED TO BE DEAD IN
2 ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

3 (C) (1) A CERTIFIED OR AUTHENTICATED COPY OF A DEATH
4 CERTIFICATE ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–212 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
5 ARTICLE IS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF THE FACT, PLACE, DATE, AND TIME OF
6 DEATH AND THE IDENTITY OF THE DECEDENT.

7 (2) A CERTIFIED OR AUTHENTICATED COPY OF ANY RECORD OR
8 REPORT BY A FOREIGN OR DOMESTIC GOVERNMENT AGENCY THAT AN INDIVIDUAL
9 IS ALIVE, MISSING, DETAINED, OR DEAD IS PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF THE STATUS,
10 DATES, CIRCUMSTANCES, AND PLACES DISCLOSED BY THE RECORD OR REPORT.

11 (3) IN THE ABSENCE OF EVIDENCE DISPUTING THE TIME OF DEATH
12 STATED ON A DOCUMENT DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OR (2) OF THIS
13 SUBSECTION, A DOCUMENT THAT STATES A TIME OF DEATH AT LEAST 120 HOURS
14 AFTER THE TIME OF DEATH OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, REGARDLESS OF HOW THE
15 TIME OF DEATH OF THE OTHER INDIVIDUAL IS DETERMINED, ESTABLISHES BY
16 CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED SURVIVED
17 THE OTHER INDIVIDUAL BY 120 HOURS.

18 (D) IN THE ABSENCE OF PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF DEATH UNDER
19 SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE FACT OF DEATH MAY BE ESTABLISHED BY
20 CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE, INCLUDING CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE.

21 (E) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL WHOSE DEATH IS NOT ESTABLISHED UNDER
22 SUBSECTION (C) OR (D) OF THIS SECTION IS PRESUMED TO BE DEAD WHEN:

23 (I) THE INDIVIDUAL HAS BEEN ENTIRELY ABSENT FOR A
24 PERIOD OF 5 CONTINUOUS YEARS; AND

25 (II) AFTER A DILIGENT SEARCH OR INQUIRY, THE INDIVIDUAL’S
26 ABSENCE HAS NOT BEEN SATISFACTORILY EXPLAINED.

27 (2) IN THE ABSENCE OF SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE TO DETERMINE AN
28 INDIVIDUAL’S DEATH OCCURRED EARLIER, AN INDIVIDUAL’S DEATH PRESUMED
29 UNDER THIS SECTION IS PRESUMED TO HAVE OCCURRED AT THE END OF THE
30 5–YEAR PERIOD.

31 10–806.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 199

1 IF THE TITLE TO PROPERTY, THE DEVOLUTION OF PROPERTY, THE RIGHT TO
2 ELECT AN INTEREST IN PROPERTY, OR THE RIGHT TO EXEMPT PROPERTY,
3 HOMESTEAD, OR FAMILY ALLOWANCE DEPENDS ON AN INDIVIDUAL SURVIVING AN
4 EVENT, INCLUDING THE DEATH OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, AN INDIVIDUAL IS NOT
5 REQUIRED TO HAVE SURVIVED THE OTHER INDIVIDUAL BY AT LEAST 120 HOURS IF:

6 (1) THE GOVERNING INSTRUMENT CONTAINS APPLICABLE
7 LANGUAGE DEALING EXPLICITLY WITH SIMULTANEOUS DEATHS OR DEATHS IN A
8 COMMON DISASTER;

9 (2) THE GOVERNING INSTRUMENT EXPRESSLY INDICATES THAT THE
10 INDIVIDUAL IS NOT REQUIRED TO SURVIVE THE EVENT, INCLUDING THE DEATH OF
11 ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL, BY ANY SPECIFIED PERIOD PROVIDED THAT IT IS
12 ESTABLISHED BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL
13 SURVIVED THE EVENT;

14 (3) THE GOVERNING INSTRUMENT EXPRESSLY REQUIRES THE
15 INDIVIDUAL TO HAVE SURVIVED THE EVENT FOR A SPECIFIED PERIOD OTHER THAN
16 AT LEAST 120 HOURS;

17 (4) THE APPLICATION OF A 120–HOUR REQUIREMENT OF SURVIVAL
18 WOULD CAUSE A NONVESTED PROPERTY INTEREST OR POWER OF APPOINTMENT TO
19 BE INVALID UNDER THE COMMON–LAW RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES, UNLESS AN
20 EXCEPTION UNDER § 11–102 OF THE ESTATES AND TRUSTS ARTICLE APPLIES; OR

21 (5) THE APPLICATION OF A 120–HOUR REQUIREMENT OF SURVIVAL
22 TO MULTIPLE GOVERNING INSTRUMENTS WOULD RESULT IN AN UNINTENDED
23 FAILURE OR DUPLICATION OF A DISPOSITION, PROVIDED THAT IT IS ESTABLISHED
24 BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL SURVIVED THE
25 EVENT.

26 10–807.

27 (A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
28 PAYOR OR OTHER THIRD PARTY IS NOT LIABLE FOR HAVING MADE A PAYMENT,
29 TRANSFERRED AN ITEM OF PROPERTY, CONFERRED A BENEFIT, OR TAKEN ANY
30 OTHER ACTION IN GOOD FAITH RELIANCE ON AN INDIVIDUAL’S APPARENT
31 ENTITLEMENT UNDER THE TERMS OF A GOVERNING INSTRUMENT.

32 (2) A PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY IS LIABLE FOR PAYMENT MADE OR
33 OTHER ACTION TAKEN AFTER THE PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY RECEIVED WRITTEN
34 NOTICE OF A CLAIMED LACK OF ENTITLEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
35 (B) OF THIS SECTION.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 199 7

1 (B) A WRITTEN NOTICE OF A CLAIMED LACK OF ENTITLEMENT SHALL BE:

2 (1) SENT BY REGISTERED OR CERTIFIED MAIL, INCLUDING PROOF OF
3 DELIVERY, TO A PAYOR’S OR THIRD PARTY’S HOME OR WORK ADDRESS; OR

4 (2) SERVED ON THE PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY IN THE SAME MANNER
5 AS A SUMMONS IN A CIVIL ACTION.

6 (C) (1) ON RECEIPT OF NOTICE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B)
7 OF THIS SECTION, A PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY MAY:

8 (I) IF PROBATE PROCEEDINGS HAVE COMMENCED, PAY ANY
9 AMOUNT OWED OR TRANSFER OR DEPOSIT ANY ITEM OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE
10 PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY TO OR WITH THE COURT HAVING JURISDICTION OF THE
11 PROBATE PROCEEDINGS RELATED TO THE DECEDENT’S ESTATE; OR

12 (II) IF NO PROBATE PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEEN COMMENCED,
13 PAY ANY AMOUNT OWED OR TRANSFER OR DEPOSIT ANY ITEM OF PROPERTY HELD
14 BY THE PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY TO OR WITH THE COURT HAVING JURISDICTION OF
15 PROBATE PROCEEDINGS RELATING TO DECEDENTS’ ESTATES LOCATED IN THE
16 COUNTY OF THE DECEDENT’S RESIDENCE.

17 (2) A COURT THAT HOLDS PROPERTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
18 SUBSECTION SHALL ORDER DISBURSEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH A
19 DETERMINATION MADE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

20 (D) IF A PAYOR OR THIRD PARTY DISTRIBUTES ASSETS BASED ON APPARENT
21 ENTITLEMENT:

22 (1) THE RECIPIENT IS NOT LIABLE FOR OR OBLIGATED TO RETURN:

23 (I) PROPERTY PURCHASED FOR VALUE, UNLESS THE
24 PURCHASER HAD NOTICE OF A DISPUTE REGARDING ENTITLEMENT TO THE
25 PROPERTY; OR

26 (II) A PAYMENT, AN ITEM OF PROPERTY, OR A BENEFIT
27 RECEIVED IN PARTIAL OR FULL OBLIGATION OF A LEGALLY ENFORCEABLE
28 OBLIGATION; AND

29 (2) THE RECIPIENT IS OBLIGATED TO RETURN OR IS PERSONALLY
30 LIABLE FOR THE COST OF A PAYMENT, AN ITEM OF PROPERTY, OR A BENEFIT THAT
31 WAS DISTRIBUTED:
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 199

1 (I) NOT–FOR–VALUE; OR

2 (II) UNDER A PROVISION THAT IS PREEMPTED BY FEDERAL
3 LAW.

4 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8