START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 164

M3, P2 6lr0661
HB 338/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Lehman, Guyton, Ruth, and Terrasa
Requested: July 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Buildings and State Highways – Collection and Disposal of Yard Waste

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from disposing of yard waste collected on the
4 grounds of a State building or State highway in a certain container; requiring a
5 person to collect yard waste on the grounds of a State building or State highway in
6 a certain container; requiring all yard waste collected on the grounds of a State
7 building or State highway to be disposed of in a certain manner under certain
8 circumstances; and generally relating to the collection and disposal of yard waste
9 from the grounds of State buildings and State highways.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – State Finance and Procurement
12 Section 2–1001 and 2–1002 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Collection and
13 Disposal of Yard Waste”
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – State Finance and Procurement

19 SUBTITLE 10. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE.

20 2–1001.

21 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
22 INDICATED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0164*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 164

1 (B) “NATURAL WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING
2 STATED IN § 9–1701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

3 (C) “ORGANICS RECYCLING FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
4 9–1701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

5 (D) (1) “STATE BUILDING” MEANS A BUILDING, A STRUCTURE, OR AN
6 IMPROVED AREA THAT IS:

7 (I) OWNED BY THE STATE; OR

8 (II) CONSTRUCTED FOR LEASE BY THE STATE.

9 (2) “STATE BUILDING” INCLUDES:

10 (I) AN EDUCATIONAL FACILITY OWNED OR OPERATED BY THE
11 STATE, INCLUDING PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

12 (II) A PUBLIC MASS TRANSPORTATION ACCOMMODATION, SUCH
13 AS A TERMINAL OR STATION, THAT IS SUPPORTED BY STATE FUNDS; AND

14 (III) AN IMPROVEMENT OF A PUBLIC AREA USED FOR
15 GATHERING OR AMUSEMENT, INCLUDING A STATE PARK, RECREATION CENTER, OR
16 SIMILAR AREA.

17 (E) (1) “STATE HIGHWAY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–101 OF THE
18 TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

19 (2) “STATE HIGHWAY” INCLUDES ANY LAND OWNED BY THE STATE
20 THAT IS ADJACENT TO A STATE HIGHWAY.

21 (F) (1) “YARD WASTE” MEANS ORGANIC PLANT WASTE DERIVED FROM
22 GARDENING, LANDSCAPING, AND TREE TRIMMING ACTIVITIES.

23 (2) “YARD WASTE” INCLUDES LEAVES, GARDEN WASTE, LAWN
24 CUTTINGS, WEEDS, AND PRUNINGS.

25 2–1002.

26 (A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
27 THIS SECTION APPLIES TO A PERSON WHO:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 164 3

1 (I) IS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE WHO COLLECTS YARD
2 WASTE ON THE GROUNDS OF A STATE BUILDING OR STATE HIGHWAY AS PART OF
3 THAT PERSON’S EMPLOYMENT; OR

4 (II) CONTRACTS WITH THE STATE TO PROVIDE SERVICES ON
5 THE GROUNDS OF A STATE BUILDING OR STATE HIGHWAY, INCLUDING THE
6 COLLECTION OF YARD WASTE.

7 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A PERSON WHO IS DISPOSING
8 OF:

9 (I) NOXIOUS WEEDS, AS DESIGNATED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
10 AGRICULTURE; OR

11 (II) INVASIVE SPECIES.

12 (B) A PERSON MAY NOT DISPOSE OF YARD WASTE COLLECTED ON THE
13 GROUNDS OF A STATE BUILDING OR STATE HIGHWAY IN A SINGLE–USE PLASTIC
14 CONTAINER.

15 (C) A PERSON SHALL COLLECT YARD WASTE ON THE GROUNDS OF A STATE
16 BUILDING OR STATE HIGHWAY IN A CONTAINER THAT:

17 (1) WILL NOT BE DISCARDED WITH THE YARD WASTE; OR

18 (2) IS A COMPOSTABLE PAPER BAG.

19 (D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY IF A PERSON COLLECTS YARD
20 WASTE AT A LOCATION THAT IS WITHIN A 30–MILE RADIUS OF A FACILITY THAT:

21 (I) IS IDENTIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
22 SUBSECTION; AND

23 (II) 1. HAS THE CAPACITY TO ACCEPT ALL OF THE PERSON’S
24 YARD WASTE; AND

25 2. IS WILLING TO ACCEPT ALL OF THE PERSON’S YARD
26 WASTE.

27 (2) ALL YARD WASTE COLLECTED ON THE GROUNDS OF A STATE
28 BUILDING OR STATE HIGHWAY SHALL BE DISPOSED OF AT:

29 (I) AN ORGANICS RECYCLING FACILITY LOCATED IN THE
30 STATE;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 164

1 (II) A NATURAL WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY LOCATED IN
2 THE STATE; OR

3 (III) A STATE FACILITY WITH THE ON–SITE CAPACITY TO CREATE
4 MULCH OR SOIL AMENDMENTS.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
6 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4