START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 116 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 116 
(Delegate Miller) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Agreements, Procurement Contracts, and Memoranda of 
Understanding - Reporting and Publication 
 
 
This bill requires “covered entities” (public elementary and secondary schools, county 
boards of education, county superintendents, the State Board of Education, and the 
State Superintendent) to annually report to the State Superintendent a list of memoranda of 
understanding (MOUs) entered into in the preceding fiscal year. It also requires the 
State Board of Education and the State Superintendent to annually report to the 
State Superintendent a list of procurement contracts entered into in the preceding 
fiscal year. On or before October 1 each year, the State Superintendent must submit a report 
compiling the reports received from each covered entity to specified committees of the 
General Assembly. The bill also requires that on or before September 1, 2026, each local 
school system must make each in-kind services agreement and MOU that the school system 
entered into from July 1, 2025, to June 30, 2026, publicly available on its website. After 
July 1, 2026, each local school system must make each in-kind services agreement and 
MOU publicly available on its website within 30 days. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Public elementary and secondary schools and county superintendents may 
satisfy the reporting requirement by submitting the required information to their county 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 116/ Page 2 
board of education by a date determined by the board. In that case, the county board of 
education must submit the reports from schools and the superintendent to the 
State Superintendent. 
 
The report by the State Superintendent summarizing submissions from all covered entities 
must be submitted to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the Senate Committee 
on Education, Energy, and the Environment, the House Appropriations Committee and the 
House Ways and Means Committee. It must include a list of each MOU entered into by 
each covered entity, and if applicable, the total amount required to be paid by a covered 
entity during the preceding fiscal year. For the State Board of Education and the 
State Superintendent, the report must also include a list of each procurement contract 
entered into, the total amount required to be paid under each procurement contract, and the 
total amount paid by a covered entity during the preceding year. 
 
The Maryland State Department of Education is responsible for ensuring that each school 
system complies with the requirement to publish its agreements on its website. The bill 
does not apply to any procurement contract or MOU that may be withheld or is prohibited 
from disclosure by law. 
 
Current Law:  “Procurement contract” means an agreement in any form entered into by a 
unit for procurement. A “unit” is any officer or other entity that is in the Executive Branch 
of the State government and is authorized by law to enter into a procurement contract, and 
does not include (1) a bistate, multistate, bicounty, or multicounty governmental agency or 
(2) a special tax district, sanitary district, drainage district, soil conservation district, water 
supply district, or other political subdivision of the State. 
 
Current law does not require local school systems to report on MOUs, but does require 
each county school board to annually report to the Department of Budget and Management 
any payments the board makes to a party that are $25,000 in aggregate. While this is the 
only reporting requirement in State law that requires local school systems and local boards 
of education to report to the State on their payments, the Code of Maryland Regulations 
requires local school systems to submit school construction projects to the 
State Superintendent for approval, with the exception of projects requested and approved 
by the Board of Public Works. These construction projects must also be approved by the 
Interagency Commission on School Construction.  
 
Separately, State agencies are required to submit monthly Procurement Agency Activity 
Reports covering all contracts greater than $50,000, except for contracts for the purchase 
of commodities and supplies, to the Board of Public Works. However, this applies only to 
State agencies and not local governments or school systems. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local school systems contacted by the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) for this bill advise that requiring each school, superintendent, and board of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 116/ Page 3 
education to report on and publish information about each of their procurement contracts 
and MOUs would strain administrative capacity and could not be handled with existing 
resources. Although local school systems routinely procure goods and services, their 
purchases do not meet the bill’s definition of a procurement contract because local school 
systems are not a unit of the Executive Branch (as discussed below). Therefore, they are 
not required to report their procurements under the bill and must instead report only on 
MOUs. Similarly, the requirements to post agreements online within 30 days only applies 
to in-kind services agreements and MOUs, which are presumed to be small in number. 
 
Additional Comments:  DLS notes that it is likely that the intent of the bill is to require 
all covered entities to report on their procurement activity to the State Superintendent. 
However, the bill references a definition of procurement contract in current law that applies 
only to procurements by Executive Branch agencies. This precludes schools, local boards 
of education, and superintendents from any requirement to report on procurement 
contracts, as they are not considered units of the Executive Branch under State law. 
Therefore, the bill’s language requiring schools, local boards of education, and 
superintendents to report on their procurement contracts has no actual effect. 
 
As the State Superintendent and State Board of Education (which are included in the bill 
as covered entities) are units of the Executive Branch, they are required to report on their 
procurement activities under the bill. However, as their reports are required to be submitted 
to the State Superintendent, they can carry out that responsibility with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1479 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 147 (Senator Ready) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of General 
Services; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Frederick 
County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 116/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4