START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 146

M3, N1 6lr1110
HB 747/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED) CF SB 165

By: Delegate Guyton
Requested: October 7, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Environment – On–Site Wastewater Systems – Requirements for Inspection and
3 Pumping Services and Implementation Dates

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a landlord of property that is served by a certain on–site
5 wastewater system to ensure, on or before a certain date and before each new tenant
6 occupies the property thereafter, that the system has been inspected and pumped
7 out in a certain manner; requiring a contract for the sale of certain real property that
8 is served by an on–site wastewater system, beginning on a certain date, to include a
9 provision requiring, as a condition of the sale, that the purchaser has ensured that
10 the system has been inspected and pumped out in a certain manner, subject to
11 certain exceptions; requiring a landlord or an owner of property to notify a certain
12 delegated approval authority of certain information regarding a failing on–site
13 sewage disposal system under certain circumstances; extending certain dates by
14 which the Department of the Environment is required to adopt certain regulations
15 and by which certain individuals are required to be licensed by the State Board of
16 On–Site Wastewater Professionals; and generally relating to on–site wastewater
17 systems.

18 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
19 Article – Environment
20 Section 9–11A–01(a) and (e)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Real Property
25 Section 8–122 and 10–716
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0146*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 146

1 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
2 Chapter 419 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022
3 Section 6 and 7

4 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
5 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

6 Article – Environment

7 9–11A–01.

8 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

9 (e) (1) “On–site wastewater system” means:

10 (i) A wastewater system designed to treat and dispose of effluent on:

11 1. The same property that produces the wastewater; or

12 2. An easement; or

13 (ii) A holding tank.

14 (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, “on–site
15 wastewater system” includes a septic or any other on–site sewage disposal system.

16 (3) “On–site wastewater system” does not include a wastewater treatment
17 system that:

18 (i) Requires a discharge permit from the Department; or

19 (ii) Treats 5,000 or more gallons per day.

20 Article – Real Property

21 8–122.

22 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
23 INDICATED.

24 (2) “DELEGATED APPROVAL AUTHORITY” MEANS THE LOCAL
25 HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR COUNTY AGENCY THAT HAS RECEIVED AN ON–SITE
26 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY BY THE DEPARTMENT.

27 (3) “ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
28 9–11A–01 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 146 3

1 (B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, AND BEFORE EACH NEW TENANT
2 OCCUPIES THE PROPERTY THEREAFTER, A LANDLORD OF PROPERTY THAT IS
3 SERVED BY AN ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEM SHALL ENSURE THAT THE SYSTEM
4 HAS BEEN:

5 (1) INSPECTED BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS LICENSED UNDER TITLE 9,
6 SUBTITLE 11A OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE TO PERFORM PROPERTY TRANSFER
7 INSPECTIONS FOR ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS; AND

8 (2) PUMPED OUT BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS LICENSED UNDER TITLE
9 9, SUBTITLE 11A OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE TO PERFORM PUMPING SERVICES
10 FOR ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.

11 (C) FOR PURPOSES OF MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION
12 (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PROPERTY TRANSFER INSPECTION OR PUMPING SERVICE
13 PERFORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS VALID FOR
14 3 YEARS.

15 (D) IF AN INSPECTION UNDER THIS SECTION IDENTIFIES A FAILING ON–SITE
16 WASTEWATER SYSTEM, THE LANDLORD OF THE PROPERTY SHALL NOTIFY THE
17 DELEGATED APPROVAL AUTHORITY:

18 (1) ABOUT THE FAILURE; AND

19 (2) WHEN THE SYSTEM IS FIXED.

20 10–716.

21 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
22 INDICATED.

23 (2) “DELEGATED APPROVAL AUTHORITY” MEANS THE LOCAL
24 HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR COUNTY AGENCY THAT HAS RECEIVED AN ON–SITE
25 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY BY THE DEPARTMENT.

26 (3) “ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
27 9–11A–01 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

28 (B) THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION DO NOT APPLY IF:

29 (1) (I) 1. THE PROPERTY TRANSFER INVOLVES THE TRANSFER
30 OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY THAT IS BETWEEN:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 146

1 A. CURRENT SPOUSES;

2 B. A PARENT AND A CHILD; OR

3 C. SIBLINGS, BY WHOLE BLOOD, IF THE PROPERTY IS
4 HELD IN TRUST;

5 2. THE PROPERTY’S MORTGAGE IS BEING REFINANCED;
6 OR

7 3. THE CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR FORM OF
8 OWNERSHIP DOES NOT INVOLVE THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW PARTIES; AND

9 (II) THE ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEM HAS BEEN INSPECTED
10 WITHIN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 5–YEAR PERIOD; OR

11 (2) THE PROPERTY TRANSFER IS THE INITIAL TRANSFER AFTER
12 CONSTRUCTION OF THE PROPERTY.

13 (C) (1) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2028, A CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF REAL
14 PROPERTY THAT IS SERVED BY AN ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEM SHALL INCLUDE
15 A PROVISION REQUIRING, AS A CONDITION OF THE SALE, THAT THE PURCHASER
16 ENSURE THAT THE SYSTEM HAS BEEN:

17 (I) INSPECTED BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS LICENSED UNDER
18 TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 11A OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE TO PERFORM PROPERTY
19 TRANSFER INSPECTIONS FOR ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS; AND

20 (II) PUMPED OUT BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS LICENSED UNDER
21 TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 11A OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE TO PERFORM PUMPING
22 SERVICES FOR ON–SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.

23 (2) (I) SETTLEMENT ON THE CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF THE
24 REAL PROPERTY MAY NOT OCCUR UNTIL THE VENDOR AND THE PURCHASER
25 RECEIVE A REPORT ON THE PROPERTY TRANSFER INSPECTION PERFORMED UNDER
26 PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND CONFIRMATION OF THE PUMPING
27 SERVICE PERFORMED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

28 (II) AT SETTLEMENT ON THE CONTRACT FOR THE SALE OF THE
29 REAL PROPERTY, THE VENDOR AND THE PURCHASER SHALL EACH CERTIFY IN
30 WRITING THAT THEY HAVE RECEIVED AND REVIEWED THE REPORT AND
31 CONFIRMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 146 5

1 (D) UNLESS OTHERWISE REQUIRED AS PART OF A REAL ESTATE CONTRACT
2 OR MORTGAGE REQUIREMENT, FOR PURPOSES OF MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS
3 UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF THIS SECTION, A PROPERTY TRANSFER INSPECTION
4 OR PUMPING SERVICE PERFORMED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF
5 THIS SECTION IS VALID FOR 3 YEARS.

6 (E) IF AN INSPECTION UNDER THIS SECTION IDENTIFIES A FAILING ON–SITE
7 WASTEWATER SYSTEM, THE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY SHALL NOTIFY THE
8 DELEGATED APPROVAL AUTHORITY:

9 (1) ABOUT THE FAILURE; AND

10 (2) WHEN THE SYSTEM IS FIXED.

11 Chapter 419 of the Acts of 2022

12 SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, [2025]
13 2027, the Department of the Environment, in consultation with the State Board of
14 On–Site Wastewater Professionals, shall adopt regulations to implement Section 2 of this
15 Act.

16 SECTION 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, [2026]
17 2028, all individuals who provide on–site wastewater services in the State shall be licensed
18 by the State Board of On–Site Wastewater Professionals.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act may not be
20 interpreted to limit a mortgage company or financial institution from requiring an
21 inspection of an on–site wastewater system as part of contract terms for the sale or transfer
22 of real property.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
24 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5