START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 170

P1 6lr0746
HB 77/25 – HGO (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Bouchat and Moon
Requested: August 27, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Commission to Study African American Civil War Sailors in Maryland

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission to Study African American Civil War
4 Sailors in Maryland to study the history of the African American sailors who fought
5 for the Union Navy and make certain recommendations regarding a memorial
6 dedicated to African American Civil War sailors; and generally relating to the
7 Commission to Study African American Civil War Sailors in Maryland.

8 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
9 That:

10 (a) There is a Commission to Study African American Civil War Sailors in
11 Maryland.

12 (b) The Commission consists of the following members:

13 (1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
14 the Senate;

15 (2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
16 House; and

17 (3) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

18 (i) one representative from the State Department of Education;

19 (ii) one representative from the State Archives;

20 (iii) one representative from the Department of Planning;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0170*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 170

1 (iv) one representative from the Governor’s Commission on
2 Maryland Military Monuments;

3 (v) one representative from the Commission on African American
4 History and Culture;

5 (vi) one representative from Preservation Maryland, Inc.; and

6 (vii) one representative from the Heart of the Civil War Heritage
7 Area, Inc.

8 (c) The Governor shall designate the chair of the Commission.

9 (d) The State Archives shall provide staff for the Commission.

10 (e) A member of the Commission:

11 (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but

12 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
13 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

14 (f) The Commission shall:

15 (1) study the history of African American Civil War sailors who fought for
16 the Union Navy in Maryland, including muster rolls, locations of service, and all
17 distinguished honors and recognitions awarded; and

18 (2) make findings and recommendations regarding the funding, design,
19 construction, and location of an appropriate memorial dedicated to the African American
20 Civil War sailors in Maryland.

21 (g) On or before December 1, 2026, the Commission shall report its findings and
22 recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
23 Government Article, the General Assembly.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2027, this
26 Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
27 further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2