START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 164 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 164 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Buildings and State Highways - Collection and Disposal of Yard Waste 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits State employees or contractors from disposing of yard waste 
collected on the grounds of a State building or a State highway in a single-use plastic 
container. All such yard waste must be collected in a container that (1) will not be discarded 
with the yard waste or (2) is a compostable paper bag. In addition, the bill generally requires 
that such yard waste be disposed of at (1) an organics recycling facility in the State;  
(2) a natural wood waste recycling facility in the State; or (3) a State facility with 
on‑site capacity to create mulch or soil amendments; however, this requirement applies 
only if the yard waste is collected within a 30-mile radius of one of those facilities and the 
facility has the capacity and willingness to accept all of the yard waste. The bill does not 
apply to a person who is disposing of (1) noxious weeds, as designated by the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture, or (2) invasive species. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (multiple fund types) may increase for some State entities, 
but any such increase is not anticipated to be significant, as discussed below. No effect on 
revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to significantly affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 164/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “State building” is defined as a building, structure, or improved area 
that is owned by the State or is constructed for lease by the State. A “State highway” is any 
public highway owned by the State, including any land owned by the State that is adjacent 
to a State highway. “Yard waste” means organic plant waste derived from gardening, 
landscaping, and tree trimming activities. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Solid Waste Management and the Recycling in the State, Generally 
 
The solid waste infrastructure in Maryland consists of both permitted and nonpermitted 
facilities, and solid waste is managed through a combination of recycling, composting, 
landfilling, incineration, storage, and exporting for disposal or recycling. 
 
Maryland’s recycling policy is guided by the Maryland Recycling Act, which sets 
mandatory recycling rates for State government and local jurisdictions, as well as a 
voluntary statewide waste diversion goal of 60% and a voluntary statewide recycling goal 
of 55% by 2020. Each county (including Baltimore City) must recycle at least 20%  
or 35% of the county’s solid waste stream, depending on the county’s population. Each 
county (including Baltimore City) must also prepare a recycling plan that addresses how 
the jurisdiction will achieve its mandatory recycling rate. Among other things, the plan 
must also address methods for separate collection and composting of yard waste.  
 
The plan must be submitted to the Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) 
Office of Recycling for approval when the jurisdiction submits its water and sewerage plan 
at least every 10 years. At least every 2 years, each county must also submit a progress 
report to MDE, which must include any revision of or amendment to the county plan that 
has been adopted. 
 
Composting in Maryland and Diversion of Yard Waste and Other Organic Materials from 
Refuse Disposal Facilities 
 
Chapter 686 of 2013 required MDE to adopt regulations governing the permitting and 
operation of composting facilities. The regulations, which were promulgated in 2014 
(through the establishment of Chapter 11 under COMAR 26.04), specify requirements 
related to the construction and operation of composting facilities in the State. Pursuant to 
Chapters 520 and 521 of 2023, MDE must exempt specified operators of on-farm 
composting facilities from permitting requirements under COMAR 26.04.11.06. MDE has 
also established a general composting facility permit. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 164/ Page 3 
Statute prohibits an owner or operator of a refuse disposal system from accepting loads of 
separately collected yard or food waste for final disposal at the facility unless the facility 
offers appropriate organics recycling services. However, if an organics recycling facility 
determines the separately collected food waste is unacceptable for recycling due to 
contamination, the food waste may be accepted by a refuse disposal system for final 
disposal. 
 
Several counties in the State restrict the use of plastic bags for the collection of yard waste, 
including Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Kent, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties. Several municipalities also restrict the use of 
plastic bags for the collection of yard waste. 
 
Invasive Plants and Noxious Weeds 
 
“Invasive plant” means any living part of a plant species or its subspecies that (1) did not 
evolve in the State and (2) if introduced in the State, will cause or is likely to cause, as 
determined by the Secretary of Agriculture, economic, ecological, or environmental harm 
or harm to human health. Title 9.5 of the Agriculture Article establishes provisions 
governing the regulation of invasive plants. Various restrictions exist on activities related 
to prohibited invasive plants, including propagating, importing, transferring, selling, 
purchasing, transporting, or introducing any living part of a prohibited invasive plant in the 
State. 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Agriculture Article authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to, 
among other things, (1) by regulation, designate as a noxious weed any plant that adversely 
affects or threatens agricultural production and (2) institute programs or carry out practices 
necessary for the control and eradication of a noxious weed. The Secretary may also, 
among other things, enter into an agreement with a county or other political subdivision of 
the State, an adjoining state, or a federal government agency to implement a program for 
the control and eradication of a noxious weed. Current regulations designate eight weeds 
and plants as noxious weeds in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  Most State agencies responsible for the removal of large quantities 
of yard waste from State buildings or highways indicate that the bill has no fiscal effect on 
their operations. For instance, the Maryland Department of Transportation advises that its 
removal of yard waste generally involves large volume collections using heavy machinery 
that transports it directly to recycling centers. The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
advises that while most DNR-managed sites do not routinely dispose of yard waste offsite 
in single-use plastic containers, its contractors may do so more frequently. DNR further 
advises that compostable paper bags are two to three times more expensive than 
conventional plastic contractor bags. Even so, any increased cost to purchase compostable 
paper bags is expected to be minimal. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 164/ Page 4 
Both DNR and the University System of Maryland indicate that properly disposing of yard 
waste in accordance with the bill could be a challenge and may carry increased costs in 
transport and disposal fees. However, the bill’s exemptions related to the proximity and 
availability of facilities to accept the yard waste likely minimize any costs associated with 
the disposal of yard waste under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 338 of 2025 and HB 173 of 2024 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, 
Carroll, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Baltimore City Community 
College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4