START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 198

F1, E2 6lr1267
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Griffith
Requested: October 21, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means and Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 School Systems – Reportable Offenses – Notification of Student as Suspect

3 FOR the purpose of requiring law enforcement agencies to notify the State’s Attorney if a
4 student is a suspect in an investigation of certain offenses and if the student no
5 longer is a suspect; authorizing the State’s Attorney to notify the local
6 superintendent or the superintendent’s designee if the student is a suspect in an
7 investigation of certain offenses; requiring the State’s Attorney to notify the local
8 superintendent or the superintendent’s designee if a student is no longer a suspect
9 in certain investigations; and generally relating to reportable offenses in school
10 systems.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Education
13 Section 7–303
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 7–303.

20 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (2) “Criminal organization” has the meaning stated in § 9–801 of the
22 Criminal Law Article.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0198*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 198

1 (3) “Law enforcement agency” means the law enforcement agencies listed
2 in § 1–101(c) of the Public Safety Article.

3 (4) “Local school system” means the schools and school programs under the
4 supervision of the local superintendent.

5 (5) “Local superintendent” means:

6 (i) The county superintendent, for the county in which a student is
7 enrolled, or a designee of the superintendent, who is an administrator; or

8 (ii) The superintendent of schools for the:

9 1. Archdiocese of Baltimore;

10 2. Archdiocese of Washington; and

11 3. Catholic Diocese of Wilmington.

12 (6) “Reportable offense” means an offense that:

13 (i) Occurred off school premises;

14 (ii) Did not occur at an event sponsored by the school; and

15 (iii) Involved any of the following:

16 1. A crime of violence, as defined in § 14–101 of the Criminal
17 Law Article;

18 2. Any of the offenses enumerated in § 3–8A–03(d)(4) of the
19 Courts Article;

20 3. A violation of § 4–101, § 4–102, § 4–203, or § 4–204 of the
21 Criminal Law Article;

22 4. A violation of § 5–602, § 5–603, § 5–604, § 5–605, § 5–606,
23 § 5–607, § 5–608, § 5–608.1, § 5–609, § 5–612, § 5–613, § 5–614, § 5–617, § 5–618, § 5–627,
24 or § 5–628 of the Criminal Law Article;

25 5. A violation of § 4–503, § 9–504, or § 9–505 of the Criminal
26 Law Article;

27 6. A violation of § 6–102, § 6–103, § 6–104, or § 6–105 of the
28 Criminal Law Article;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 198 3

1 7. A violation of § 9–802 or § 9–803 of the Criminal Law
2 Article;

3 8. A violation of § 3–203 of the Criminal Law Article;

4 9. A violation of § 6–301 of the Criminal Law Article;

5 10. A violation of § 9–302, § 9–303, or § 9–305 of the Criminal
6 Law Article;

7 11. A violation of § 7–105 of the Criminal Law Article;

8 12. A violation of § 6–202 of the Criminal Law Article; or

9 13. A violation of § 10–606 of the Criminal Law Article.

10 (7) “School principal” means the principal of the public or nonpublic school
11 in which a student is enrolled, or a designee of the principal, who is an administrator.

12 (8) (i) “School security officer” includes a school principal, another
13 school administrator, a law enforcement officer, or other individual employed by a local
14 school system or a local government who is designated by the county superintendent or a
15 school principal to help maintain the security and safety of a school.

16 (ii) “School security officer” does not include a teacher.

17 (9) “Student” means an individual enrolled in a public school system or
18 nonpublic school in the State who is 5 years of age or older and under 22 years of age.

19 (b) (1) IF A STUDENT IS THE SUSPECT IN AN INVESTIGATION OF AN ACT
20 THAT IF COMMITTED BY AN ADULT WOULD BE A FELONY OR CRIME OF VIOLENCE,
21 THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY CONDUCTING THE INVESTIGATION SHALL NOTIFY
22 THE STATE’S ATTORNEY OF THE INVESTIGATION WITHIN 24 HOURS OF THE
23 IDENTIFICATION OF THE STUDENT AS A SUSPECT OR AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

24 (2) ON NOTIFICATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
25 THE STATE’S ATTORNEY MAY NOTIFY THE LOCAL SUPERINTENDENT OR THE
26 SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE WITHIN 24 HOURS OF THE NOTIFICATION OR AS
27 SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

28 (3) IF NOTIFICATION HAS BEEN MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
29 THIS SUBSECTION AND THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY DETERMINES THAT THE
30 STUDENT IS NO LONGER A SUSPECT IN THE INVESTIGATION, WITHIN 24 HOURS OF
31 MAKING THE DETERMINATION, THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY SHALL NOTIFY
32 THE STATE’S ATTORNEY THAT THE STUDENT IS NO LONGER A SUSPECT.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 198

1 (4) IF THE STATE’S ATTORNEY IS NOTIFIED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3)
2 OF THIS SUBSECTION AND HAD PREVIOUSLY NOTIFIED THE LOCAL
3 SUPERINTENDENT OR SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF
4 THIS SUBSECTION, THE STATE’S ATTORNEY SHALL NOTIFY THE LOCAL
5 SUPERINTENDENT OR THE SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE THAT THE STUDENT IS NO
6 LONGER A SUSPECT WITHIN 24 HOURS OF RECEIVING THE NOTIFICATION OR AS
7 SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

8 (C) If a student is arrested for a reportable offense or an offense that is related to
9 the student’s membership in a criminal organization, the law enforcement agency making
10 the arrest:

11 (1) Shall notify the following individuals of the arrest and the charges
12 within 24 hours of the arrest or as soon as practicable:

13 (i) The local superintendent;

14 (ii) The school principal; and

15 (iii) For a school that has a school security officer, the school security
16 officer; and

17 (2) May notify the State’s Attorney of the arrest and charges.

18 [(c)] (D) The State’s Attorney shall promptly notify either the local
19 superintendent or the school principal of the disposition of the reportable offense required
20 to be reported under subsection [(b)] (C) of this section.

21 [(d)] (E) Except by order of a juvenile court or other court upon good cause
22 shown, the information obtained by an individual pursuant to subsections (b) [and], (c),
23 AND (D) of this section:

24 (1) Is confidential and may not be redisclosed by subpoena or otherwise
25 except as provided pursuant to subsections [(e) and] (f) AND (G) of this section; and

26 (2) May not be made part of the student’s permanent educational record.

27 [(e)] (F) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection [(d)] (E) of this
28 section, nothing shall prohibit a local superintendent or school principal from transmitting
29 the information obtained pursuant to subsections (b) [and], (c), AND (D) of this section as
30 a confidential file to the local superintendent of another public school system in the State
31 or another nonpublic school in the State in which the student has enrolled or been
32 transferred in order to carry out the purposes of this section if the disposition of the
33 reportable offense was a conviction or an adjudication of delinquency or the criminal charge
34 or delinquency petition is still pending.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 198 5

1 (2) A local superintendent or school principal who transmits information
2 about a student under this subsection shall include in the transmittal information
3 regarding any educational programming and related services provided to the student.

4 [(f)] (G) The State Board shall adopt regulations to ensure that information
5 obtained by a local superintendent, a school principal, or a school security officer under
6 subsections (b), (c), (D), and [(e)] (F) of this section is:

7 (1) Used to provide appropriate educational programming and related
8 services to the student and to maintain a safe and secure school environment for students
9 and school personnel;

10 (2) Transmitted only to school personnel of the school in which the student
11 is enrolled as necessary to carry out the purposes set forth in item (1) of this subsection;
12 and

13 (3) Destroyed when the student graduates or otherwise permanently
14 leaves school or turns 22 years old, whichever occurs first.

15 [(g)] (H) (1) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection,
16 the local superintendent and the school principal shall consider prohibiting a student who
17 is arrested for a reportable offense involving rape or a sexual offense from attending the
18 same school or riding on the same school bus as the alleged victim of the reportable offense
19 if such action is necessary or appropriate to protect the physical or psychological well–being
20 of the alleged victim.

21 (2) If a student is arrested for a reportable offense involving rape or a
22 sexual offense and is convicted of or adjudicated delinquent for the rape or sexual offense,
23 the student may not attend the same school or ride on the same school bus as the victim.

24 [(h)] (I) Nothing in this section is intended to limit the manner in which a local
25 school obtains information or uses information obtained by any lawful means other than
26 that set forth in subsections (b), (c), (D), and [(e)] (F) of this section.

27 [(i)] (J) Each public school that enrolls students in grades six through twelve in
28 the State shall designate at least one school security officer.

29 [(j)] (K) (1) On or before December 30 each year, the Department, in
30 accordance with State and federal privacy laws, shall submit to the Governor and, in
31 accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly a report
32 that includes the following information about each reportable offense for which a local
33 school received information under [subsection] SUBSECTIONS (b) AND (C) of this section
34 in the preceding school year:

35 (i) The nature of the reportable offense;
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 198

1 (ii) Verification that the offense occurred off school premises;

2 (iii) Action taken by the local school and county board after being
3 notified of the reportable offense OR THE IDENTIFICATION OF A STUDENT AS A
4 SUSPECT;

5 (iv) The race, ethnicity, gender, and disability status of the student
6 arrested for the reportable offense OR IDENTIFIED AS A SUSPECT;

7 (v) The grade of the student arrested for the reportable offense OR
8 IDENTIFIED AS A SUSPECT;

9 (vi) The regular school program of the student arrested for the
10 reportable offense OR IDENTIFIED AS A SUSPECT;

11 (vii) Whether the student’s regular school program was altered as a
12 result of the reportable offense OR IDENTIFICATION OF THE STUDENT AS A SUSPECT;

13 (viii) If the student was removed from the student’s regular school
14 program as a result of the reportable offense OR THE IDENTIFICATION OF THE STUDENT
15 AS A SUSPECT:

16 1. The amount of time during which the student was
17 removed; and

18 2. The student’s placement and educational programming
19 during the period of removal; and

20 (ix) If removed from the student’s regular school program, the
21 student’s academic performance during the time period the student was removed, including
22 attendance, grades, and standardized test scores, and any additional disciplinary actions.

23 (2) Each county board and public school shall provide the Department with
24 any information necessary to issue its report in accordance with this section.

25 [(k)] (L) If a student is removed or excluded from the student’s regular school
26 program for a reportable offense OR IDENTIFICATION AS A SUSPECT, the principal or
27 county superintendent shall invite the student’s attorney, if the student has an attorney,
28 to participate in the conference between the student or the student’s parent or guardian
29 and the principal or county superintendent, and the manifestation determination review,
30 if applicable.

31 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
32 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6