START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 161

Q1 6lr0815
HB 341/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF SB 58

By: Delegates Ruth, Allen, Behler, Fair, Feldmark, Lehman, McCaskill, Miller,
Pena–Melnyk, Solomon, Terrasa, Tomlinson, and Ziegler
Requested: September 10, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Property Tax Credit – Retail Service Station Conversions

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the
4 governing body of a county or municipal corporation to grant, by law, a credit against
5 the county or municipal corporation property tax imposed on real property if use of
6 the real property has been converted from a retail service station to other certain
7 uses; authorizing the State to pay to each county or municipal corporation that
8 grants the property tax credit under this Act an amount equal to a certain percentage
9 of certain forgone revenue of the county or municipal corporation; and generally
10 relating to a property tax credit for retail service station conversions.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Tax – Property
13 Section 9–276
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Tax – Property

19 9–276.

20 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0161*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 161

1 (2) “DISCOUNT STORE” MEANS A RETAIL STORE THAT OFFERS FOR
2 SALE:

3 (I) A COMBINATION AND VARIETY OF CONVENIENCE AND
4 CONSUMER SHOPPING GOODS; AND

5 (II) THE MAJORITY OF THE ITEMS IN THE INVENTORY AT A
6 PRICE NOT TO EXCEED $5.

7 (3) “RETAIL USE” DOES NOT INCLUDE USE AS A DISCOUNT STORE OR
8 A SELF–SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY.

9 (B) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT A PROPERTY TAX
10 CREDIT AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION BE GRANTED PRIMARILY TO DEFRAY
11 COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE REMOVAL OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS AND
12 THE REMEDIATION OF ANY CONTAMINATION ASSOCIATED WITH UNDERGROUND
13 STORAGE TANKS.

14 (C) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
15 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY GRANT, BY LAW,
16 A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION AGAINST THE COUNTY OR
17 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON REAL PROPERTY IF THE USE
18 OF THE REAL PROPERTY HAS BEEN CONVERTED FROM A RETAIL SERVICE STATION
19 TO ANOTHER RETAIL USE, A RESIDENTIAL USE, OR A MIXED RETAIL AND
20 RESIDENTIAL USE.

21 (D) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
22 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY PROVIDE, BY
23 LAW, FOR:

24 (1) THE AMOUNT AND DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS
25 SECTION;

26 (2) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE TAX CREDIT;

27 (3) REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION AND
28 UNIFORM PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE TAX CREDIT; AND

29 (4) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE TAX
30 CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

31 (E) THE STATE MAY PAY TO EACH COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
32 THAT GRANTS THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 50% OF
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 161 3

1 THE PROPERTY TAX REVENUE THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN COLLECTED IF THE TAX
2 CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION HAD NOT BEEN GRANTED.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
4 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3