START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 154

F1 6lr0670
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 99

By: Delegate Korman
Requested: August 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Open Meetings Act – County Boards of Education – Enhanced Requirements
3 (Local Boards of Education Transparency Act)

4 FOR the purpose of establishing enhanced requirements under the Open Meetings Act for
5 county boards of education and the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners;
6 and generally relating to the Open Meetings Act and county boards of education.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 4–107(b) and (c)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Education
14 Section 4–107(d)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
18 Article – General Provisions
19 Section 3–101(a) and (h)(1) and 3–105
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
23 Article – General Provisions
24 Section 3–307
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0154*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 154

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 4–107.

5 (b) A county board may hold any other meetings that its duties and business
6 require.

7 (c) Except as provided in Title 3 of this article, each county board, at its annual
8 meeting, shall elect a president and a vice president from among its members by means of
9 an individually recorded vote.

10 (d) (1) (I) All final actions of a county board shall be taken at a public
11 meeting.

12 (II) The AGENDA, minutes of [the] A meeting, AND LIVE VIDEO
13 STREAMING OF EACH PORTION OF A MEETING HELD IN OPEN SESSION shall be
14 PUBLICLY available [to the public] ON THE COUNTY BOARD’S WEBSITE IN
15 ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–307 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

16 (2) A county board may meet and deliberate in executive session if the
17 matter under consideration is:

18 (i) Land and site acquisitions; or

19 (ii) Personnel and labor relations.

20 Article – General Provisions

21 3–101.

22 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (h) (1) “Public body” means an entity that:

24 (i) consists of at least two individuals; and

25 (ii) is created by:

26 1. the Maryland Constitution;

27 2. a State statute;

28 3. a county or municipal charter;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 154 3

1 4. a memorandum of understanding or a master agreement
2 to which a majority of the county boards of education and the State Department of
3 Education are signatories;

4 5. an ordinance;

5 6. a rule, resolution, or bylaw;

6 7. an executive order of the Governor; or

7 8. an executive order of the chief executive authority of a
8 political subdivision of the State.

9 3–105.

10 Whenever this title and another law that relates to meetings of public bodies conflict,
11 this title applies unless the other law is more stringent.

12 3–307.

13 (a) This section applies only to the following public bodies:

14 (1) the Board of Directors of the Bainbridge Development Corporation;

15 (2) the Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority;

16 (3) the Maryland 9–1–1 Board;

17 (4) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Agricultural and
18 Resource–Based Industry Corporation;

19 (5) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Clean Energy Center;

20 (6) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Economic Development
21 Corporation;

22 (7) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Environmental Service;

23 (8) the Maryland Food Center Authority;

24 (9) the Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority;

25 (10) the Maryland Industrial Development Financing Authority;

26 (11) the Maryland Stadium Authority;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 154

1 (12) the Maryland Transportation Authority;

2 (13) the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority;

3 (14) the Public Service Commission;

4 (15) the State Board of Elections;

5 (16) the Maryland Technology Development Corporation;

6 (17) the Historic St. Mary’s City Commission;

7 (18) the State Ethics Commission;

8 (19) the Maryland Aviation Commission; [and]

9 (20) the Maryland Department of Transportation, with respect to quarterly
10 public meetings held by the Vision Zero coordinator on the implementation of Vision Zero
11 under § 8–1004 of the Transportation Article; AND

12 (21) A COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION AND THE BALTIMORE CITY
13 BOARD OF SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS.

14 (b) A public body specified in subsection (a) of this section shall make publicly
15 available on its website:

16 (1) each open meeting agenda, together with a summary of any finalized
17 documents, written testimony from the public, and other materials that the public body
18 will vote on at the open meeting:

19 (i) at least 48 hours in advance of each meeting; or

20 (ii) if the meeting is being held due to an emergency, a natural
21 disaster, or any other unanticipated situation, as far in advance of the meeting as
22 practicable;

23 (2) meeting minutes from the portions of a meeting that were held in open
24 session, not more than 2 business days after the minutes are approved; and

25 (3) subject to subsections (f), [and] (g), AND (I) of this section, live video
26 streaming of each portion of a meeting that is held in open session.

27 (c) To the extent practicable, each open meeting agenda shall indicate:

28 (1) whether the public body intends to adjourn the open session to a closed
29 session; and
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 154 5

1 (2) if applicable, the expected time at which the public body intends to
2 adjourn the open session to a closed session.

3 (d) (1) The public body shall approve meeting minutes in a timely manner.

4 (2) Each open meeting agenda shall include consideration of the meeting
5 minutes from the most recent meeting.

6 (3) The requirement under paragraph (2) of this subsection does not apply
7 to the agenda of an emergency meeting of a public body if consideration of the meeting
8 minutes from the most recent meeting is not practicable because of the need to hold an
9 emergency meeting.

10 (e) The public body shall maintain on its website:

11 (1) meeting minutes made available under subsection (b) of this section for
12 a minimum of 5 years after the date of the meeting; and

13 (2) except as provided in subsections (f), (g), (H), and [(g–1)] (I) of this
14 section, a complete and unedited archived video recording of each open meeting for which
15 live video streaming was made available under subsection (b) of this section for a minimum
16 of 1 year after the date of the meeting.

17 (f) (1) This subsection applies only to the Maryland Stadium Authority.

18 (2) If the Maryland Stadium Authority meets by telephone conference, the
19 Authority shall:

20 (i) make publicly available on its website live audio streaming of
21 each portion of the meeting that is held in open session; and

22 (ii) maintain on its website a complete and unedited archived audio
23 recording of each meeting for which live audio streaming was made available for a
24 minimum of 1 year after the date of the meeting.

25 (g) (1) This subsection applies only to the Maryland Transportation Authority.

26 (2) The Maryland Transportation Authority is required to provide live
27 video streaming of a meeting only if the meeting is held at:

28 (i) the headquarters of the Maryland Transportation Authority; or

29 (ii) a location where the Maryland Transportation Authority held at
30 least 10 meetings during the immediately preceding calendar year.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 154

1 [(g–1)] (H) The Maryland Department of Transportation, with respect to quarterly
2 public meetings held by the Vision Zero coordinator on the implementation of Vision Zero
3 under § 8–1004 of the Transportation Article, shall maintain on its website a complete and
4 unedited archived video recording of the meeting for a minimum of 5 years after the date
5 of the meeting.

6 (I) A COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION AND THE BALTIMORE CITY BOARD OF
7 SCHOOL COMMISSIONERS SHALL MAINTAIN ON ITS WEBSITE A COMPLETE AND
8 UNEDITED ARCHIVED VIDEO RECORDING OF EACH OPEN MEETING FOR WHICH LIVE
9 VIDEO STREAMING WAS MADE AVAILABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
10 FOR A MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS AFTER THE DATE OF THE MEETING.

11 [(h)] (J) The Department of Information Technology shall provide the technical
12 staff, support, and equipment necessary to livestream the open meetings of:

13 (1) the Maryland Transportation Authority;

14 (2) the State Board of Elections; and

15 (3) the State Ethics Commission.

16 [(i)] (K) For purposes of this title, a project site visit or educational field tour
17 may not be considered a meeting of a public body listed under subsection (a) of this section
18 if no organizational business is conducted.

19 [(j)] (L) Nothing in this section may be construed to prevent a public body from
20 altering the agenda of a meeting after the agenda has been made available to the public.

21 [(k)] (M) The requirements of this section are in addition to the other
22 requirements of this subtitle.

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
24 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6