START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 194

E5 6lr1190
HB 289/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Metzgar
Requested: October 14, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Incarcerated Job Training Act

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
4 to develop and offer an apprenticeship program in skilled trades for incarcerated
5 individuals; and generally relating to an incarcerated individual apprenticeship
6 program and the employment of incarcerated individuals.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Correctional Services
9 Section 3–901 through 3–908 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Incarcerated
10 Individual Apprenticeship Program”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Correctional Services

16 SUBTITLE 9. INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

17 3–901.

18 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM” MEANS THE
19 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

20 3–902.

21 (A) THERE IS AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0194*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 194

1 IN THE DEPARTMENT.

2 (B) THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM IS AN INDEPENDENT PROGRAM THAT
3 IS SEPARATE FROM MARYLAND CORRECTIONAL ENTERPRISES UNDER SUBTITLE 5
4 OF THIS TITLE.

5 3–903.

6 (A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP AN APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM TO
7 PROVIDE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS THE OPPORTUNITY TO SERVE AS PAID
8 APPRENTICES IN AN AGENCY OR A UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT OR WITH
9 A PRIVATE ENTITY.

10 (B) THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM SHALL PRIORITIZE EMPLOYMENT IN
11 SKILLED TRADES WITH THE PURPOSE OF ASSISTING INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS
12 TO DEVELOP MARKETABLE JOB SKILLS AND TO PROVIDE INCARCERATED
13 INDIVIDUALS WITH THE OPPORTUNITY TO EARN MONEY THAT CAN BE USED ONCE
14 THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IS RELEASED FROM INCARCERATION.

15 (C) EMPLOYERS PARTICIPATING IN THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM MAY
16 INCLUDE AN AGENCY OR A UNIT OF STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE
17 ENTITIES.

18 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE ASSIGNMENTS FOR
19 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS TO ELIGIBLE EMPLOYERS WHO ARE
20 PARTICIPATING IN THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

21 (2) AN EMPLOYER MAY REJECT THE DEPARTMENT’S PROPOSED
22 ASSIGNMENT OR CEASE PARTICIPATION IN THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM AT ANY
23 TIME.

24 3–904.

25 (A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, AN EMPLOYER WHO IS
26 A PARTICIPANT IN THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM SHALL DETERMINE THE WAGE
27 PAID TO AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL.

28 (B) A PERSON THAT EMPLOYS AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL UNDER THIS
29 SECTION SHALL PAY A COMPENSATION RATE OF NOT LESS THAN THE STATE
30 MINIMUM WAGE UNDER § 3–413(C) OF THE LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE.

31 (C) AN EMPLOYER WHO IS AN APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM PARTICIPANT
32 SHALL PAY TO THE DEPARTMENT THE AMOUNT AGREED ON WITH THE
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 194 3

1 DEPARTMENT, AS PART OF THE AGREEMENT FOR THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM,
2 FOR EACH DAY THAT AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IS EMPLOYED AS PART OF THE
3 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

4 (D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
5 FROM THE PAYMENTS MADE UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE
6 DEPARTMENT SHALL CREDIT THE AMOUNT HELD TO THE ACCOUNT OF THE
7 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL UNDER § 3–609 OF THIS TITLE, AS DETERMINED BY THE
8 DEPARTMENT.

9 (2) IF THE DEPARTMENT FINDS THAT THE SPOUSE, CHILD, OR OTHER
10 DEPENDENT OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL NEEDS FINANCIAL SUPPORT, THE
11 DEPARTMENT MAY PAY ALL OR PART OF THE PAYMENTS MADE UNDER SUBSECTION
12 (C) OF THIS SECTION, AS THE DEPARTMENT CONSIDERS PROPER, TO THE SPOUSE,
13 CHILD, OR OTHER DEPENDENT.

14 3–905.

15 (A) THE DIVISION OF CORRECTION SHALL PROVIDE, OR MAKE
16 ARRANGEMENTS THAT IT CONSIDERS TO BE ADEQUATE AND PROPER TO PROVIDE,
17 FOR THE GUARDING, TRANSPORTING, LODGING, FEEDING, CLOTHING, AND MEDICAL
18 AND OTHER CARE OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WHILE THE INCARCERATED
19 INDIVIDUAL IS PARTICIPATING IN THE APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

20 (B) (1) FOR AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNED TO AN AGENCY OR
21 A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT AS A PARTICIPANT IN THE APPRENTICESHIP
22 PROGRAM, THE STATE SHALL PAY THE EXPENSES INCURRED UNDER SUBSECTION
23 (A) OF THIS SECTION.

24 (2) FOR AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNED TO A MUNICIPAL
25 CORPORATION, COUNTY, OR PRIVATE ENTITY AS A PARTICIPANT IN THE
26 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM, THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, COUNTY, OR PRIVATE
27 ENTITY SHALL PAY THE EXPENSES INCURRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
28 SECTION UNDER ARRANGEMENTS MADE WITH OR SATISFACTORY TO THE
29 DEPARTMENT.

30 3–906.

31 AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATING IN THE APPRENTICESHIP
32 PROGRAM IS ENTITLED TO THE SAME DEDUCTIONS OR ALLOWANCES FOR GOOD
33 BEHAVIOR, OBSERVANCE OF DISCIPLINE AND RULES, AND DILIGENT AND FAITHFUL
34 LABOR AND IS SUBJECT TO THE SAME FORFEITURES OR PUNISHMENTS FOR BAD
35 BEHAVIOR AND OTHER VIOLATIONS THAT OTHERWISE APPLY TO INCARCERATED
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 194

1 INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE.

2 3–907.

3 IF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETES THE
4 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM, WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE SCHEDULED RELEASE OF
5 THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE
6 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WITH A CERTIFICATE DEMONSTRATING THE
7 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THE APPRENTICESHIP
8 PROGRAM.

9 3–908.

10 THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE
11 PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4