START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 102

F1 6lr1255
HB 596/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1254

By: Delegate Patterson
Requested: October 20, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Dependent Children of Active Service Members – Advance
3 Enrollment Procedures

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a county superintendent of schools to allow a certain
5 dependent child of an active service member to advance enroll in a school in the
6 county in a certain manner; requiring the remote registration process to provide an
7 opportunity for the active service member or other parent or guardian of a dependent
8 child with a disability to make a certain note during the registration process;
9 requiring a county board of education to ensure that a dependent child with a
10 disability continues to receive a certain education without undue delay through a
11 certain method; requiring the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families, in
12 consultation with certain entities, to publish and maintain certain information on
13 school enrollment and related services for dependent children of active service
14 members; and generally relating to school enrollment procedures for dependent
15 children of active service members.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Education
18 Section 7–115.1
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Education
23 Section 8–401(a)(1), (2), and (3)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
27 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0102*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 102

1 Article – Education

2 7–115.1.

3 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

4 (2) “CHILD WITH A DISABILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
5 8–401 OF THIS ARTICLE.

6 (3) “Dependent child” means an individual of school age who is a natural
7 child, a stepchild, an adopted child, or a financially dependent child of an active service
8 member.

9 [(3)] (4) “Enrollment” includes course registration and charter school
10 lotteries.

11 (5) “FREE APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION” HAS THE MEANING
12 STATED IN § 8–401 OF THIS ARTICLE.

13 (6) “SENDING STATE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–1303 OF THIS
14 TITLE.

15 (b) (1) [A] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND
16 SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A county superintendent shall allow a dependent
17 child of an active service member who is relocating to the State on official orders and is not
18 domiciled in that county during the enrollment period to apply for ADVANCE enrollment in
19 a public school in the county[, in the same manner and at the same time as individuals
20 domiciled in the county].

21 (2) TO ADVANCE ENROLL UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
22 SUBSECTION, AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER SHALL PROVIDE TO A COUNTY
23 SUPERINTENDENT OFFICIAL ORDERS EVIDENCING THAT THE ACTIVE SERVICE
24 MEMBER WILL BE STATIONED IN THE STATE DURING THE CURRENT OR
25 IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING SCHOOL YEAR.

26 (3) (I) A COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT SHALL ESTABLISH A REMOTE
27 REGISTRATION PROCESS FOR ADVANCE ENROLLMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
28 THIS SUBSECTION.

29 (II) A REMOTE REGISTRATION PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER
30 THIS PARAGRAPH MAY NOT:

31 1. CHARGE A FEE; OR
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 102 3

1 2. REQUIRE THE ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER OR OTHER
2 PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR THE DEPENDENT CHILD TO PHYSICALLY APPEAR AT A
3 LOCATION WITHIN THE COUNTY TO COMPLETE ANY PART OF THE ADVANCE
4 ENROLLMENT PROCESS.

5 (4) (I) THE REMOTE REGISTRATION PROCESS SHALL PROVIDE AN
6 OPPORTUNITY FOR THE ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER OR OTHER PARENT OR GUARDIAN
7 OF A DEPENDENT CHILD TO NOTE WHETHER THE CHILD HAS AN INDIVIDUALIZED
8 EDUCATION PROGRAM OR A 504 PLAN IN THE SENDING STATE.

9 (II) IF A DEPENDENT CHILD HAS AN INDIVIDUALIZED
10 EDUCATION PROGRAM OR A 504 PLAN IN THE SENDING STATE, THE COUNTY BOARD
11 SHALL ENSURE THAT THE CHILD RECEIVES AN APPROPRIATE EDUCATION WITHOUT
12 UNDUE DELAY IN THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE CHILD ENROLLS, INCLUDING, IF
13 APPROPRIATE, EDUCATION UNDER AN INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM OR
14 IN ACCORDANCE WITH A 504 PLAN.

15 (III) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL COORDINATE WITH A CHILD’S
16 PARENT OR GUARDIAN AND THE SCHOOL SYSTEM IN THE SENDING STATE IN ORDER
17 TO CARRY OUT THIS PARAGRAPH.

18 (c) (1) [Within] TO FINALIZE ADVANCE ENROLLMENT UNDER THIS
19 SECTION, WITHIN 10 days of the published arrival date on the active service member’s
20 official orders, the active service member shall provide the school with:

21 (i) Satisfactory evidence of the dependent child’s status as a
22 dependent child of the active service member;

23 (ii) A copy of the active service member’s official orders to relocate;
24 and

25 (iii) Proof of residence in the county.

26 (2) The active service member may use the address of any of the following
27 as proof of residence:

28 (i) A temporary on–base lodging facility;

29 (ii) A purchased or leased home or apartment; or

30 (iii) Any federal government housing unit or off–base military
31 housing unit.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 102

1 (D) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A
2 DEPENDENT CHILD OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER WHO HAS USED ADVANCE
3 ENROLLMENT TO ENROLL IN A SCHOOL UNDER THIS SECTION MAY REMAIN
4 ENROLLED IN SCHOOL UNTIL THE END OF THE CURRENT SCHOOL YEAR, EVEN IF THE
5 CHILD NO LONGER MEETS RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS OF THE SCHOOL.

6 (2) A DEPENDENT CHILD OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER WHO USES
7 ADVANCE ENROLLMENT SHALL HAVE ACCESS TO ACADEMIC COURSES AND
8 PROGRAMS, INCLUDING EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES AND ATHLETIC AND SOCIAL
9 PROGRAMS, IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STUDENTS ENROLLED IN THE SCHOOL.

10 (E) THE SECRETARY OF VETERANS AND MILITARY FAMILIES, IN
11 CONSULTATION WITH THE MILITARY FAMILY EDUCATION LIAISON DESIGNATED
12 UNDER § 7–1303 OF THIS TITLE AND THE OFFICE OF MILITARY AND FEDERAL
13 AFFAIRS AND THE MARYLAND MILITARY INSTALLATION COUNCIL IN THE
14 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, SHALL PUBLISH AND MAINTAIN INFORMATION ON:

15 (1) THE ADVANCE ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED UNDER
16 THIS SECTION; AND

17 (2) ANY ASSISTANCE AND SERVICES AVAILABLE TO ACTIVE SERVICE
18 MEMBERS REGARDING THE ADVANCE ENROLLMENT OF A DEPENDENT CHILD,
19 INCLUDING A CHILD WITH A DISABILITY ENTITLED TO RECEIVE A FREE
20 APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION IN THE STATE.

21 8–401.

22 (a) (1) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (2) “Child with a disability” means a child who has been determined
24 through appropriate assessment as having autism, deaf–blindness, hearing impairment,
25 including deafness, emotional disability, intellectual disability, multiple disabilities,
26 orthopedic impairment, other health impairment, specific learning disability, speech or
27 language impairment, traumatic brain injury, visual impairment, including blindness, and
28 who because of that impairment needs special education and related services.

29 (3) “Free appropriate public education” means special education and
30 related services that:

31 (i) Are provided at public expense, under public supervision and
32 direction, at no cost to the parents;

33 (ii) Meet the standards of the State Board regulations and the
34 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.);
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 102 5

1 (iii) Includes preschool, elementary, and secondary education; and

2 (iv) Are provided in conformance with the requirements of the child’s
3 individualized education program.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5