START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 119

P2, L6, M5 6lr0739
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: August 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Energy Performance Contracts – Navigators, Funding, and Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a public body that enters into an energy performance contract
4 to comply with certain provisions of law regarding energy performance contracts;
5 requiring the Maryland Clean Energy Center to hire or contract with navigators to
6 assist a public body in creating an energy performance contract; altering the Jane E.
7 Lawton Conservation Loan Program and the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund to
8 allow for the issuance of certain grants and loans to certain public bodies; requiring
9 the Maryland Energy Administration to work with a navigator assisting a public
10 body in creating an energy performance contract; authorizing the use of the Strategic
11 Energy Investment Fund for the Center to hire or contract with navigators; and
12 generally relating to energy performance contracts.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – State Finance and Procurement
15 Section 11–101(a) and (i) and 12–302
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – State Finance and Procurement
20 Section 17–1001 and 17–1002 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Navigators
21 for Energy Performance Contracts”
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
25 Article – State Government
26 Section 9–20A–01 through 9–20A–07 and 9–20B–05(f)(13) and (14)
27 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0119*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 119

1 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
3 Article – State Government
4 Section 9–20B–05(a)
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

7 BY adding to
8 Article – State Government
9 Section 9–20B–05(f)(14)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – State Finance and Procurement

15 11–101.

16 (a) In this Division II the following words have the meanings indicated unless:

17 (1) the context clearly requires a different meaning; or

18 (2) a different definition is provided for a particular title or provision.

19 (i) “Energy performance contract” means an agreement for the provision of
20 energy services, including electricity, heating, ventilation, cooling, steam, or hot water, in
21 which a person agrees to design, install, finance, maintain, or manage energy systems or
22 equipment to improve the energy efficiency of a building or facility in exchange for a portion
23 of the energy savings.

24 12–302.

25 (a) The Department of General Services shall be responsible for monitoring the
26 status of active energy performance contracts and reporting that status to the Board
27 annually.

28 (b) A unit that has entered into an energy performance contract shall submit to
29 the Department of General Services for review any required annual measurement and
30 verification reports.

31 SUBTITLE 10. NAVIGATORS FOR ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACTS.

32 17–1001.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 119 3

1 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (B) “ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
4 11–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

5 (C) “NAVIGATOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO ASSISTS PUBLIC BODIES IN
6 CREATING ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACTS.

7 (D) “PUBLIC BODY” INCLUDES:

8 (1) A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT;

9 (2) A COUNTY;

10 (3) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

11 (4) A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

12 (5) A LOCAL BOARD OF EDUCATION; AND

13 (6) A STATE OR LOCAL HOSPITAL.

14 17–1002.

15 (A) (1) A PUBLIC BODY THAT ENTERS INTO AN ENERGY PERFORMANCE
16 CONTRACT SHALL COMPLY WITH TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE.

17 (2) BEFORE ENTERING INTO AN ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACT
18 A PUBLIC BODY SHALL SUBMIT WRITTEN NOTIFICATION TO THE NAVIGATOR FOR
19 THE PUBLIC BODY’S REGION.

20 (B) (1) (I) THE MARYLAND CLEAN ENERGY CENTER SHALL HIRE OR
21 CONTRACT WITH NAVIGATORS TO ASSIST A PUBLIC BODY IN CREATING AN ENERGY
22 PERFORMANCE CONTRACT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

23 (II) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE
24 IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $1,500,000 FROM THE
25 STRATEGIC ENERGY INVESTMENT FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–20B–05 OF THE
26 STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE TO THE MARYLAND CLEAN ENERGY CENTER TO
27 HIRE OR CONTRACT WITH NAVIGATORS TO ASSIST PUBLIC BODIES IN CREATING AN
28 ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 119

1 (2) AT LEAST ONE NAVIGATOR SHALL ASSIST PUBLIC BODIES IN EACH
2 OF THE FOLLOWING REGIONS:

3 (I) ALLEGANY COUNTY, FREDERICK COUNTY, GARRETT
4 COUNTY, AND WASHINGTON COUNTY;

5 (II) CALVERT COUNTY, CHARLES COUNTY, AND ST. MARY’S
6 COUNTY;

7 (III) CAROLINE COUNTY, CECIL COUNTY, DORCHESTER
8 COUNTY, KENT COUNTY, QUEEN ANNE’S COUNTY, SOMERSET COUNTY, TALBOT
9 COUNTY, WICOMICO COUNTY, AND WORCESTER COUNTY;

10 (IV) ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, CARROLL COUNTY, HARFORD
11 COUNTY, AND HOWARD COUNTY;

12 (V) MONTGOMERY COUNTY;

13 (VI) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY;

14 (VII) BALTIMORE COUNTY; AND

15 (VIII) BALTIMORE CITY.

16 (C) AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS
17 SECTION, A NAVIGATOR SHALL ASSIST A PUBLIC BODY WITH CREATING AN ENERGY
18 PERFORMANCE CONTRACT, INCLUDING:

19 (1) APPLYING FOR FEDERAL, STATE, OR OTHER GRANTS OR LOANS TO
20 CREATE OR EXECUTE ENERGY PERFORMANCE CONTRACTS;

21 (2) REVIEWING AND ESTABLISHING ENERGY EFFICIENCY MEASURES
22 TO REDUCE THE ENERGY COSTS OF A BUILDING;

23 (3) REVIEWING AND ESTABLISHING CLEAN ENERGY PROJECTS TO
24 REDUCE THE ENERGY COSTS OF A BUILDING; AND

25 (4) WORKING WITH THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION TO
26 APPLY FOR GRANTS OR LOANS UNDER THE JANE E. LAWTON CONSERVATION
27 GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAM.

28 Article – State Government

29 9–20A–01.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 119 5

1 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (b) “Administration” means the Maryland Energy Administration.

3 (c) “Borrower” means an eligible State agency, local jurisdiction, nonprofit
4 organization, or eligible business that applies and qualifies for a loan under this Program.

5 (d) “Eligible business” means a commercial enterprise or business that is in good
6 standing with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation and is:

7 (1) incorporated in the State; or

8 (2) registered to do business in the State.

9 (e) “Energy cost savings” means the actual reduction in operating expenses
10 resulting from the installation, operation, and maintenance of a project financed under the
11 Program.

12 (f) “Fund” means the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund.

13 (g) “GRANTEE” MEANS A PUBLIC BODY THAT APPLIES FOR A GRANT UNDER
14 THE PROGRAM.

15 (H) (1) “Local jurisdiction” means any county or municipality of the State.

16 (2) “Local jurisdiction” includes:

17 (i) a board of education of a county or municipality;

18 (ii) a special district that is established by State law and that
19 operates within a single county;

20 (iii) a special district that is established by a county under public
21 general law; and

22 (iv) an office, board, or department that is established in a county
23 under State law and that is funded, under State law, at least in part by the county
24 governing body.

25 [(h)] (I) “Municipality” means any municipal corporation in the State that is
26 subject to the provisions of Article XI–E of the Maryland Constitution or any duly
27 authorized agency or instrumentality of the municipality.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 119

1 [(i)] (J) “Nonprofit organization” means a corporation, foundation, school,
2 hospital, or other legal entity, no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of
3 any private shareholder or individual holding an interest in the entity.

4 [(j)] (K) “Program” means the Jane E. Lawton Conservation GRANT AND Loan
5 Program.

6 [(k)] (L) “Project” means one or more improvements or modifications that
7 enhance the energy efficiency and reduce the operating expenses of a structure located in
8 Maryland.

9 (M) “PUBLIC BODY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 17–1001 OF THE STATE
10 FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

11 [(l)] (N) (1) “State agency” means any permanent or temporary State office,
12 department, division or unit, bureau, board, commission, task force, authority, institution,
13 State college or university, and any other unit of State government, whether executive,
14 legislative, or judicial.

15 (2) “State agency” includes any subunits of State government OR PUBLIC
16 BODY.

17 9–20A–02.

18 There is a Jane E. Lawton Conservation GRANT AND Loan Program in the
19 Administration.

20 9–20A–03.

21 The purpose of the Program is to provide financial assistance in the form of GRANTS
22 TO PUBLIC BODIES AND low interest and zero interest loans to nonprofit organizations,
23 local jurisdictions, State agencies, and eligible businesses for projects in order to:

24 (1) promote energy conservation;

25 (2) reduce consumption of fossil fuels;

26 (3) improve energy efficiency;

27 (4) enhance energy–related economic development and stability in the
28 nonprofit, commercial, and industrial sectors; and

29 (5) reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

30 9–20A–04.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 119 7

1 The Administration shall:

2 (1) manage, supervise, and administer the Program;

3 (2) adopt regulations to ensure that GRANTS AND loans are provided only
4 to projects that carry out the purpose of the Program;

5 (3) attach [specific terms] to any GRANT OR loan SPECIFIC TERMS that
6 are considered necessary to ensure that the purpose of the Program is fulfilled; [and]

7 (4) develop procedures for monitoring projects to assess whether the
8 improvements or modifications made by an eligible entity or business that had received a
9 GRANT OR loan under the Program have resulted in a measurable reduction in energy
10 consumption; AND

11 (5) WORK WITH NAVIGATORS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 17–1002 OF
12 THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

13 9–20A–05.

14 (a) (1) To receive a GRANT OR loan under the Program, a GRANTEE OR
15 borrower must file an application with the Administration.

16 (2) If the borrower is an eligible business, the application must be signed
17 by the chief operating officer or an authorized officer of the business.

18 (3) If the GRANTEE OR borrower is a local jurisdiction, the application
19 must be signed by the chief elected officer of the county or municipality, or if none, by the
20 governing body of the county or municipality in which the project is located.

21 (4) If the GRANTEE OR borrower is a public school, the application must
22 be signed by the board of education of the county in which the project is located.

23 (5) If the GRANTEE OR borrower is a State agency, the application must
24 be signed by the head of the State agency.

25 (6) IF THE GRANTEE OR BORROWER IS A STATE HOSPITAL, THE
26 APPLICATION MUST BE SIGNED BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OR PRESIDENT
27 OF THE HOSPITAL.

28 (b) The application shall contain any information the Administration determines
29 is necessary, including:

30 (1) the projected cost to accomplish a proposed project;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 119

1 (2) the amount of energy or fuel a proposed project is expected to save over
2 a defined period of time after completion of the project;

3 (3) the anticipated environmental benefits in the form of reduced emissions
4 or pollution attributable to the proposed project;

5 (4) the amount of cost savings expected to be generated over a defined
6 period of time after completion of the proposed project;

7 (5) a description of the borrower’s contribution to a proposed project as
8 required by § 9–20A–06 of this subtitle; and

9 (6) any additional information relating to the GRANTEE, borrower, or [the]
10 proposed project that may be required by the Administration in order to administer the
11 Program.

12 9–20A–06.

13 (a) Loans from the Fund may be used for:

14 (1) the costs of implementing projects, including the costs of all necessary:

15 (i) technical assessments;

16 (ii) studies;

17 (iii) surveys;

18 (iv) plans and specifications; and

19 (v) start–up, architectural, engineering, or other special services;

20 (2) the costs of procuring necessary technology, equipment, licenses, or
21 materials; and

22 (3) the costs of construction, rehabilitation, or modification, including the
23 purchase and installation of any necessary machinery, equipment, or furnishings.

24 (b) Each borrower shall make a contribution to a project that is of a type and
25 amount acceptable to the Administration.

26 (c) A borrower other than a State agency OR PUBLIC BODY must document that
27 the anticipated energy cost savings to the borrower over a defined period according to a
28 methodology acceptable to the Administration after the completion of the project are
29 greater than the total cost of the project to the borrower.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 119 9

1 (d) Loans made under the Program to a borrower other than a State agency OR
2 PUBLIC BODY shall:

3 (1) be repayable by the borrower from specified revenues that may include
4 the energy cost savings generated by a project;

5 (2) bear interest at a rate that the Administration determines to be
6 necessary and reasonable for the project; and

7 (3) be repayable in accordance with a schedule that the Administration
8 sets, which may be on a deferred payment basis.

9 (e) (1) A borrower other than a State agency OR PUBLIC BODY shall provide
10 assurances for the repayment of a loan.

11 (2) The assurances:

12 (i) shall include a promissory note; and

13 (ii) may include superior or subordinate mortgage liens, guarantees
14 of repayment, or other forms of collateral.

15 (f) Loans may be made in conjunction with, or in addition to, financial assistance
16 provided through other State or federal programs.

17 (G) (1) GRANTS MADE TO PUBLIC BODIES UNDER THE PROGRAM MAY BE
18 USED FOR:

19 (I) THE COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING PROJECTS, INCLUDING THE
20 COSTS OF ALL NECESSARY:

21 1. TECHNICAL ASSESSMENTS;

22 2. STUDIES;

23 3. SURVEYS;

24 4. PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; AND

25 5. START–UP, ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING, OR
26 OTHER SPECIAL SERVICES;

27 (II) THE COSTS OF PROCURING NECESSARY TECHNOLOGY,
28 EQUIPMENT, LICENSES, OR MATERIALS; AND
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 119

1 (III) THE COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION, REHABILITATION, OR
2 MODIFICATION, INCLUDING THE PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF ANY NECESSARY
3 MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, OR FURNISHINGS.

4 (2) GRANTS MAY BE AWARDED IN CONJUNCTION WITH, OR IN
5 ADDITION TO, FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDED THROUGH OTHER STATE OR
6 FEDERAL PROGRAMS.

7 (3) A RECIPIENT OF A GRANT AWARDED UNDER THE PROGRAM MAY
8 USE THE ENERGY COST SAVINGS ASSOCIATED WITH THE GRANT TO APPLY FOR
9 ADDITIONAL FEDERAL, STATE, OR PRIVATE PROGRAMS THAT ARE DESIGNED TO
10 INCREASE THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY OF A BUILDING OR ADD RENEWABLE ENERGY
11 TO A BUILDING.

12 (4) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
13 MARYLAND CLEAN ENERGY CENTER TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
14 SECTION.

15 9–20A–07.

16 (a) There is a Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund.

17 (b) The Administration shall administer the Fund.

18 (c) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
19 the State Finance and Procurement Article.

20 (2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund and the Comptroller shall
21 account for the Fund.

22 (d) The Fund consists of:

23 (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Program;

24 (2) money received from any public or private source;

25 (3) interest and investment earnings on the Fund; and

26 (4) repayments and prepayments of principal and interest on loans made
27 from the Fund.

28 (e) The Fund may be used only:

29 (1) to pay the expenses of the Program;
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 119 11

1 (2) to provide GRANTS AND loans to GRANTEES, eligible borrowers, and
2 projects; and

3 (3) to enhance the credit of a financing offered by eligible banks and other
4 financial institutions for projects.

5 (f) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest and reinvest the money of the Fund in
6 the same manner as other State money may be invested.

7 (2) Any investment earnings of the Fund shall be paid into the Fund.

8 (3) Any repayment of principal and interest on loans made from the Fund
9 shall be paid into the Fund.

10 (g) (1) The Administration shall annually reserve for at least 90 days a portion
11 of the money from the Fund that is available for financial assistance under the Program for
12 GRANTS TO PUBLIC BODIES AND loans to nonprofit organizations.

13 (2) In a fiscal year in which requests for financial assistance from nonprofit
14 organizations are less than the amount of money reserved under paragraph (1) of this
15 subsection for the period determined by the Administration, the Administration may make
16 the unencumbered or noncommitted portion of the reserve available to other GRANTEES
17 OR borrowers in the Program.

18 9–20B–05.

19 (a) There is a Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund.

20 (f) The Administration shall use the Fund:

21 (13) notwithstanding subsection (g) of this section, to pay costs associated
22 with the Air and Radiation Administration within the Department of the Environment;
23 [and]

24 (14) TO PROVIDE FUNDING, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 17–1002 OF THE
25 STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, TO THE MARYLAND CLEAN ENERGY
26 CENTER TO HIRE OR CONTRACT WITH NAVIGATORS; AND

27 [(14)] (15) to pay the expenses of the Program.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
29 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 11