START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 122 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 122 
(Delegate Szeliga, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Aid - Nonprofits - Status 
 
 
This bill prohibits a grantor (defined as a unit of State government or other State entity that 
provides State aid to a nonprofit entity) from providing State aid to a nonprofit entity unless 
the nonprofit entity meets specified conditions. The nonprofit entity must:  (1) be in good 
standing with the Internal Revenue Service; (2) be current on any federal, State, or local 
obligations; (3) have a current charter on file with the State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation (SDAT); and (4) if required, have filed specified tax forms for the most recent 
tax year. “State aid” is a contribution, grant, or subsidy provided through the State 
operating or capital budget or by the action of a unit of State government from State funds 
appropriated to that unit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill may have an operational impact on State agencies that provide State 
aid to nonprofit entities, but it likely does not materially affect State expenditures, as 
discussed below. State revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. Nonprofit organizations are not considered small 
businesses. 
  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 122/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Reporting Requirements for State Aid Provided 
 
A “grantee” is a for-profit or nonprofit entity or association that receives State aid during 
a fiscal year and is not a unit of State of local government. A “grantor” is a unit of State 
government or other State entity that provides State aid to a grantee. “State aid” is a 
contribution, grant, or subsidy of $50,000 or more provided through the State operating or 
capital budget or by the action of a unit of State government from State funds appropriated 
to that unit. “State aid” does not include reimbursements to providers participating in a 
State program. 
 
Grantors must submit a report to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) by 
September 1 after each fiscal year they provide State aid to a grantee. The Department of 
Information Technology (DoIT), in consultation with DBM, must develop and operate a 
searchable web site, accessible to the public at no cost, which provides grantee report 
information in a specified format. The Office of Legislative Audits is authorized to conduct 
audits or reviews of grantees. 
 
Grantor reports must contain the following information:  the name, address, and zip code 
of each grantee that received State aid from the grantor during the previous fiscal year; the 
amount of any State aid provided to the grantee; and a description of the State aid provided 
to the grantee. The reports must be in a form and format that DBM determines after 
consulting with DoIT. The web site must provide specified information and be searchable 
by, at a minimum, the name or zip code of the grantee and the name of the grantor. 
 
Reporting Requirements for Social Organizations 
 
A “social organization” is an association or corporation that is operated for a charitable, 
cultural, educational, historical, humane, industrial, medical, or military purpose.  
“State aid” is a contribution, grant, or subsidy of money from the State Treasury.  
 
Each social organization that, by statute, is to receive State aid must make an agreement 
with either the Comptroller or appropriate unit of State government that defines the 
purposes and terms of the State aide and requires the social organization to submit to the 
unit or Comptroller a report, generally by September 1 after the close of the fiscal year in 
which the social organization received the State aide, on the expenditure of the State aide. 
After receiving the report, the unit or the Comptroller must determine whether the social 
organization has spent and accounted for the State aid in accordance with the agreement 
and must give DBM and the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notice of any 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 122/ Page 3 
inconsistencies. The unit or the Comptroller may audit the social organization’s financial 
records. 
 
State Expenditures:  Several State agencies that provide State aid to nonprofit entities 
report that they already comply with some of the bill’s requirements by checking the status 
of nonprofit entities on SDAT’s website or the Internal Revenue Services’ website. Other 
agencies note that they can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources, though the 
process to award grants may be extended as State agencies that provide State aid to 
nonprofit entities may need to spend additional time to ensure grant recipients meet all of 
the bill’s requirements. 
 
A few agencies reported needing additional personnel and informational technology (IT) 
tools to ensure nonprofit entities meet the bill’s requirements. Additionally, several State 
agencies note that they may be unable to confirm requirements of the bill, such as whether 
a nonprofit entity is current on any federal or local tax obligations. Thus, DLS assumes 
grantors may need to rely on grantee affidavits to fulfill some of the bill’s requirements, 
thereby eliminating some staffing and IT needs to implement the bill. To the extent that 
State agencies are unable to rely on grantee affidavits to fulfill the bill’s requirements, 
additional resources may be needed for State agencies to verify that nonprofit entities meet 
the bill’s requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department 
of Aging; Department of Commerce; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
Systems; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Maryland State Library Agency; University System of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of 
Public Works; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Service and Civic 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 122/ Page 4 
Innovation; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4