START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 143 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Electric Company Contracts, Capacity Market Models, and Regional 
Transmission Organizations - Studies 
 
 
The bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC), in consultation with the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), to study the benefits and costs of requiring each 
electric company in the State to demonstrate to PSC that it has contracted for at least 
80% of its load-serving capacity over the next five-year period. In addition, in consultation 
with neighboring states, PSC and MEA must jointly study the benefits and costs of, and 
make recommendations on, potential options for withdrawing from PJM Interconnection, 
LLC (PJM), as specified. By December 31, 2026, PSC and MEA jointly must submit a 
report of their findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $600,000 only in FY 2027. 
Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public 
service companies. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$600,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$600,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 143/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  PSC and MEA, in consultation with neighboring states, must jointly study 
the benefits and costs of, and make recommendations on, potential options for:   
 
 
withdrawing from the PJM capacity market model and developing a multistate 
compact to engage in the fixed resource requirement alternative to secure electric 
capacity through entering contracts with private entities or competitive capacity 
auctions; and 
 
withdrawing from PJM and (1) establishing an independent regional transmission 
organization (RTO) or (2) joining an existing RTO operating in another region or 
state. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Electric Customer Choice and Competition Act of 1999 
 
The Electric Customer Choice and Competition Act of 1999 facilitated the restructuring of 
the electric utility industry in Maryland, which deregulated the generation, supply, and 
pricing of electricity. As part of restructuring, the State’s vertically integrated electric 
companies divested themselves of their generation assets. With restructuring, generation 
resources are considered competitive, and the competitive market is relied upon to provide 
new generation resources and to meet load requirements. 
 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies, which include electric 
companies, subject to its jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of the 
public and (2) promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in 
the State without unjust discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, 
the economy of the State, the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected 
workers, the conservation of natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, 
the achievement of the State’s climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, and the protection of a public service company’s infrastructure against 
cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce compliance with legal requirements by public 
service companies. State law does not require electric companies to be a member of an 
RTO. 
 
PJM Interconnection, LLC 
 
PJM is the RTO for all or parts of 13 states plus the District of Columbia, including 
Maryland. According to PJM, its members include electricity distributors, transmission and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 143/ Page 3 
generator owners, organizations that can sell electricity to end-users, marketing firms, and 
end-use customers. PJM members take part in PJM’s stakeholder process, which provides 
a forum for those who have a stake in the wholesale electric industry to discuss and work 
through issues related to PJM markets, operations, public policies, and current and future 
industry matters. PJM’s stakeholder process – the Consensus-Based Issue Resolution 
strategy – uses committees, subcommittees, user groups and task forces to conduct 
business. 
 
All four Maryland investor-owned utilities are affiliate members of PJM, and all 
five Maryland municipal electric utilities are voting members of PJM, as is the 
Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $600,000 in 
fiscal 2027 only to hire a consultant to complete the required studies and submit the 
required report. Neither PSC nor MEA have the necessary software, databases, or staff 
expertise to conduct the required studies without outside assistance. This estimate assumes 
that PSC takes the lead and that any costs incurred to hire a consultant are paid out of PSC’s 
Public Utility Regulation Fund. To that end, this analysis assumes that MEA can consult 
with PSC as needed using existing resources. 
 
PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it regulates. As 
a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from assessments 
imposed on public service companies. 
 
Additional Comments:  Based on prior experience, PSC advises that it might not be 
feasible to hire a consultant, complete the required studies, and submit the required report 
by the December 31, 2026 deadline established by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 92 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Energy Administration; 
PJM Interconnection, LLC; Department of Legislative Services  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 143/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4