START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 184

E1 6lr1658
HB 1425/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED) CF SB 8

By: Delegate Pasteur
Requested: November 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Law – Identity Fraud – Artificial Intelligence and Deepfake
3 Representations

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from utilizing certain personal identifying
5 information or engaging in certain conduct in order to cause certain harm;
6 prohibiting a person from using certain artificial intelligence or certain deepfake
7 representations for certain purposes; providing that a person who is the victim of
8 certain conduct may bring a civil action against a certain person; and generally
9 relating to identity fraud and artificial intelligence and deepfake representations.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Criminal Law
12 Section 8–301
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – State Finance and Procurement
17 Section 3.5–801(a) and (c)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Criminal Law

23 8–301.

24 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0184*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 184

1 (2) “ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
2 3.5–801 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

3 (3) (I) “DEEPFAKE REPRESENTATION” MEANS A PHOTOGRAPH, A
4 FILM, A VIDEO, AN AUDIO RECORDING, A DIGITAL IMAGE, A PICTURE, OR A
5 COMPUTER OR COMPUTER–GENERATED IMAGE OR PICTURE, WHETHER MADE,
6 PRODUCED, OR GENERATED BY ELECTRONIC, MECHANICAL, OR OTHER MEANS,
7 THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM AN ACTUAL AND IDENTIFIABLE HUMAN BEING.

8 (II) “DEEPFAKE REPRESENTATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE
9 IMAGES OR ITEMS DEPICTING HUMAN BEINGS THAT ARE:

10 1. DRAWINGS;

11 2. CARTOONS;

12 3. SCULPTURES; OR

13 4. PAINTINGS.

14 (4) “HARM” MEANS:

15 (I) PHYSICAL INJURY;

16 (II) SERIOUS EMOTIONAL DISTRESS; OR

17 (III) ECONOMIC DAMAGES.

18 [(2)] (5) “Health care” means care, services, or supplies related to the
19 health of an individual that includes the following:

20 (i) preventative, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative,
21 maintenance care, palliative care and counseling, service assessment, or procedure:

22 1. with respect to the physical or mental condition or
23 functional status of an individual; or

24 2. that affects the structure or function of the body; and

25 (ii) the sale or dispensing of a drug, device, equipment, or other item
26 in accordance with a prescription.

27 [(3)] (6) “Health information” means any information, whether oral or
28 recorded in any form or medium, that:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 184 3

1 (i) is created or received by:

2 1. a health care provider;

3 2. a health care carrier;

4 3. a public health authority;

5 4. an employer;

6 5. a life insurer;

7 6. a school or university; or

8 7. a health care clearinghouse; and

9 (ii) relates to the:

10 1. past, present, or future physical or mental health or
11 condition of an individual;

12 2. provision of health care to an individual; or

13 3. past, present, or future payment for the provision of health
14 care to an individual.

15 (7) (I) “INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM AN ACTUAL AND IDENTIFIABLE
16 HUMAN BEING” MEANS AN IMAGE AN ORDINARY PERSON WOULD CONCLUDE IS OF
17 AN ACTUAL AND IDENTIFIABLE HUMAN BEING.

18 (II) “INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM AN ACTUAL AND IDENTIFIABLE
19 HUMAN BEING” INCLUDES AN IMAGE THAT IS COMPUTER–GENERATED AND HAS
20 BEEN CREATED, ADAPTED, OR MODIFIED TO APPEAR AS AN ACTUAL AND
21 IDENTIFIABLE HUMAN BEING.

22 [(4)] (8) “Interactive computer service” means an information service,
23 system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer access by multiple
24 users to a computer server, including a system that provides access to the Internet and
25 cellular phones.

26 [(5)] (9) “Payment device number” has the meaning stated in § 8–213 of
27 this title.

28 [(6)] (10) (i) “Personal identifying information” includes a name,
29 address, telephone number, driver’s license number, Social Security number, place of
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 184

1 employment, employee identification number, health insurance identification number,
2 medical identification number, mother’s maiden name, bank or other financial institution
3 account number, date of birth, personal identification number, unique biometric data,
4 including fingerprint, voice print, retina or iris image or other unique physical
5 representation, digital signature, credit card number, or other payment device number.

6 (ii) “Personal identifying information” may be derived from any
7 element in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, alone or in conjunction with any other
8 information to identify a specific natural or fictitious individual.

9 [(7)] (11) “Re–encoder” means an electronic device that places encoded
10 personal identifying information or a payment device number from the magnetic strip or
11 stripe of a credit card onto the magnetic strip or stripe of a different credit card or any
12 electronic medium that allows such a transaction to occur.

13 [(8)] (12) “Skimming device” means a scanner, skimmer, reader, or any
14 other electronic device that is used to access, read, scan, obtain, memorize, or store,
15 temporarily or permanently, personal identifying information or a payment device number
16 encoded on the magnetic strip or stripe of a credit card.

17 (b) A person may not knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent possess,
18 obtain, or help another to possess or obtain any personal identifying information of an
19 individual, without the consent of the individual, in order to use, sell, or transfer the
20 information to get a benefit, credit, good, service, or other thing of value or to access health
21 information or health care.

22 (b–1) A person may not maliciously use an interactive computer service to disclose
23 or assist another person to disclose the driver’s license number, bank or other financial
24 institution account number, credit card number, payment device number, Social Security
25 number, or employee identification number of an individual, without the consent of the
26 individual, in order to annoy, threaten, embarrass, or harass the individual.

27 (B–2) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY, WILLFULLY, AND WITH FRAUDULENT
28 INTENT UTILIZE THE PERSONAL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION OF AN INDIVIDUAL,
29 WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE INDIVIDUAL, IN ORDER TO CAUSE HARM.

30 (c) A person may not knowingly and willfully assume the identity of another,
31 including a fictitious person:

32 (1) to avoid identification, apprehension, or prosecution for a crime; or

33 (2) with fraudulent intent to:

34 (i) get a benefit, credit, good, service, or other thing of value;

35 (ii) access health information or health care; [or]
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 184 5

1 (iii) avoid the payment of debt or other legal obligation; OR

2 (IV) HARM, HARASS, INTIMIDATE, THREATEN, OR COERCE THE
3 OTHER PERSON.

4 (d) A person may not knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent to obtain a
5 benefit, credit, good, service, or other thing of value or to access health information or health
6 care, use:

7 (1) a re–encoder to place information encoded on the magnetic strip or
8 stripe of a credit card onto the magnetic strip or stripe of a different credit card or use any
9 other electronic medium that allows such a transaction to occur without the consent of the
10 individual authorized to use the credit card from which the personal identifying
11 information or payment device number is being re–encoded; or

12 (2) a skimming device to access, read, scan, obtain, memorize, or store
13 personal identifying information or a payment device number on the magnetic strip or
14 stripe of a credit card without the consent of the individual authorized to use the credit
15 card.

16 (e) A person may not knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent possess,
17 obtain, or help another possess or obtain a re–encoder device or a skimming device for the
18 unauthorized use, sale, or transfer of personal identifying information or a payment device
19 number.

20 (f) (1) A person may not knowingly and willfully claim to represent another
21 person without the knowledge and consent of that person, with the intent to solicit, request,
22 or take any other action to otherwise induce another person to provide personal identifying
23 information or a payment device number.

24 (2) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY, WILLFULLY, AND WITH
25 FRAUDULENT INTENT USE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OR A DEEPFAKE
26 REPRESENTATION TO:

27 (I) IMPERSONATE, FALSELY DEPICT, OR CLAIM TO REPRESENT
28 ANOTHER PERSON WITH THE INTENT TO DEFRAUD, MISLEAD, OR CAUSE HARM TO
29 THAT PERSON OR ANY OTHER PERSON; OR

30 (II) CREATE OR DISTRIBUTE FALSE RECORDS WITH THE INTENT
31 TO:

32 1. CAUSE HARM TO ANOTHER PERSON;
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 184

1 2. INDUCE ANOTHER PERSON TO PROVIDE PERSONAL
2 IDENTIFYING INFORMATION; OR

3 3. OBTAIN A BENEFIT, CREDIT, GOOD, SERVICE, OR
4 OTHER THING OF VALUE.

5 (g) (1) (i) A person who violates this section where the benefit, credit, good,
6 service, health information or health care, or other thing of value that is the subject of
7 subsection (b), [(c)] (C)(2)(I), (II), (III), or (d) of this section has a value of at least $1,500
8 but less than $25,000 is guilty of a felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not
9 exceeding 5 years or a fine not exceeding $10,000 or both.

10 (ii) A person who violates this section where the benefit, credit, good,
11 service, or other thing of value that is the subject of subsection (b), [(c)] (C)(2)(I), (II), (III),
12 or (d) of this section has a value of at least $25,000 but less than $100,000 is guilty of a
13 felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or a fine not
14 exceeding $15,000 or both.

15 (iii) A person who violates this section where the benefit, credit, good,
16 service, or other thing of value that is the subject of subsection (b), [(c)] (C)(2)(I), (II), (III),
17 or (d) of this section has a value of $100,000 or more is guilty of a felony and on conviction
18 is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 20 years or a fine not exceeding $25,000 or both.

19 (2) A person who violates this section where the benefit, credit, good,
20 service, health information or health care, or other thing of value that is the subject of
21 subsection (b), [(c)] (C)(2)(I), (II), (III), or (d) of this section has a value of at least $100
22 but less than $1,500 is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to
23 imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or a fine not exceeding $500 or both.

24 (3) A person who violates this section under circumstances that reasonably
25 indicate that the person’s intent was to manufacture, distribute, or dispense another
26 individual’s personal identifying information without that individual’s consent is guilty of
27 a felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or a fine not
28 exceeding $25,000 or both.

29 (4) A person who violates subsection (b–1), (B–2), (c)(1), (C)(2)(IV), (e), or
30 [(f)] (F)(1) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to
31 imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or a fine not exceeding $500 or both.

32 (5) (I) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (F)(2) OF THIS
33 SECTION INVOLVING ONE VICTIM IS GUILTY OF A FELONY AND ON CONVICTION IS
34 SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING
35 $10,000 OR BOTH.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 184 7

1 (II) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (F)(2) OF THIS
2 SECTION INVOLVING TWO OR MORE VICTIMS IS GUILTY OF A FELONY AND ON
3 CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 10 YEARS OR A FINE
4 NOT EXCEEDING $15,000 OR BOTH.

5 [(5)] (6) When the violation of this section is pursuant to one scheme or
6 continuing course of conduct, whether from the same or several sources, the conduct may
7 be considered as one violation and the value of the benefit, credit, good, service, or other
8 thing of value may be aggregated in determining whether the violation is a felony or
9 misdemeanor.

10 (H) (1) A PERSON WHO IS THE VICTIM OF AN ACT THAT WOULD
11 CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (F)(2) OF THIS SECTION MAY BRING A
12 CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE PERSON OR PERSONS WHO COMMITTED THE ACT IN A
13 COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

14 (2) THE COURT MAY:

15 (I) ISSUE AN INJUNCTION TO PREVENT OR RESTRAIN AN ACT
16 THAT WOULD CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (F)(2) OF THIS SECTION;
17 AND

18 (II) GRANT ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE RELIEF.

19 [(h)] (I) A person described in subsection (g)(2) or (4) of this section is subject to
20 § 5–106(b) of the Courts Article.

21 [(i)] (J) In addition to restitution under Title 11, Subtitle 6 of the Criminal
22 Procedure Article, a court may order a person who pleads guilty or nolo contendere or who
23 is found guilty under this section to make restitution to the victim for reasonable costs,
24 including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred:

25 (1) for clearing the victim’s credit history or credit rating;

26 (2) for clearing the victim’s record or history related to health information
27 or health care; and

28 (3) in connection with a civil or administrative proceeding to satisfy a debt,
29 lien, judgment, or other obligation of the victim that arose because of the violation.

30 [(j)] (K) A sentence under this section may be imposed separate from and
31 consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act or acts
32 establishing the violation of this section.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 184

1 [(k)] (L) Notwithstanding any other law, the Department of State Police may
2 initiate investigations and enforce this section throughout the State without regard to any
3 limitation otherwise applicable to the Department’s activities in a municipal corporation or
4 other political subdivision.

5 [(l)] (M) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, a law enforcement officer of the
6 Maryland Transportation Authority Police, the Maryland Port Administration Police, the
7 Park Police of the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission, or a
8 municipal corporation or county may investigate violations of this section throughout the
9 State without any limitation as to jurisdiction and to the same extent as a law enforcement
10 officer of the Department of State Police.

11 (2) The authority granted in paragraph (1) of this subsection may be
12 exercised only in accordance with regulations that the Department of State Police adopts.

13 (3) The regulations are not subject to Title 10, Subtitle 1 of the State
14 Government Article.

15 (4) The authority granted in paragraph (1) of this subsection may be
16 exercised only if an act related to the crime was committed in the investigating law
17 enforcement agency’s jurisdiction or if the complaining witness resides in the investigating
18 law enforcement agency’s jurisdiction.

19 [(m)] (N) If action is taken under the authority granted in subsection [(l)] (M) of
20 this section, notification of an investigation:

21 (1) in a municipal corporation, shall be made to the chief of police or
22 designee of the chief of police;

23 (2) in a county that has a county police department, shall be made to the
24 chief of police or designee of the chief of police;

25 (3) in a county without a police department, shall be made to the sheriff or
26 designee of the sheriff;

27 (4) in Baltimore City, shall be made to the Police Commissioner or the
28 Police Commissioner’s designee;

29 (5) on property owned, leased, or operated by or under the control of the
30 Maryland Transportation Authority, the Maryland Aviation Administration, or the
31 Maryland Port Administration, shall be made to the respective chief of police or the chief’s
32 designee; and

33 (6) on property owned, leased, or operated by or under the control of the
34 Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission, to the chief of police of the
35 Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission for the county in which the
36 property is located.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 184 9

1 [(n)] (O) When acting under the authority granted in subsection [(k)] (L) or [(l)]
2 (M) of this section, a law enforcement officer:

3 (1) in addition to any other immunities and exemptions to which the officer
4 may be entitled, has the immunities from liability and exemptions accorded to a law
5 enforcement officer of the Department of State Police; but

6 (2) remains an employee of the officer’s employing agency.

7 [(o)] (P) (1) A State’s Attorney or the Attorney General may investigate and
8 prosecute a violation of this section or a violation of any crime based on the act establishing
9 a violation of this section.

10 (2) If the Attorney General exercises authority under paragraph (1) of this
11 subsection, the Attorney General has all the powers and duties of a State’s Attorney,
12 including the use of a grand jury in any county or Baltimore City, to investigate and
13 prosecute the violation.

14 [(p)] (Q) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the prosecution of a
15 violation of this section or for a violation of any crime based on the act establishing a
16 violation of this section may be commenced in any county in which:

17 (1) an element of the crime occurred; or

18 (2) the victim resides.

19 Article – State Finance and Procurement

20 3.5–801.

21 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (c) “Artificial intelligence” means a machine–based system that:

23 (1) can, for a given set of human–defined objectives, make predictions,
24 recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments;

25 (2) uses machine and human–based inputs to perceive real and virtual
26 environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an
27 automated manner; and

28 (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action.

29 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
30 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9