START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 180 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 180 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Incompetency to Stand Trial Dismissal 
 
 
This bill extends, from 5 years to 10 years, the time after which a court is required to 
dismiss a charge of first-degree murder or first-degree rape against a defendant found 
incompetent to stand trial (IST). The bill specifies that as part of the process of dismissing 
a charge against an IST defendant due to the expiration of statutory time limits (1) the court 
must provide the State’s Attorney and a victim who has filed a specified notification 
request form advance notice of the dismissal and an opportunity to be heard and (2) at any 
time, the State may petition the court for extraordinary cause to extend the time of the 
charge. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $159,700 in FY 2027 for the Office 
of the Public Defender (OPD); future year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. 
General fund expenditures may increase for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
due to extended commitments and related proceedings. The Judiciary and the Office of 
Administrative Hearings can implement the bill with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
159,700 
199,000 
205,200 
211,600 
218,100 
Net Effect 
($159,700) 
($199,000) 
($205,200) 
($211,600) 
($218,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  It is anticipated that local State’s Attorneys’ offices can accommodate any 
increased workload using existing budgeted resources. Local revenues are not materially 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 180/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Dismissal of Charges for a Defendant Found Incompetent to Stand Trial 
 
By statute, a defendant is IST if the defendant is not able to understand the nature or object 
of the proceeding or assist in the defense. 
 
Whether or not the defendant is confined in an MDH facility and unless the State petitions 
the court for extraordinary cause to extend the time, the court must dismiss the charge 
against a defendant found IST (1) after the lesser of the expiration of five years or the 
maximum sentence for the most serious offense charged, if charged with a felony or crime 
of violence or (2) after the lesser of the expiration of three years or the maximum sentence 
for the most serious offense charged, if charged with an offense other than a felony or crime 
of violence. 
 
The court is required to dismiss a charge without prejudice if the court considers that 
resuming the criminal proceeding would be unjust because so much time has passed since 
the defendant was found IST. Before dismissing a charge, the court must provide the 
State’s Attorney and a victim or victim’s representative who has requested notification 
advance notice and an opportunity to be heard. If charges are dismissed, the court must 
notify the victim or representative mentioned above and the Criminal Justice Information 
System. 
 
If charges are dismissed against a defendant who is IST due to mental illness and is deemed 
dangerous, the court may civilly commit the defendant to MDH. If the defendant is 
determined not to be dangerous in the future, the defendant is released into the community. 
If charges are dismissed for a defendant found IST due to an intellectual disability who is 
dangerous, the court may commit the defendant to the Developmental Disabilities 
Administration for 21 days to determine the defendant’s eligibility for services. 
 
Extraordinary Cause 
 
In 2009, the Maryland Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) held that 
the dangerousness and restorability of a defendant adjudged IST are not sufficient for an 
extraordinary cause determination under the State’s incompetency statute. Ray v. State of 
Maryland, 410 Md. 384 (2009). While the State may reindict a defendant after the 
defendant’s charges were dismissed under § 3-107(a) of the Criminal Procedure Article 
without a showing that the defendant has become competent, the State must overcome the 
presumption that the defendant is unrestorable before the defendant is placed in 
incompetency commitment. Otherwise, the circuit court must initiate civil commitment 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 180/ Page 3 
proceedings in accordance with Section 3-106 of the Criminal Procedure Article. 
State v. Ray, 429 Md. 566 (2012). 
 
Crimes of Violence  
 
Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of violence” as 
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, except 
involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; (9) robbery; 
(10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree sexual 
offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of violence, 
except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; (13) child 
abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified circumstances; 
(15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; (17) an attempt to 
commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual conduct with a 
child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, rape, rob, or 
commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
Victim Notification 
 
Under Maryland law, a victim of a crime or delinquent act (or a representative in the event 
the victim is deceased, disabled, or a minor) has a broad range of specific rights during the 
criminal justice process. On first contact with a victim, a law enforcement officer, 
District Court commissioner, or juvenile intake officer must give an identified victim a 
pamphlet that advises the victim of the rights, services, and procedures available in the 
time before and after the filing of a charging document. Also, within 10 days after the filing 
or unsealing of an indictment or information, the prosecuting attorney must provide a 
victim with a pamphlet that describes the rights, services, and procedures available to a 
victim after the indictment or information is filed and a notification request form by which 
a victim may request notice of various proceedings. 
 
Many of the rights afforded a victim of crime depend on a victim completing a notification 
request form or requesting notice by following the Maryland Electronic Courts system 
protocol. 
 
State Expenditures:  Based on existing statute and the classification of and the maximum 
penalties for first-degree murder and first-degree rape, the defendants affected by the bill 
would have their charges dismissed after 10 years instead of 5 years under existing statute. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 180/ Page 4 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
General fund expenditures for MDH increase if the bill increases the amount of time 
defendants spend committed in MDH facilities. The extent of this increase cannot be 
reliably determined at this time and depends on:   
 
 
the number of individuals committed to MDH facilities after being found IST for 
first‑degree murder or first-degree rape; 
 
whether an individual charged with first-degree murder or first-degree rape who is 
found IST and not restored to competency within 5 years will be restored to 
competency in 10 years; 
 
whether an individual charged with first-degree murder or first-degree rape who is 
found IST is also determined to be dangerous; 
 
whether an individual charged with first-degree murder or first-degree rape who is 
found IST and has his/her charges dismissed after the time limit under existing 
statute will still be determined to be dangerous and civilly committed to an MDH 
facility; and 
 
the current length of civil commitments for individuals charged with first‐degree 
murder or first‐degree rape whose charges are dismissed after 5 years. 
 
This analysis assumes that the cost of maintaining an individual in an MDH facility on a 
pending charges basis is equal to the cost of maintaining the same individual on a civil 
commitment basis. 
 
MDH did not respond to multiple requests for information regarding the bill. However, in 
response to identical legislation introduced in 2025, MDH noted that its healthcare system 
operates 1,056 adult psychiatric beds, which are operating at almost full capacity. Because 
extended commitments under the bill may reduce the turnover of beds necessary to 
accommodate the need for psychiatric beds within existing facilities, the bill likely 
exacerbates ongoing capacity issues. In 2025, MDH advised that it spends $1.5 million 
annually on court-imposed fines due to waitlists for admissions to its mental health 
facilities. According to the department, if the bill increases the lengths of stay and impacts 
admissions to facilities, annual fines assessed against the department could increase 
significantly. However, DLS advises that as noted above, the effect of the bill on MDH 
facilities depends on (1) whether individuals affected by the bill who are not restored to 
competency within 5 years under current law are civilly committed to MDH facilities and 
(2) the amount of time that these individuals spend in MDH facilities after dismissal of 
charges. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 180/ Page 5 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $159,736 in fiscal 2027, which assumes a 
90‑day start‐up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one attorney to assist with 
legal representation generated by the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one‑time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and fees for psychiatric experts. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$90,595 
Psychiatric Experts 
60,000 
Operating Expenses 
     9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$159,736 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
OPD advises that the bill extends the time required for representation in applicable cases, 
which results in increased costs for staff and experts. For anyone committed for IST, an 
annual court review is required, which generally requires OPD to engage an independent 
expert evaluator. In addition, MDH is required to provide an updated review report to the 
court and counsel every six months. Often courts set hearings upon receipt of those reports, 
in addition to the annual reviews. Thus, the bill could generate two additional court 
hearings per year per defendant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 90 and HB 195 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 67 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Health; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5