START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 171 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 171 
(Delegates Valentine and Simmons) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Drug Trafficking Crime - Definition 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “drug trafficking crime” under § 5-621 of the Criminal Law 
Article (use of a weapon in a drug trafficking crime) to include a misdemeanor or a 
conspiracy to commit a misdemeanor in violation of § 5-602(b)(1) (possession with intent 
to distribute cannabis) or § 5-603(b) (cultivating or growing cannabis) of the Criminal Law 
Article.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund expenditures for the Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) due to the expanded application of existing 
incarceration penalties, as discussed below. The Judiciary and the Office of the Public 
Defender (OPD) can likely handle any increase in their workloads with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in local expenditures to the extent the bill shifts 
incarcerated individuals from local detention facilities to State correctional facilities. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 5-621 of the Criminal Law Article, “drug trafficking crime” means 
a felony or a conspiracy to commit a felony involving the possession, distribution, 
manufacture, or importation of a controlled dangerous substance, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 171/ Page 2 
Section 5-621 of the Criminal Law Article – Use of a Weapon in a Drug Trafficking Crime 
 
During and in relation to a drug trafficking crime, a person may not (1) possess a firearm 
under sufficient circumstances to constitute a nexus to the drug trafficking crime or (2) use, 
wear, carry, or transport a firearm. Violators are guilty of a felony and, in addition to the 
sentence provided for the drug trafficking crime, are subject to:   
 
 
for a first violation, imprisonment for up to 20 years with a mandatory minimum, 
nonsuspendable sentence of 5 years; and 
 
for each subsequent violation, imprisonment for up to 20 years with a mandatory 
minimum, nonsuspendable sentence of 10 years. 
 
Except for an incarcerated individual at the Patuxent Institution, the entire sentence is 
nonparolable. A sentence imposed for a subsequent violation of § 5-621 must be 
consecutive to and not concurrent with any other sentence imposed by virtue of the 
commission of the drug trafficking crime. 
 
Sections 5-602(b)(1) and 5-603(b) of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Under § 5-602(b)(1), a person may not possess cannabis in a sufficient quantity that 
reasonably indicates under the circumstances an intent to distribute or dispense cannabis. 
However, possession of the personal use amount of cannabis or the civil use amount of 
cannabis without other evidence of an intent to distribute or dispense does not constitute a 
violation of this prohibition. Additionally, this prohibition does not apply to adult sharing 
of the personal use amount of cannabis (generally defined as the transfer of cannabis 
between persons who are at least age 21 without remuneration). 
 
Under § 5-603(b), a person is prohibited from cultivating or growing cannabis or 
manufacturing a cannabis product, or manufacturing, distributing, or possessing equipment 
or other specified items that is adapted to produce cannabis or a cannabis product under 
circumstances that reasonably indicate an intent to use it to produce, sell, or dispense 
cannabis or a cannabis product. 
 
A person who violates § 5-602(b)(1) or § 5-603(b) is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject 
to imprisonment for up to three years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
expanded application of incarceration penalties. The bill is not expected to materially affect 
the workloads of the Judiciary or OPD. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 171/ Page 3 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information for fiscal 2025 on the number of violations (charges) filed 
and guilty dispositions (convictions) in the District Court and circuit courts for offenses 
under § 5-602(b)(1) and § 5-603(b) of the Criminal Law Article. According to the 
Judiciary, there is no way to determine how many of these offenses also involved firearms.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions – Fiscal 2025 
Sections 5-602(b)(1) and 5-603(b) of the Criminal Law Article 
 
 
District Court 
Circuit Courts 
 
Criminal Law Article Offenses 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Section 5-602(b)(1)  
554 
10 
335 
63 
Section 5-603(b)  
17 
0 
12 
1 
 
1 A violation is a charge filed with the court. It is not a conviction, and one person may be associated with multiple 
violations. 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures for DPSCS increase minimally due to more people being 
committed to State correctional facilities for longer periods of time. It is anticipated that 
the number of additional convictions under § 5-621 of the Criminal Law Article resulting 
from the bill is minimal.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,838 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 171/ Page 4 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility.   
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
OPD advises that the bill increases its workload in existing cases and requires one 
additional assistant public defender statewide. The Department of Legislative Services 
advises that while the bill may result in increased effort for OPD in a small number of cases 
where an existing OPD misdemeanor client faces an additional felony charge arising from 
the same alleged conduct, OPD can likely absorb any additional workload with existing 
budgeted resources.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures may decrease minimally due to individuals 
shifting from local detention facilities to State correctional facilities. Counties pay the full 
cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. 
Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately 
$140 to $350 per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1202 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4