START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 156 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 156 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Affiliating With a Party and Voting - Unaffiliated Voters 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes an unaffiliated voter to apply to change the voter’s existing 
voter registration to affiliate with a political party during early voting before a primary 
election. If an election judge at the early voting center determines that the voter resides in 
the county, the voter may vote (and have counted) a provisional ballot for the political 
party. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures are expected to increase by an indeterminate 
amount beginning as early as FY 2026, and in FY 2028 and 2030 (and future years in which 
a primary election occurs), as discussed below. Under one (illustrative) set of assumptions, 
general fund expenditures increase by $66,000 in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures are expected to increase by an indeterminate 
amount beginning as early as FY 2026, and in FY 2028 and 2030 (and future years in which 
a primary election occurs), as discussed below. Under one (illustrative) set of assumptions, 
local government expenditures increase, collectively, by at least $114,000 in FY 2026. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Party affiliation changes can be made at any time that voter registration is 
open. Voter registration is only closed beginning on the twenty-first day preceding an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 156/ Page 2 
election until the eleventh day after the election. There are certain exceptions to the close 
of registration during that time period:  (1) during early voting, an individual may appear 
in person at an early voting center in the individual’s county of residence and apply to 
register to vote or change the voter’s address on an existing voter registration, then 
subsequently vote the appropriate ballot; and (2) on Election Day, an individual may appear 
at a precinct polling place in the individual’s county of residence and apply to register to 
vote, and then vote. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  State and local government expenditures are expected to 
increase as early as fiscal 2026, which reflects the emergency status of the bill, to 
implement the bill in fiscal years in which a primary election occurs; however, the extent 
of additional costs cannot be reliably estimated at this time primarily because it is uncertain 
how many unaffiliated voters choose, under the bill, to change their voter registration to 
affiliate with a political party. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, general fund expenditures increase by $66,000 and 
local government expenditures increase by at least $114,000 in fiscal 2026, if certain 
assumptions are made. This illustrative estimate accounts for costs of additional paper 
ballots and additional provisional ballot election judges (two of the larger costs expected 
to be incurred), as well as costs for voter education and revision of the provisional ballot 
application. The estimate is based on the following assumptions/information: 
 
 
Additional Ballots (State – $17,000; local – $17,000) – Additional ballots are 
ordered (at $0.23 per ballot), to be prepared for up to 5% of unaffiliated registered 
voters who apply to affiliate with a political party pursuant to the bill. Paper ballot 
costs are shared by the State Board of Elections (SBE) and the local boards. 
 
Additional Provisional Judges (State – $10,000; local – $58,000) – An additional 
provisional ballot election judge is needed at a minimum of 25% of early voting 
centers to administer provisional voting for additional voters. Costs of election 
judges are largely borne by the local boards, with the exception of the additional 
$100 paid to returning election judges, of which SBE pays half.  
 
Voter Education and Revision of the Provisional Ballot Application  
(State – $40,000; local – $40,000) – These are estimated costs based on information 
provided by SBE (for similar and past legislation), assumed to be shared costs. 
 
Additional costs, not accounted for in the above illustrative estimate, include costs of 
additional provisional ballot canvassing staff and provisional ballot applications. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 156/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1280 of 2025 and SB 99 and HB 257 of 2024. 
 
Cross File:  SB 132 (Senators Kagan and Rosapepe) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, and St. Mary’s counties; Maryland 
State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3