START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 216 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 216 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Benefits Exploitation 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits a person from committing the crime of benefits exploitation, 
as specified. A violator is guilty of a felony and on conviction subject to a penalty of 
imprisonment for up to 25 years and/or a $15,000 maximum fine.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1,573 in FY 2026 only for the 
Judiciary to implement one-time programming changes. Otherwise, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Benefits Exploitation 
 
A person is prohibited from knowingly recruiting, harboring, transporting, or obtaining an 
individual through deception, coercion, exploitation, isolation, or any other means for the 
purpose of appropriating the individual’s government benefits for personal benefit or to 
benefit another (general prohibition). A person is also prohibited from knowingly 
benefitting financially or by receiving anything of value from participating in this 
prohibited activity. A person may not aid, abet, or conspire with one or more persons to 
violate the general prohibition established under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 216/ Page 2 
A person who violates any of these prohibitions is guilty of a felony punishable by 
imprisonment for up to 25 years and/or a $15,000 maximum fine. Each violation is 
considered a separate offense. A sentence imposed for benefits exploitation may be 
separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the 
act or acts establishing the benefits exploitation violation. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Government benefits” includes (1) Medicare; (2) Medicaid; (3) Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families; (4) Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and 
Children; (5) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; (6) Social Security;  
(7) Social Security Disability; (8) veterans benefits; (9) pension benefits; (10) Temporary 
Disability Assistance Program; and (11) Public Assistance to Adults. 
 
“Coercion” means (1) causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to an individual or 
physically restraining or confining or threatening to physically restrain or confine an 
individual; (2) exposing or disseminating or threatening to expose or disseminate any fact 
or information that would tend to subject an individual to criminal or immigration 
proceedings, hatred, contempt, or ridicule; (3) destroying, concealing, removing, 
confiscating, or possessing any actual or purported passport or other immigration 
document, or any other actual or purported government identification document, of an 
individual; (4) providing a controlled dangerous substance to an individual for the purpose 
of compelling the individual to engage in an action against the individual’s will; (5) causing 
or threatening to cause financial harm to an individual or exerting financial control over a 
disabled or elderly adult; or (6) depriving an individual of medical care. 
 
The bill also contains definitions for “deception,” “exploitation,” and “isolation.” 
 
Current Law: 
 
Exploitation of a Vulnerable Adult – § 8-801 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
A “vulnerable adult” is an adult who lacks the physical or mental capacity to provide for 
the adult’s daily needs. Under the offense of exploitation of a vulnerable adult, a person 
may not knowingly and willfully obtain, by deception, intimidation, or undue influence, 
the property of an individual that the person knows or reasonably should know is at least  
age 68 or is a vulnerable adult with intent to deprive the individual of the individual’s 
property. Penalties for the offense vary based on the value of the property, as listed below. 
A sentence imposed for the offense may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent 
with a sentence for any crime based on the act or acts establishing the violation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 216/ Page 3 
Property Value 
Maximum Penalty 
Less than $1,500 
Misdemeanor – 1 year and/or $500 
$1,500 to less than $25,000 
Felony – 5 years and/or $10,000 
$25,000 to less than $100,000 
Felony – 10 years and/or $15,000 
$100,000 or more 
Felony – 20 years and/or $25,000 
 
In addition to the penalties listed above, violators must restore the property taken or its 
value to the owner or, if the owner is deceased, restore the property or its value to the 
owner’s estate. If a defendant fails to restore fully the property taken or its value as ordered, 
the defendant is disqualified, to the extent of the defendant’s failure to restore the property 
or its value, from inheriting, taking, enjoying, receiving, or otherwise benefiting from the 
estate, insurance proceeds, or property of the victim of the offense, whether by operation 
of law or pursuant to a legal document executed or entered into by the victim before the 
defendant has been convicted. The defendant has the burden of proof with respect to 
establishing that the defendant has fully restored the property taken or its value. 
 
The statutory prohibition on exploitation of a vulnerable adult may not be construed to 
impose criminal liability on a person who, at the request of the victim of the offense, the 
victim’s family, or the court-appointed guardian of the victim, has made a good faith effort 
to assist the victim in the management of or transfer of the victim’s property. 
 
Office of the Attorney General – Enforcement Related to Exploitation of a Vulnerable Adult 
 
Chapter 114 of 2016 generally authorizes the Division of Consumer Protection in the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to bring a civil action for damages against a person 
who violates the State’s prohibition against exploitation of a vulnerable adult on behalf of 
a victim of the offense or, if the victim is deceased, the victim’s estate. Chapter 794 of 2018 
extends this authority to the Securities Commissioner of the Division of Securities in OAG. 
Finally, Chapter 3 of 2021 established the Senior and Vulnerable Adult Asset Recovery 
Unit in OAG with the authority to bring the same types of claims for the purpose of 
protecting seniors and vulnerable adults from financial crimes. The division, 
commissioner, and unit may recover damages for property loss or damage. If the division, 
commissioner, or unit prevails in an action, the costs of the action may be recovered for 
the use of OAG. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill 
requires two additional attorneys to handle felony cases generated by the bill. OPD did not 
provide any data regarding projected workloads to account for this staffing need. The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees that OPD’s workload is significantly 
changed solely by the provisions of the bill. Thus, DLS advises that OPD can likely address 
workloads resulting from the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 216/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 170 and HB 187 of 2025 and HB 892 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 140 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4