START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 237 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 237 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Commercial Law - Earned Wage Access - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits consumer loan lenders, commercial loan lenders, and 
earned wage access providers from soliciting or receiving tips and requires those lenders 
to return any tip collected within seven days after receiving a tip. Additionally, the bill 
requires those lenders to disclose to consumers that they are prohibited from soliciting or 
accepting tips, as specified. The bill subjects earned wage access providers to consumer 
protection and nondiscrimination requirements governing other consumer and commercial 
loans. Lastly, the bill makes conforming changes to reflect the prohibition on lenders from 
soliciting or collecting tips. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Earned Wage Access Providers 
 
The bill subjects earned wage access providers to provisions of State law regulating 
advertising of consumer loans and prohibiting discrimination based on race, color, creed, 
national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, marital status, or age. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 237/ Page 2 
Additionally, the bill includes earned wage access providers in a broad exemption from 
specified penalty provisions in instances where the provider, in good faith, performed or 
did not perform an act based on a written opinion of the Office of Financial Regulation 
(OFR) or the Attorney General, as specified. 
 
Required Disclosures 
 
Earned Wage Access Providers:  The bill requires earned wage access providers to 
prominently disclose that the provider is prohibited by law from soliciting or retaining tips, 
gratuities, or other donations. 
 
Commercial and Consumer Loan Lenders:  The bill requires commercial and consumer 
loan lenders to prominently disclose that the provider is prohibited from accepting a tip 
from a consumer. 
 
Current Law:  The financial services industry in Maryland is regulated by OFR within 
MD Labor and the Office of the Attorney General’s Securities Division. Under the 
direction and authority of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, OFR regulates 
State‑chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in Maryland. These 
include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank 
holding companies, and credit unions, as well as nondepository entities such as money 
transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance companies, installment 
lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, credit services businesses, debt 
management services providers, debt settlement services providers, consumer reporting 
agencies, and collection agencies. 
 
Maryland Consumer Loan Law 
 
The Maryland Consumer Loan Law (MCLL) (Title 12, Subtitle 3 of the Commercial Law 
Article) applies to a loan or advance of money of $25,000 or less for personal, family, or 
household purposes – regardless of whether the loan or advance is (or purports to be) 
another type of product. In addition, a person may not lend $25,000 or less if interest on a 
loan exceeds the amount authorized by Maryland law, the transaction violates the federal 
Military Lending Act, or the person is not licensed (or exempt). Loans made under MCLL 
generally cap interest at 33% with a balance of $2,000 or less and 24% with a balance of 
more than $2,000. 
 
MCLL does not apply to (1) a plan or loan for which a written election has been made 
under other provisions of law relating to interest and usury, secondary mortgage loans, 
revolving credit, and closed end credit transactions; (2) a loan made by an individual who 
makes three or fewer loans per year and is not engaged in the business of making loans; or 
(3) a loan between an employer and an employee. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 237/ Page 3 
A lender who receives a tip that would otherwise create a rate of interest above that allowed 
by State law may not be found in violation of MCLL if the lender returns all of the tip, or 
the portion necessary to reduce the rate of interest to an allowed amount, within  
30 calendar days after receiving the tip. 
 
Earned Wage Access, Definitions  
 
“Earned wage” is defined as salary, wages, compensation, or other income earned (1) on 
an hourly, project-based, piecework, or other basis or (2) through services rendered as an 
independent contractor. 
 
“Earned 
wage 
access” 
means 
“consumer-directed 
earned 
wage 
access” 
or  
“employer-integrated earned wage access.” A provider of earned wage access may not, 
among other things, charge a consumer specified fees, receive interest from a consumer, or 
obtain a consumer’s credit report as a method of qualifying the consumer for earned wage 
access. 
 
Earned Wage Access, Regulations 
 
Chapter 847 of 2025 established a comprehensive regulatory framework for earned wage 
access providers in the State. 
 
Among other things, Chapter 847 subjects earned wage access products to MCLL and other 
related statutory provisions that regulate entities that provide consumer credit. Among 
other provisions, Chapter 847 explicitly treats certain earned wage access products as loans 
and establishes new rules for the acceptance of tips in connection with the provision of 
earned wage access products and other credit under MCLL. 
 
Chapter 847 prohibits consumer lenders from suggesting to consumers that a tip will 
influence (1) the lender’s willingness to provide a loan or (2) the terms of the loan. Earned 
wage access providers must offer a no cost option to a consumer whenever the provider 
offers a consumer the option to receive earned wage access for a fee or solicits an optional 
tip, gratuity, or other donation. Earned wage access providers must disclose to whom a tip 
is allocated and that any tip paid by the consumer does not inure to the direct benefit of any 
specific employee or any other individual. 
 
Regulatory Exemptions for Licensed Providers of Earned Wage Access 
 
A licensed earned wage access provider is exempted from provisions of State law relating 
to lending, credit, or debt including the interest, consumer loan, and revolving and closed 
end credit provisions of the Commercial Law Article (including prohibitions against false 
advertising and discrimination). Furthermore, licensed earned wage access services are not 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 237/ Page 4 
considered money transmission, and such services are not considered to be in violation of 
State law regarding deductions from payroll, salary wages, compensation, or other income 
or the purchase, sale, assignment, or order for unpaid but earned wages. 
 
Background:  MD Labor advises that the provisions of the bill prohibiting the collection 
of tips are necessary to eliminate potentially predatory practices around tipping by some 
earned wage access providers and to increase consumer protection in the State. 
Specifically, MD Labor advises that tips can function like undisclosed finance charges or 
interest and exploit financially vulnerable Marylanders into paying more than they 
otherwise must for earned wage access services. Additionally, MD Labor suggests that the 
provisions surrounding required disclosures bolster consumer protections by keeping 
consumers informed as to the nature of cost and options associated with earned wage access 
services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 94 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 237/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Commercial Law - Earned Wage Access - Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 237 
 
PREPARED BY: Amy Hennen  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 5