START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 251 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 251 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Transfer of Used Vehicles - Repeal of Notarized Bill of Sale 
Requirement 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that a notarized bill of sale be submitted to 
the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), which applies when a person transfers 
ownership of certain used vehicles. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Subject to specified exemptions, the vehicle excise tax is imposed for each 
original and subsequent certificate of title issued in the State for a motor vehicle, a trailer, 
a semitrailer, a moped, a motor scooter, or an off-highway recreational vehicle (OHRV) 
and for specified vehicles in interstate operation that are registered without a certificate of 
title. The tax is applied to the fair market value of the vehicle, which is defined as:   
 
 
for the sale of a new or used vehicle by a licensed dealer, the total purchase price, 
as certified by the dealer; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 251/ Page 2 
 
for a used vehicle that is sold by a person other than a licensed dealer and that has a 
designated model year that is seven years old or older, the greater of the total 
purchase price or $640; 
 
for any other used vehicle sold by a person other than a licensed dealer, generally 
the total purchase price; however, if the total purchase price is more than $500 below 
the retail value of the vehicle (as shown in a national publication of used car values 
adopted for use by MDOT) and is not verified to the satisfaction of MVA through a 
notarized bill of sale, the valuation shown in the national publication of used car 
values; 
 
for a used trailer, a motor scooter, a moped, or an OHRV that is sold by a person 
other than a licensed dealer, the greater of the total purchase price or $320; and 
 
in any other case, the valuation shown in a national publication of used car values 
adopted for use by MDOT. 
 
If applicable, the notarized bill of sale document (provided by MVA) must be signed by 
the buyer and the seller and include a statement explaining why the vehicle was sold at the 
price stated in the bill of sale. 
 
Background:  MVA advises that it is developing an electronic titling process that requires 
the elimination of all paper forms, including the notarized bill of sale form. The purpose of 
the notarized bill of sale is for both parties to attest the purchase price of certain vehicles 
to ensure the appropriate excise tax is assessed. However, MVA is able to independently 
validate the value of a vehicle and confirm the correct excise tax is paid. As a result, the 
need for a notarized bill of sale in these private transactions is no longer needed. MVA 
advises that removing the notarized bill of sale requirement will simplify the transfer 
process. Over the past three fiscal years, the number of private sales requiring a notarized 
bill of sale averaged just under 10,500 per year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 125 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 251/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 251/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Vehicle Laws - Transfer of Used Vehicles - Repeal of Notarized Bill of Sale 
Requirement 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 251 
 
PREPARED BY: Kevin Knight 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
To the extent any small business owns or leases a vehicle and opts for e-titles, they will have 
reduced paperwork management required and a more streamlined titling process for buying or 
selling vehicle assets owned by the small business. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4