START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 228 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Horse Racing - Prohibited Acts - Slaughter of Racehorses for Commercial 
Purposes 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits a person from (1) slaughtering or causing the slaughter of 
a racehorse in the State for certain commercial purposes and (2) purchasing, selling, 
transferring, offering for sale, importing into the State, or transporting a racehorse if the 
person knows or reasonably should know that the racehorse will be slaughtered for certain 
commercial purposes. A person who violates the provisions of the bill is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to specified penalties on conviction. Fine revenue is distributed 
to the horse racing special fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues may increase beginning in FY 2027 depending on the 
number and amount of fines that are imposed and collected in any year. State expenditures 
are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual who violates the provisions of the bill is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to maximum penalties of a $1,000 fine and/or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 228/ Page 2 
one year imprisonment for a first offense. For a second or subsequent offense, maximum 
penalties increase to a $2,000 fine and/or one year imprisonment.  
 
A corporation, partnership, or any other entity that violates the provisions of the bill is 
subject to a fine of up to $2,500 for a first offense and $5,000 for a second or subsequent 
offense. 
 
If the Maryland Racing Commission (MRC) or the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA) finds that a person has violated the provisions of the bill, MRC or MDA may 
revoke or suspend any license issued to the person by MRC or MDA. 
 
MRC, in consultation with MDA, must adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of the 
bill. 
 
The bill may not be construed to prohibit humane euthanasia of a racehorse by a licensed 
veterinarian for reasons unrelated to commercial purposes, including severe injury, 
maiming, or injury that results in no quality of life for the racehorse, as determined by a 
licensed veterinarian. 
 
A racehorse is defined as a horse (1) bred or intended for racing, including a weanling, 
yearling, horse in training, or racehorse breeding stock with a record of having produced 
or sired offspring intended for racing or (2) that has been recorded on the backstretch of a 
track in the State, has had a recorded workout on a track in the State, or has participated in 
a race meeting in the State where pari-mutuel betting is allowed. 
 
Current Law:  The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection Service 
enforces the Federal Meat Inspection Act, which requires federal inspection and regulation 
of meat products prepared for distribution in interstate commerce for use as human food. 
The Maryland Wholesome Meat Act authorizes MDA to inspect establishments engaged 
in slaughtering of livestock or processing livestock carcasses, parts of them, meat, or meat 
food products capable of use as human food solely for intrastate commerce. MDA advises, 
however, that it has not inspected establishments since the early 1990s, when the 
department’s inspection program ended for budgetary reasons and establishments were 
advised to seek federal authorization in order to continue operations. 
 
The Maryland Wholesome Meat Act contains various prohibitions relating to livestock 
carcasses, meat food products, and labeling, including a prohibition against selling, 
donating, transporting, or offering or receiving for sale or transportation in intrastate 
commerce any equine carcass, part of it, or meat or meat food products of any equine, 
unless it is clearly identified to show the kind of animals from which it is derived. The 
prohibitions under the Act are subject to criminal penalties, including, for a first offense, 
imprisonment for up to six months and/or a fine of up to $3,000. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 228/ Page 3 
Section 10-620 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from (1) willfully and 
maliciously interfering with, injuring, destroying, or tampering with an equine used for 
racing or breeding; a competitive exhibition of skill, breed, or stamina; or any other lawful 
activity; (2) willfully starting, instigating, engaging in, or furthering an act that interferes 
with, injures, destroys, or tampers with an equine used for racing or breeding; a competitive 
exhibition of skill, breed, or stamina; or any other lawful activity; or (3) committing an act 
that tends to interfere with, injure, destroy, or tamper with an equine used for racing or 
breeding; a competitive exhibition of skill, breed, or stamina; or any other lawful activity. 
 
A person who violates these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment of up to one year. 
 
Background:  MRC advises that the bill is intended to (1) improve the Maryland racing 
industry’s reputation and integrity with the public regarding animal welfare; (2) support 
the responsible retirement of racehorses; and (3) enhance the humane treatment of 
Maryland racehorses. MRC reports that California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, 
New York, and Texas have similar laws prohibiting the sales of racehorses for such 
commercial purposes. 
 
State Revenues:  Horse racing special fund revenues may increase beginning in 
fiscal 2027 depending on the number and amount of fines imposed and collected in a 
given year, which cannot be reliably estimated at this time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 231 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 228/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Horse Racing - Prohibited Acts - Slaughter of Racehorses for 
Commercial Purposes 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 228 
 
PREPARED BY:  Chris Merz 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4