START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 226 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 226 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Disabilities) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Department of Disabilities - Housing Programs and Affiliated Foundations - 
Establishment 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD) to 
oversee and administer affordable and accessible housing programs. MDOD may establish 
one or more affiliated foundations to work with the Maryland Assistive Technology 
Program (MDTAP), the Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program (ATLP), the 
Office of Disability Employment Advancement and Policy (ODEAP), and affordable and 
accessible housing programs. By September 1 each year, MDOD must report to the 
Governor, the Legislative Policy Committee, and the State Ethics Commission (SEC) on 
(1) the names of the officials and employees serving as a director or an official of an 
affiliated foundation and (2) how policies for operating each affiliated foundation have 
been implemented in the preceding calendar year. Each year, MDOD must hire an 
independent certified public accountant (CPA) to audit an affiliated foundation. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. To the extent that an affiliated foundation is established and 
provides contributions, MDOD special fund revenues and expenditures may increase by 
an indeterminate amount.        
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations of finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDOD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 226/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of an affiliated foundation is to: 
 
 
solicit and accept funds and partner with individuals, corporations, and other entities 
to support innovative projects designed to maintain, expand, and enhance MDTAP, 
ATLP, ODEAP, and affordable and accessible housing programs; and 
 
promote activities that (1) enhance awareness of, access to, and effective use of 
assistive technology (AT), accessible information technology, and environmental 
adaptations that allow individuals with disabilities to participate in employment, 
education, housing, transportation, public safety, recreation, health care, and other 
aspects of daily life; (2) support training, technical assistance, and reasonable 
accommodations that promote the hiring and retention of individuals with 
disabilities in private and public-sector employment; and (3) create opportunities 
for integrated, affordable, and accessible housing for individuals with disabilities to 
live in the communities of their choice.   
 
An affiliated foundation may not be considered an agency or instrumentality of the State 
or a unit of the Executive Branch. A financial obligation or liability of an affiliated 
foundation may not be considered a debt or an obligation of the State or MDOD. 
 
Operating Policies 
 
MDOD must develop policies for operating each affiliated foundation, including the 
affiliated foundation name, and submit each policy to the Attorney General (AG) and SEC 
for review and, if appropriate, specified approval. 
 
The AG must review policies developed by MDOD for form and legal sufficiency and, if 
appropriate, approve the policies for use in governing MDOD’s relationship with the 
affiliated foundation. SEC must review policies developed by MDOD that pertain to 
conflicts of interest and, if appropriate, approve the policies for use in governing an official 
or employee of the department who also serves as a director or an official of the affiliated 
foundation. 
 
Solicitation and Receipt of Contributions 
 
An affiliated foundation may solicit and receive contributions from businesses, 
governmental entities, nonprofit organizations, and individuals interested in the promotion 
of programs and units administered or supported by MDOD. In accordance with the 
authority to receive funds from any public or private source to carry out the powers and 
duties of the department, the Secretary of Disabilities must receive and deposit funds from 
an affiliated foundation into a separate special fund. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 226/ Page 3 
Contributions accepted by MDOD from an affiliated foundation are supplemental to and 
not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for MDOD.  
 
If an affiliated foundation has not been audited within the past year, the affiliated 
foundation may not solicit and receive contributions, and MDOD may not accept 
contributions from the affiliated foundation. 
 
Departmental Officials or Employees and Affiliated Foundations  
 
Notwithstanding specified Maryland Public Ethics Law, an MDOD official or employee 
may become a director or an official of an affiliated foundation. The official or employee 
may not be compensated, directly or indirectly, by the affiliated foundation but may be 
reimbursed for bona fide expenses incurred in the performance of activities undertaken on 
behalf of the affiliated foundation as authorized by MDOD and the board of directors of 
the affiliated foundation.  
 
MDOD must notify SEC in writing whenever the department allows an official or 
employee to serve as a director or an official of an affiliated foundation. Within 30 days 
after receipt of the notice, SEC must notify the department of any objections or concerns 
pertaining to the joint service identified in the notice. On receipt of a notice from SEC, 
MDOD must reexamine the joint service identified in the notice.  
 
Current Law:  MDOD is the principal unit of State government responsible for 
developing, maintaining, revising, and enforcing statewide disability policies and 
standards. The department must oversee and administer constituent services and 
ombudsmen programs, ATLP, the Office of Personal Assistance Services (including the 
Attendant Care Program), Telecommunications Access of Maryland, Telecommunications 
Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information for Disabled Individuals, ODEAP, and 
MDTAP. 
 
The Secretary of Disabilities must review, coordinate, and concur with any application for 
federal aid, waivers, or grants specific to services for individuals with disabilities and 
submitted by or through any unit of State government. Except as otherwise prohibited by 
law, the Secretary may apply for, receive, and use grant-in-aid, funds, or services from the 
federal government or any of its units, or any public or private source made available to 
MDOD for use in carrying out the powers and duties of the Secretary or the department. 
 
Maryland Technology Assistance Program 
 
Chapters 419 and 420 of 2025 codified the federally funded Maryland Technology 
Assistance Program into statute as MDTAP to (1) increase access to AT devices and 
services for individuals with disabilities; (2) support the State’s efforts to improve the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 226/ Page 4 
provision of AT to individuals with disabilities of all ages, including underrepresented 
populations, through comprehensive statewide programs of technology-related assistance; 
(3) ensure statewide access to AT lending libraries that allow individuals with disabilities 
and those supporting individuals with disabilities to learn about, try, and borrow AT 
devices through short-term loans; and (4) implement activities required by federal grants, 
including funding authorized under the federal 21st Century Assistive Technology Act.  
 
Chapters 419 and 420 also established the Assistive Technology Services Fund to receive 
revenue from AT services provided by the program, including AT assessments and 
training, and digital accessibility training, website evaluations, and remediation services. 
The fund may only be used to support the operations of the program, including the purchase 
of AT devices. 
 
Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program 
 
MDTAP operates ATLP to provide eligible individuals with disabilities and their families 
low-interest loans to buy AT equipment to help the individual live, work, and learn more 
independently. An applicant must demonstrate (1) that the loan or subsidy of loan interest 
will be used to buy AT; (2) the ability to repay the loan; (3) creditworthiness; and (4) the 
inability to qualify for a loan from a lending institution without a loan guarantee or interest 
subsidy. 
 
Office of Disability Employment Advancement and Policy 
 
Chapter 1 of 2025 established ODEAP. As it relates to the employment, training, and 
career-readiness of individuals with disabilities, the purpose of ODEAP includes (1) the 
development and implementation of strategies in the State Disabilities Plan; (2) performing 
specified duties necessary to support statewide policies and standards; (3) collecting 
information and data from units of State government; and (4) beginning July 1, 2026, 
implementing the Maryland as a Model Employer Initiative. 
 
The purpose of the initiative must include:  
 
 
promoting the recruitment, hiring, retention, and career advancement of people with 
disabilities across State government;  
 
conducting and coordinating outreach to job seekers with disabilities and State 
government to encourage participation in the initiative;  
 
developing and delivering trainings to State agencies and units addressing best 
practices, resources, and relevant federal and State laws pertaining to the 
employment of people with disabilities;  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 226/ Page 5 
 
assisting State government agencies and units to attract qualified job seekers with 
disabilities to available positions;  
 
promoting access to and acquisition of AT for new State employees with 
disabilities;  
 
evaluating State employment practices and policies and making recommendations 
regarding ways to reduce barriers for job seekers and employees with disabilities;  
 
collecting from each unit of State government, as part of unit plans required to 
implement the State Disabilities Plan, performance goals related to hiring and 
retention efforts for employees with disabilities and any data deemed necessary by 
the Secretary to demonstrate performance outcomes; and  
 
reporting on the initiative’s outcomes. 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law – Public Officials and Employees 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law sets out requirements, prohibitions, and procedures that 
affect State officials in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of government for 
the purpose of maintaining people’s trust in government and protecting against the 
improper influence and appearance of improper influence of government. The Public 
Ethics Law is generally administered by SEC with the Joint Committee on Legislative 
Ethics and the Commission on Judicial Disabilities.  
 
An official or employee generally may not participate in a matter if (1) the official or 
employee or a qualifying relative has an interest in the matter and the official or employee 
knows of the interest or (2) if a business entity with a specified relationship to the official 
or employee is a party to the matter. An official or employee may not be employed by an 
entity that is a party to a contract that binds or purports to bind to the State under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Background:  The bill requires MDOD to oversee and administer affordable and 
accessible housing programs. Currently, MDOD oversees the Affordable Apartments 
Program, which was founded in partnership with the Weinberg Foundation, to provide 
affordable and accessible rental housing options for people with disabilities.  
 
MDOD advises that the creation of affiliated foundations would provide opportunities to 
support programs and units of the department that need additional sources of funding for 
sustainability or expansion, and that are good candidates for future innovative 
public‑private partnerships. MDOD further advises that, while the department will 
continue to directly seek support for the programs specified under the bill, the creation of 
affiliated foundations offers increased opportunities to fundraise, apply for grants 
unavailable to government agencies, and explore innovative partnerships. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 226/ Page 6 
MDOD has determined that the following programs would benefit from a partnership with 
an affiliated foundation: 
 
 
MDTAP is fully funded through federal grants, which have not kept pace with 
program costs, including personnel, and the future of federal funding is unclear. 
Funding insufficiency and uncertainty has limited the program’s ability to expand 
or update AT lending libraries. 
 
ATLP relies on loan repayments and interest for sustainability but is limited in its 
ability to expand. The program has previously received federal grants for additional 
support, but the future of these grants is uncertain. 
 
ODEAP, although recently established, has been approached by philanthropists that 
would prefer not to partner with a governmental entity but are interested in 
supporting the program. 
 
Affordable and accessible housing programs, such as the Affordable Apartments 
Program, would benefit from private partnerships. MDOD advises that partnership 
with the Weinberg Foundation has ended, preventing the program from expanding. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDOD can oversee and administer affordable and accessible housing 
programs using existing budgeted resources.  
 
The bill authorizes MDOD to establish affiliated foundations to work with MDTAP, 
ATLP, ODEAP, and affordable and accessible housing programs. This analysis assumes 
that the bill’s authorization for MDOD to establish one or more affiliated foundations does 
not directly affect State finances, since, under the bill, (1) a foundation may not be 
considered an agency or instrumentality of the State or a unit of the Executive Branch and 
(2) a financial obligation or liability of an affiliated foundation may not be considered a 
debt or an obligation of the State or MDOD. It is assumed that any foundation’s finances 
are maintained separately from MDOD’s, as non-State funds. The department can likely 
maintain contact with the affiliated foundation, including the development of operating 
policies, using existing budgeted resources. However, the bill requires MDOD to hire an 
independent CPA to annually audit each affiliated foundation and submit an associated 
report. To the extent that these funds are not absorbable, general fund expenditures may 
increase by an indeterminate, although likely minimal, amount annually beginning the 
first fiscal year after an affiliated foundation is established.  
 
To the extent that an affiliated foundation is established and contributes funds to MDOD 
for the programs specified under the bill, MDOD special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as the first fiscal year after the 
foundation is established. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 226/ Page 7 
Additional Comments:  Chapter 443 of 2025, among other things, authorized the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to establish one or more affiliated foundations to 
work with the Maryland Park Service, the Maryland Forest Service, the Wildlife and 
Heritage Service, the Office of Outdoor Recreation, and the Natural Resources Police. The 
Act established similar purposes, policies, and requirements for the affiliated foundations 
and DNR as those established under this bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 22 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Disabilities) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Department of 
Disabilities; State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 226/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Disabilities - Housing Programs and Affiliated 
Foundations - Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 226 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Anne Blackfield 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
x__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill will have no impact on small businesses.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8