START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 266 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 266 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information 
Technology) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Department of Information Technology – Information Technology Investment 
Fund – Uses 
    
This departmental bill authorizes revenues that accrue to the Information Technology 
Investment Fund (ITIF) from resource sharing agreements (RSAs) to be used, at the 
Secretary of Information Technology’s discretion, to support State-owned communication 
sites, communications facilities, and telecommunications equipment used in connection 
with RSAs, including program management for these activities. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding the authorized use of RSA revenues from ITIF does not affect 
overall State revenues or expenditures; however, the distribution of funds may be different. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Resource Sharing Agreements  
 
The State’s telecommunications RSA process was initially established by Chapter 87 of 
1996 to allow State agencies to enter into contractual agreements with private companies 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 266/ Page 2 
for the nonexclusive, long-term use of State rights-of-way (land), communications 
infrastructure (telecommunications towers), and real estate (buildings). Generally, RSAs 
permit private companies to install, operate, and maintain communications systems on 
State resources; in exchange, the private companies provide the State with monetary 
compensation, equipment, or in-kind services.  
 
A unit of State government must generally confer with DoIT on any information 
technology (IT) proposal involving resource sharing, the exchange of goods or services, or 
a gift, contribution, or grant of real or personal property. After being notified by an agency, 
DoIT must then determine if the value of resources, services, and/or property to be obtained 
by the State under the terms of the proposal equals or exceeds $100,000.  
 
If so, and DoIT and the agency agree to proceed with the proposal, the proposal must be 
(1) advertised for at least 30 days on eMaryland Marketplace and (2) submitted to the 
Legislative Policy Committee for a 60-day review and comment period during which the 
committee may recommend the proposal be treated as a procurement contract. Following 
the committee’s comment period, the proposal is subject to approval by the Board of Public 
Works. 
 
Information Technology Investment Fund 
 
To centralize State oversight and funding for major Executive Branch IT projects, 
Chapters 467 and 468 of 2002 established a review and approval process for major IT 
development projects and the related Major IT Development Fund. Chapter 497 of 2024 
made various changes to the fund, including renaming it as ITIF. Under Chapter 497, the 
purpose of ITIF is to support both major IT development projects and expedited projects. 
ITIF is managed by DoIT and may be used only for major IT development projects, 
maintenance costs for major IT development projects for a specified time period, expedited 
projects, administrative costs, and costs for specified pilot programs and prototypes.  
 
Among other sources of funding, money received from RSAs generally accrues to ITIF. 
However, money from this source must be used only to support (1) the State-owned and 
‑operated telecommunication and computer network, including program development for 
the network, and (2) the Statewide Public Safety Interoperability Radio System 
(i.e. Maryland First).  
 
Background:  DoIT advises that the bill is needed to allow revenues derived from RSAs 
to be used to and support the communications facilities and IT that are central to 
maintaining those same RSAs. As noted above, money from RSAs generally accrue to 
ITIF, but, under current law, ITIF cannot be used to maintain or develop the infrastructure 
used in RSAs. DoIT further advises that the bill provides flexibility for the reinvestment of 
ITIF funding to more generally support some of the infrastructure critical to statewide IT 
services. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 266/ Page 3 
Generally, RSA revenues account for a very small portion of total ITIF funding. For 
informational purposes only, RSA revenues to ITIF totaled $738,247 in fiscal 2024 (the 
most recent year for which revenue data are available), but spending from ITIF totaled 
$64.3 million in fiscal 2025.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 85 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Information Technology) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Institute for 
Emergency Medical Services Systems; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 266/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Information Technology - Information Technology 
Investment Fund - Uses 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 266 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sara Elalamy - DoIT - Legislative Director  
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Department does not anticipate any additional costs as a result of this proposed 
legislative change. However, the Department does expect an increase in revenues to the 
State Resource Sharing Agreements Program once the change is enacted. Under the 
discretion of the Secretary, the Program may reinvest these revenues to enhance and 
modernize its supporting infrastructure. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4