START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 277 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 277 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Health 
 
 
Insurance – Third Party Administrators – Enforcement 
 
   
This departmental bill authorizes the Insurance Commissioner to impose a civil penalty of 
up to $10,000 for each violation of the entire Insurance Article by a third‑party 
administrator (TPA), instead of only for a violation of the provisions of law that directly 
govern TPAs. Additionally, the bill authorizes the Commissioner to deny a TPA 
registration to an applicant or refuse to renew, suspend, or revoke a TPA registration if the 
applicant or registrant has (1) violated the Insurance Article or any other State law related 
to insurance or (2) knowingly fails to comply with a regulation or order of the 
Commissioner. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of new and existing penalties is not anticipated to have 
a material impact on State revenues. MIA can handle the bill’s requirements using existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MIA and the Insurance Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties 
include, among other things, certifying insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 277/ Page 2 
approving the rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance 
professionals. MIA and the Commissioner have broad authority to enforce the 
requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers and insurance professionals. For 
example, depending on the type of violation and following the administrative processes 
required by Insurance Law and regulations, the Commissioner is authorized to issue orders 
directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain actions, impose administrative 
penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or licenses.     
 
MIA and the Insurance Commissioner regulate and have enforcement authority over TPAs. 
An “administrator” is a person that acts for an insurer or plan sponsor and has (1) control 
over or custody of premiums, contributions, or any other money related to a plan for any 
period of time or (2) discretionary authority over the adjustment, payment, or settlement of 
benefit claims under a plan or over the investment of a plan’s assets.  
 
To act as a TPA, an applicant must register with the Insurance Commissioner and meet 
other specified requirements. The application fee is $250 and the renewal fee is $65 every 
two years. Failure to register as a TPA is subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day. 
A TPA must maintain adequate books and records about each plan it administers. When 
the TPA ceases to administer a plan, it must either (1) give the information to its successor 
or the sponsor or (2) retain the information and provide access to the sponsor for 
three years. 
 
The Commissioner is authorized to deny a TPA registration to an applicant or refuse to 
renew, suspend, or revoke the TPA registration of a registrant of a registrant if the applicant 
or registrant:   
 
 
makes a material misstatement in an application for registration; 
 
fraudulently or deceptively obtains or attempts to obtain a registration for the 
applicant or registrant or for another; 
 
has been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
 
in connection with the administration of a plan or with activities on behalf of a life 
insurer, commits fraud or engages in illegal or dishonest activities; or 
 
violates any of the provisions of law that directly govern TPAs or a related 
regulation. 
 
In addition to any other enforcement action taken by the Commissioner, the Commissioner 
may impose a civil penalty of no more than $10,000 for each violation of the provisions of 
law that directly govern TPAs.  
 
Background:  MIA advises that the bill is necessary to close significant enforcement gaps 
that exist within the regulatory framework for TPAs under current law. Specifically, MIA 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 277/ Page 3 
advises that it cannot currently penalize TPAs for violations of the of the Insurance Article 
outside of the subtitle that directly governs TPAs. For example, MIA advises that under 
current law it would be unable to revoke the registration of a TPA for using a biased 
artificial intelligence system to make claim determinations, even though that practice 
would be considered an unfair trade practice, because such practices are not regulated 
under the TPA subtitle of the Insurance Article.  
 
MIA advises that the bill addresses these enforcement gaps and ensures that the penalties 
in the Insurance Article align with the potential violations that a TPA might commit.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 139 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 277/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Insurance - Third Party Administrators – Enforcement 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 277 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jamie N. Sexton 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4