START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 241

C3 6lr0120
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 133

By: Chair, Economic Matters Committee (By Request – Departmental – Labor)
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Business Occupations and Professions – State Boards and Commissions – Sunset
3 Extensions

4 FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Barbers, the State Board of
5 Cosmetologists, the State Board for Professional Land Surveyors, the State
6 Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and
7 Home Inspectors, and the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers in accordance
8 with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by
9 extending to a certain date the termination provisions relating to the statutory and
10 regulatory authority of the boards and commission; requiring the Maryland
11 Department of Labor to submit certain reports to the Joint Audit and Evaluation
12 Committee on or before a certain date; and generally relating to sunset extensions of
13 State boards and commissions.

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
16 Section 4–201, 5–201, 15–201, 16–201, and 21–201
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
21 Section 4–702, 5–702, 15–702, 16–802, and 21–502
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0241*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 241

1 4–201.

2 There is a State Board of Barbers in the Department.

3 4–702.

4 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
5 Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
6 be of no effect after July 1, [2027] 2032.

7 5–201.

8 There is a State Board of Cosmetologists in the Department.

9 5–702.

10 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
11 Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
12 be of no effect after July 1, [2027] 2032.

13 15–201.

14 There is a State Board for Professional Land Surveyors in the Department.

15 15–702.

16 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
17 Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
18 be of no effect after July 1, [2027] 2032.

19 16–201.

20 There is a State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management
21 Companies, and Home Inspectors in the Department.

22 16–802.

23 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
24 Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
25 be of no effect after July 1, [2026] 2032.

26 21–201.

27 There is a State Board of Individual Tax Preparers in the Department.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 241 3

1 21–502.

2 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
3 Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
4 be of no effect after July 1, [2027] 2032.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, 2030, the
6 Maryland Department of Labor shall submit to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee,
7 in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, a report with information as
8 determined by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee for each of the following entities:

9 (1) the State Board of Barbers;

10 (2) the State Board of Cosmetologists;

11 (3) the State Board for Professional Land Surveyors;

12 (4) the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal
13 Management Companies, and Home Inspectors; and

14 (5) the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers.

15 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
16 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3