START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 283 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 283 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Property Insurance - Settlement of Claims and Notices 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits an insurer, when adjusting and settling certain first party 
claims based on the actual cash value of the property, from treating the expense of labor 
needed to repair, rebuild, or replace the property as having depreciated. Failure to comply 
with the prohibition is considered an unfair claim settlement practice and a violation of the 
Insurance Article, as specified. Additionally, the bill requires insurers to notify an insured 
at least 45 days prior to each renewal of a homeowner’s or renters insurance policy if any 
coverage provided under the expiring policy changes under the renewed policy. The bill 
applies to all policies and contracts issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after 
October 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:   Minimal increase in special fund revenues for The Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2027 only from rate and form filing fees. General fund revenues from 
the premium tax may be affected, as discussed below; however, any such impact, if 
realized, is likely minimal. Enforcement of the bill’s requirements can be handled using 
existing budgeted resources. The bill’s imposition of new and existing penalty provisions 
is not anticipated to have a material impact on State operations or finances.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 283/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
First-party Claim Settlements 
 
The following requirements apply to a claim made under a residential or commercial 
property insurance policy that provides for the adjustment and settlement of a first-party 
claim requiring the repairing, rebuilding, or replacing of damaged or destroyed property 
based on the actual cash value of the property and is issued or renewed on or after 
October 1, 2026.  
 
The measure of the actual cash value recovery in settle of such a claim must be the  
lesser of (1) the amount it would cost the insured to repair, rebuild, or replace the damaged 
or destroyed property, less a reasonable deduction for physical depreciation of the property, 
or (2) the policy limit. The expense of labor necessary to repair, rebuild, or replace the 
damaged or destroyed property, except those labor costs intrinsic to the cost of 
manufactured materials or goods, is not a component of physical depreciation and may not 
be treated by the insurer as having depreciated in value. Labor expenses that an insurer may 
not consider a component of physical depreciation include, among other things, the labor 
rate, any sales tax on the labor, and any other fee or tax that must be paid to obtain the labor 
services. 
 
Failure to comply with these requirements is considered an unfair claim settlement practice 
and a violation of the Insurance Article, as specified. 
 
Notice Requirements for Homeowners and Renters Insurers 
 
An insurer that issues or delivers a homeowner’s insurance policy or renters insurance 
policy in the State must provide the insured, at least 45 days before a policy renewal, a 
written notice using clear and specific language that identifies: 
 
 
any differences between coverage limits under the renewal policy and the expiring 
policy; 
 
any risk that was covered under the expiring policy that is not covered under the 
renewal policy; 
 
the extent to which any coverage of risk is reduced or limited under the renewal 
policy compared to the expiring policy; and 
 
any difference between deductibles specified under the expiring policy and 
deductibles specified under the renewal policy  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 283/ Page 3 
The notice must be separate from the annual summary statement required by current law. 
However, the notice may be delivered electronically if the notice complies with the 
provisions governing the required notice of cancellation or nonrenewal of a policy set out 
in current law. An insurer does not have to provide a notice to the insured if all coverages 
and deductibles of an applicable policy are identical. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Insurance Regulation and Unfair Claim Settlement Practices 
 
Insurance in the State is regulated by MIA, an independent agency headed by the Insurance 
Commissioner, whom the Governor appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
The administration licenses, examines, and audits insurance companies operating in the 
State; reviews rates and policies; collects premium and retaliatory taxes; licenses 
producers; investigates fraud as well as consumer complaints regarding insurance and 
health plan coverage; and educates the public on insurance matters. 
 
The Insurance Article expressly prohibits certain insurer practices and activities as unfair 
claim settlement practices. For example, insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health 
maintenance organizations are prohibited from, among other things, (1) misrepresenting 
pertinent facts or policy provisions that relate to the claim or coverage at issues; (2) refusing 
to pay a claim for an arbitrary or capricious reason based on all available information; and 
(3) failing to act in good faith in settling a first-party claim under a policy of property and 
casualty insurance.  
 
Among other enforcement actions, the Commissioner may impose a penalty of up to $2,500 
for each violation of these prohibitions; however, the Commissioner may impose a penalty 
of up to $125,000 for failure to act in good faith in settling a first-party claim, as specified.  
 
Notices and Statements 
 
State law requires homeowner’s insurers to provide various notices and statements to 
insureds. For example, a homeowner’s insurer must provide the policy holder with an 
annual statement that summarizes the coverages and exclusions under the policy issued by 
the insurer. The statement must, among other things, state whether the coverages under the 
policy provide for replacement cost, actual cash value, or other method of loss payment for 
covered structures and contents. Additionally, homeowner’s insurers must provide, at 
reach renewal, a notice regarding areas of concern including, among others, floods, storm 
loss protective device discounts, deductibles, and claims history. 
 
Background:  According to MIA, for residential or commercial property insurance 
policies that have actual cash value terms for claim settlements, the settlement amount is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 283/ Page 4 
the amount required to repair or replace damaged or destroyed property, minus 
depreciation. MIA advises that they have become aware of insurers in the State applying 
depreciation to the expense of labor needed to repair or replace damaged or destroyed 
property, which significantly shifts the financial burden of necessary repairs to damaged 
or destroyed property onto the policy holder. It is the position of MIA that, unlike physical 
goods, the cost of labor does not wear out or lose value over time. Accordingly, the bill 
ensures this practice can be considered a prohibited unfair claim settlement practice.  
 
Additionally, MIA advises that they have noticed an increase in complaints from policy 
holders in the State alleging insurers have made significant changes to homeowners and 
renters insurance policies without clearly notifying the affected policyholders of those 
changes. MIA advises that the bill’s changes allow policyholders sufficient time to consider 
how to address potential gaps in coverage from modified terms under a renewal policy. 
 
State Revenues:  Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each 
authorized insurance company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company 
that sells, or an individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage 
upon a risk that is located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund. 
 
Currently available information does not indicate what effect the bill may have on 
premiums for residential or commercial property insurance policies; insurers may choose 
to adjust their premiums to account for the provisions of the bill that impact settlements of 
certain claims. The direction and extent of any impact on general fund revenues from the 
premium tax cannot be reliably estimated at this time; however, any such impact, if 
realized, is likely minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 52 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 283/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Property Insurance - Settlement of Claims and Notices 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 283 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jamie N. Sexton 
 
 
 
Associate Commissioner of External Affairs and Policy Initiatives 
 
 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__   
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
____ 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Maryland Insurance Administration does not expect that the proposed bill would have any 
meaningful economic impact on small businesses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5