START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 231 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 231 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Higher Education Commission) 
Appropriations and Government, Labor, 
and Elections 
 
 
Higher Education - Guaranteed Access Grant Program - Applicability 
 
 
This departmental bill delays transfer of Guaranteed Access (GA) Grant award notification 
and issuance responsibility from the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) 
Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) to institutions of higher education until the 
2029-2030 financial aid award year. The bill makes other technical changes to clarify 
references to institutions of higher education. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Higher education expenditures associated with the administration of 
GA Grants at institutions of higher education are delayed until FY 2029. To the extent 
general fund appropriations cover administrative GA Grant administration costs to 
institutions of higher education (in accordance with the legislative intent expressed in 
Chapter 634 of 2023), such general fund expenditures and corresponding higher education 
revenues are likewise delayed until FY 2029. Administrative burdens on MHEC OSFA to 
facilitate the transfer of the program are delayed until FY 2029, however administrative 
burdens to continue running GA Grant award notification and issuance centrally are 
maintained through FY 2029. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures associated with administration of the GA grant at locally 
funded community colleges are similarly delayed until FY 2029. Overall revenues are not 
materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MHEC has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 231/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards Program – Generally 
 
The Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Award (EEA) program consists 
of two types of awards for full-time undergraduate students:  (1) GA Grants that are 
awarded to the neediest students to ensure that 100% of educational costs are paid; and 
(2) Educational Assistance (EA) Grants that are awarded to low- and moderate-income 
students to assist in paying educational costs. 
 
An EEA award may be used at a degree-granting institution of higher education, an eligible 
institution with an associate degree program that provides transfer credit for an accredited 
baccalaureate program, or a hospital diploma school for training registered nurses if the 
curriculum is approved by MHEC. The award may be used for educational expenses as 
defined by MHEC, including tuition and fees and room and board.  
 
An EEA award may be used at a school in another state if (1) there is a specified reciprocal 
agreement and (2) the school meets the same requirements that an in-state school must 
meet. OSFA may not award more than 10% of the funds available for either the GA Grant 
or the EA Grant for use by students attending schools in another state. EEA award 
recipients are required to successfully complete 30 credits at the end of their 
sophomore year to receive their maximum renewal award. A student who fails to meet the 
30‑credit completion requirement but completes between 24 and 29 credits is eligible for a 
prorated renewal award. 
 
Guaranteed Access Grant 
 
The GA Grant is a component of the EEA program that covers 100% of need when 
combined with a federal Pell Grant for the State’s lowest income students. The maximum 
award is capped at the cost of education at the highest cost four-year University System of 
Maryland institution, excluding the University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the 
University of Maryland Global Campus. The maximum award for the 2025-2026 award 
cycle was $18,000. Students that meet all program criteria are guaranteed funding. The 
criteria include (1) enrolling as a full‑time student within in six years of completing  
high school absent extenuating circumstances; (2) being younger than age 26 at the time of 
receiving the first award; (3) having certain family income limits; and (4) satisfying any 
additional criteria set by MHEC.  
 
Although Chapter 634 updates administration of the GA grant as described below, MHEC 
currently identifies first-time applicants who are potentially eligible for the GA Grant 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 231/ Page 3 
based on Free Application for Federal Student Aid or the Maryland State Financial Aid 
Application (for qualified children of undocumented immigrants who are eligible for 
in‑state tuition) – submitted by the March 1 deadline set by MHEC. Previously, students 
were required to determine themselves whether they might be eligible and submit a 
separate GA Grant application to MHEC.  
 
Among other requirements, statute requires that eligible GA Grant applicants have an 
annual family income below a poverty index determined by MHEC. MHEC has set the 
income requirement using the federal poverty level, which accounts for family size, at 
130% for first-time students and 150% for renewal awards. Students meeting all the 
requirements are guaranteed funding. As a result of Chapter 23 of 2022, a GA Grant 
recipient who otherwise becomes ineligible because of a change in family income still 
receives the full award if the recipient remains eligible to receive a federal Pell Grant.  
 
For a GA Grant, each recipient must demonstrate a definite financial need to OSFA or an 
eligible institution of higher education. A verification obtained by an applicant from 
one institution of higher education may be used at any eligible institution for an EEA.  
 
A student in grade 7 or 8 can prequalify for a GA Grant to be used at the time of enrollment 
at an institution of higher education. Chapter 578 of 2021 expanded prequalification 
eligibility to allow a student in grade 9 or 10 who meets other existing eligibility 
requirements to automatically prequalify for an award if the student is (1) eligible for free 
or reduced-priced meals or (2) attends a school that participates in the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Community Eligibility Provision (better known as CEP), and the student is 
identified by direct certification or income information provided by the family of the 
student to the local school system on an alternative form developed by the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE).  
 
To prequalify, a student must agree in writing, as a secondary and undergraduate student, 
to (1) satisfy the attendance policy of the applicable school; (2) provide information 
required by MHEC or the State Board of Education (SBE); (3) apply for admission to an 
institution of higher education during the student’s senior year in high school; (4) complete 
and file, on a timely basis, applications for federal student aid for each year that the student 
plans to enroll in postsecondary education; (5) participate in the Next Generation Scholars 
of Maryland Program until the student graduates from high school and matriculates at an 
institution of higher education; (6) maintain a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale 
or its equivalent; and (7) satisfy any other program requirements set by OSFA, MHEC, 
SBE, or MSDE. Chapter 23 requires that GA Grant eligibility for a student who 
prequalified under the Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program be based on the 
annual family income determination used when the student prequalified.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 231/ Page 4 
In addition, for academic years 2017-2018 and 2018-2019, a student in grade 9 who 
otherwise met the prequalifying conditions for grades 7 and 8 students described above 
could prequalify if the student applied and met the financial need standards established by 
MHEC.  
 
Guaranteed Access Grant – Administration under Chapter 634 of 2023 
 
Effective July 1, 2025, Chapter 634 establishes a new process for making initial and 
renewal GA Grant awards that generally requires institutions of higher education to use 
information from OSFA to notify students of awards and issue awards for the appropriate 
amount in accordance with statute. Additionally, applicants may accept an offer of a 
GA award from an institution of higher education, and institutions of higher education must 
then notify OSFA of the number of individuals receiving a GA Grant award. OSFA must 
reimburse each institution using the list provided by institutions of higher education. OSFA 
must adopt regulations to implement the new award notification processes. Additionally, 
MHEC must work with the Segmental Advisory Council and the Financial Assistance 
Advisory Council in establishing regulations to implement new GA Grant processes, 
including award deadlines and procedures for renewal awards. 
 
Effective July 1, 2025, OSFA remains responsible for verifying applicant eligibility, but 
instead of OSFA directly making GA Grant awards, OSFA must turn over lists of eligible 
students to institutions of higher education for them to notify students of eligibility and 
make awards.  
 
Background:  Prior to the passage of Chapter 634, a DLS Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability report found that, during the 2020-2021 academic year, 
only 32% of 3,558 individuals identified as eligible for a first‑time GA Grant actually 
received one. Another 32% of students received an EA Grant award, and 37% of identified 
students received no EEA whatsoever, potentially because their high school GPA was less 
than the required 2.5 on a 4.0 scale or equivalent or they failed to submit official transcripts 
with their GPA to MHEC, among other reasons. As described above in current law,  
Chapter 634 implemented these recommendations by, among other changes, removing the 
GPA requirements for a GA grant.  
 
The report also recommended decentralizing the EEA program to allow MHEC to better 
focus its limited staff on customer service, technical support, and audits of EEA grants. 
Chapter 634 also implemented those recommendations via the system of notifications and 
awarding described above. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 231/ Page 5 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission  
 
The fiscal and policy note for House Bill 923 of 2023 (Chapter 643) noted that MHEC 
likely faces programming costs for changes to Maryland College Aid Processing System 
in fiscal 2026 associated with the change in GA grant administration. Any such 
programming costs are delayed until fiscal 2029 under the bill. The fiscal and policy notes 
also noted that, although MHEC advised additional staff would be needed to implement 
the change, due to the bill removing awarding responsibility for the Maryland Community 
College Promise Scholarship from OSFA in fiscal 2024 and transferring responsibility for 
award notification in fiscal 2026, OSFA can likely absorb the new administrative structure 
using existing resources. Nevertheless, resources may need to be diverted from other 
projects, particularly because OSFA retains responsibility for determining eligibility for 
GA Grant awards under the decentralized model. Therefore, the net effect of bill’s delay 
in the transfer of award notification is to also delay any reorganization of resources within 
OSFA until fiscal 2029. 
 
Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Costs associated with administration of GA awards by institutions of higher education are 
delayed until fiscal 2029. As noted in the fiscal and policy note for House Bill 923 
(Chapter 634), although exact costs are difficult to estimate, public institutions of higher 
education may incur minimal staffing, equipment/systems, and training costs to provide 
notice for GA Grant awards. Exact costs depend on notification methods used by public 
institutions of higher education and the resources required to annually coordinate with 
OSFA to report information on awards.  
 
Chapter 634 expresses legislative intent that the Governor include funding in the budget 
for financial aid offices at public institutions of higher education to implement changes to 
the Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program; accordingly, potential general fund 
expenditures are delayed until fiscal 2029 for this purpose. As a result, higher education 
revenues at public four-year institutions and Baltimore City Community College (a 
State-funded institution) are delayed until fiscal 2029.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Costs for locally funded public community colleges to notify students 
about and make GA Grant awards are, as with four-year colleges and universities, delayed 
until fiscal 2029. Chapter 634 expresses legislative intent that the Governor include funding 
in the budget for financial aid offices at public institutions of higher education to implement 
changes to the Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program; accordingly, revenues for 
locally funded community colleges to offset, in total or partially, such costs are also 
delayed until 2029. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 231/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  Nonpublic institutions of higher education eligible for the 
Joseph A. Sellinger State aid program face additional, likely minimal, costs to notify 
applicants about and make GA Grant awards, which are likewise delayed until fiscal 2029 
under the bill. Although they are reimbursed for the awards, their financial aid offices are 
not eligible for funding to offset their administrative costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 207 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Higher Education Commission) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 231/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Higher Education - Guaranteed Access Grant Program – Applicability 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 231 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7