START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 285

E5 6lr0094
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 210

By: Chair, Judiciary Committee (By Request – Departmental – Public Safety and
Correctional Services)
Requested: September 16, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Correctional Services – Home Detention – Monitoring and Security

3 FOR the purpose of transferring the monitoring and security of the home detention
4 programs of the Division of Correction to the Warrant Apprehension Unit of the
5 Intelligence and Investigative Division within the Department of Public Safety and
6 Correctional Services; and generally relating to home detention.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Correctional Services
9 Section 3–403, 3–412, and 10–702
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Correctional Services

15 3–403.

16 An incarcerated individual in the program shall be supervised by means of:

17 (1) electronic devices; and

18 (2) direct contact by employees of the WARRANT APPREHENSION UNIT
19 OF THE INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATIVE Division.

20 3–412.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0285*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 285

1 (a) The Commissioner shall [employ correctional] AUTHORIZE employees OF
2 THE WARRANT APPREHENSION UNIT OF THE INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATIVE
3 DIVISION to monitor and provide security for incarcerated individuals in the program.

4 (b) [A correctional] AN employee [designated] OF THE WARRANT
5 APPREHENSION UNIT HAS THE AUTHORITY PROVIDED UNDER § 10–702 OF THIS
6 ARTICLE to monitor incarcerated individuals in the program [may:

7 (1) obtain and execute search warrants as authorized under § 3–415 of this
8 subtitle; and

9 (2) make arrests as authorized under § 2–207 of the Criminal Procedure
10 Article.

11 (c) A correctional employee authorized to make arrests under this section shall:

12 (1) meet the minimum qualifications required by the Maryland Police
13 Training and Standards Commission; and

14 (2) complete satisfactorily the training prescribed by the Maryland Police
15 Training and Standards Commission].

16 10–702.

17 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

18 (2) “Offender” [has the meaning stated in § 6–101 of this article] MEANS:

19 (I) AN INDIVIDUAL ON PROBATION, PAROLE, OR MANDATORY
20 SUPERVISION; OR

21 (II) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL DETAINED OR CONFINED IN
22 A STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

23 (3) “Program” has the meaning stated in § 3–401, § 5–202, OR § 6–101 of
24 this article.

25 (b) There is a Warrant Apprehension Unit in the Intelligence and Investigative
26 Division.

27 (c) The Director of the Intelligence and Investigative Division may authorize
28 employees of the Warrant Apprehension Unit of the Intelligence and Investigative Division
29 to:

30 (1) execute warrants for the retaking of offenders;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 285 3

1 (2) execute warrants for the arrest of [probationers] OFFENDERS for
2 whom a warrant is issued for an alleged violation of [probation] THE PROGRAM;

3 (3) obtain and execute search warrants as authorized under § 3–415 OR §
4 6–109 of this article; and

5 (4) arrest offenders in the program as authorized under § 2–207 of the
6 Criminal Procedure Article.

7 (d) An Intelligence and Investigative Division employee who is authorized to
8 make arrests under this section shall:

9 (1) meet the minimum qualifications required by the Maryland Police
10 Training and Standards Commission; and

11 (2) complete satisfactorily the training prescribed by the Maryland Police
12 Training and Standards Commission.

13 (e) An Intelligence and Investigative Division employee who is authorized to
14 make arrests under this section may also exercise the powers of a peace officer and police
15 officer.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3