START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 284

E4 6lr0004
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 160

By: Chair, Judiciary Committee (By Request – Departmental – State Police)
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Licensed Firearms Dealers – Notification Regarding Potential
3 Compromise of Security Features

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a certain licensed firearms dealer to notify the Secretary of
5 State Police within a certain period of time that certain security features may have
6 been compromised; and generally relating to licensed firearms dealers.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Public Safety
9 Section 5–145.1
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Public Safety

15 5–145.1.

16 (a) A licensed dealer may not conduct business and store firearms at a location
17 unless:

18 (1) the premises on which the licensed dealer operates is equipped with
19 security features, including:

20 (i) equipment capable of filming and recording video footage inside
21 and outside buildings where firearms are stored;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0284*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 284

1 (ii) at least one of the following features designed to prevent
2 unauthorized entry installed on all exterior doors and windows of all buildings where
3 firearms are stored:

4 1. bars;

5 2. security screens;

6 3. commercial grade metal doors;

7 4. grates; or

8 5. other physical barriers approved by the Secretary;

9 (iii) a burglary alarm system that is continually monitored; and

10 (iv) if practicable, physical barriers designed to prevent the use of
11 motor vehicles to breach all buildings where firearms are stored; or

12 (2) outside business hours, the licensed dealer locks all firearms stored on
13 the premises in:

14 (i) a vault;

15 (ii) a safe; or

16 (iii) a room or building that meets the requirements under item (1) of
17 this subsection.

18 (B) (1) A LICENSED DEALER WHO KNOWS OR REASONABLY SHOULD
19 KNOW THAT A BURGLARY, ATTEMPTED BURGLARY, ROBBERY, THEFT, OR ANY OTHER
20 EVENT MAY HAVE COMPROMISED THE SECURITY FEATURES REQUIRED UNDER
21 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOTIFY THE SECRETARY WITHIN 24
22 HOURS AFTER THE DEALER FIRST DISCOVERS THAT THE SECURITY FEATURES MAY
23 HAVE BEEN COMPROMISED.

24 (2) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
25 SUBSECTION IS IN ADDITION TO ANY REPORT MADE TO THE LOCAL LAW
26 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR THE BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS AND
27 EXPLOSIVES.

28 [(b)] (C) (1) This subsection does not apply if the equipment or alarm system
29 became temporarily inoperable at no fault of the licensed dealer.

30 (2) A person who violates this section is subject to a civil penalty not
31 exceeding $1,000 imposed by the Secretary.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 284 3

1 (3) In addition to the penalty imposed under paragraph (2) of this
2 subsection, a person who knowingly and willfully violates this section is subject to:

3 (i) for a second offense, suspension of the person’s dealer’s license;
4 and

5 (ii) for a third or subsequent offense, revocation of the person’s
6 dealer’s license.

7 [(c)] (D) The Secretary shall adopt rules and regulations to determine whether
8 a licensed dealer has met the requirements of subsection (a) of this section.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3