START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 231

F2 6lr0178
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 207

By: Chair, Appropriations Committee (By Request – Departmental – Higher
Education Commission)
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations and Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Guaranteed Access Grant Program – Applicability

3 FOR the purpose of delaying the decentralization of the Guaranteed Access Grant Program
4 until the 2029–2030 financial aid award year; and generally relating to the
5 Guaranteed Access Grant Program.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 18–303.4
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Education

14 18–303.4.

15 (a) THIS SECTION APPLIES BEGINNING WITH THE 2029–2030 FINANCIAL
16 AID AWARD YEAR.

17 (B) (1) Beginning when financial aid information is available each year, but
18 not later than October 1 each year, the Office shall compile and certify lists for the entire
19 State that rank applicants for the Guaranteed Access Grant award by financial need.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0231*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 231

1 (2) Regularly, the Office shall provide to each institution of higher
2 education in the State the lists compiled and certified in accordance with paragraph (1) of
3 this subsection.

4 [(b)] (C) (1) Each institution of higher education shall use the lists provided
5 by the Office in accordance with subsection [(a)] (B) of this section, and the requirements
6 under §§ 18–303 and 18–304 of this subtitle, to determine the applicants who shall be
7 offered a Guaranteed Access Grant award by the institution and the amount of the award.

8 (2) The institution shall send the financial aid award notification to an
9 applicant to offer the applicant a Guaranteed Access Grant award.

10 [(c)] (D) An applicant may accept the offer of a Guaranteed Access Grant award
11 from an institution of higher education.

12 [(d)] (E) (1) Each semester, each institution OF HIGHER EDUCATION shall
13 submit to the Office a list of the students who were awarded a Guaranteed Access Grant
14 for the semester and the amounts awarded.

15 (2) The Office shall reimburse each institution for the Guaranteed Access
16 Grant awards on the list submitted in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection.

17 [(e)] (F) (1) (i) The Office shall compile and certify lists of students who
18 previously received a Guaranteed Access Grant award and are eligible for a renewal award.

19 (ii) The Office shall provide to each institution of higher education
20 in the State the lists compiled and certified in accordance with subparagraph (i) of this
21 paragraph.

22 (2) (i) Each institution of higher education shall use the lists provided
23 by the Office in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, and the requirements
24 under §§ 18–303 and 18–304 of this subtitle, to determine the students who shall be offered
25 a Guaranteed Access Grant renewal award by the institution.

26 (ii) The institution shall send the financial aid award notification to
27 a student to offer the student a Guaranteed Access Grant renewal award.

28 (3) The Office shall reimburse each institution OF HIGHER EDUCATION
29 for the Guaranteed Access Grant renewal awards made in accordance with paragraph (1)
30 of this subsection.

31 [(f)] (G) The Office shall adopt regulations to implement this section.

32 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
33 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2