START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 216

E1 6lr0930
HB 187/25 – JUD (PRE–FILED) CF SB 140

By: Delegates Kaufman, Fair, Feldmark, Pena–Melnyk, and Tomlinson
Requested: September 23, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Law – Benefits Exploitation

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from knowingly recruiting, harboring,
4 transporting, or obtaining an individual for the purpose of appropriating the
5 government benefits of an individual for the benefit of the person or another by
6 certain means; prohibiting a person from knowingly benefitting in a certain manner
7 from participation in a venture that violates a certain provision of this Act;
8 prohibiting a person from aiding, abetting, or conspiring with one or more persons to
9 violate a certain provision of this Act; and generally relating to benefits exploitation.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Criminal Law
12 Section 8–524
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Criminal Law

18 8–524.

19 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (2) “COERCION” MEANS:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0216*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 216

1 (I) 1. CAUSING OR THREATENING TO CAUSE BODILY HARM
2 TO AN INDIVIDUAL; OR

3 2. PHYSICALLY RESTRAINING OR CONFINING OR
4 THREATENING TO PHYSICALLY RESTRAIN OR CONFINE AN INDIVIDUAL;

5 (II) EXPOSING OR DISSEMINATING OR THREATENING TO
6 EXPOSE OR DISSEMINATE ANY FACT OR INFORMATION THAT WOULD TEND TO
7 SUBJECT AN INDIVIDUAL TO CRIMINAL OR IMMIGRATION PROCEEDINGS, HATRED,
8 CONTEMPT, OR RIDICULE;

9 (III) DESTROYING, CONCEALING, REMOVING, CONFISCATING, OR
10 POSSESSING ANY ACTUAL OR PURPORTED PASSPORT OR OTHER IMMIGRATION
11 DOCUMENT, OR ANY OTHER ACTUAL OR PURPORTED GOVERNMENT IDENTIFICATION
12 DOCUMENT, OF AN INDIVIDUAL;

13 (IV) PROVIDING A CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE TO AN
14 INDIVIDUAL FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPELLING THE INDIVIDUAL TO ENGAGE IN AN
15 ACTION AGAINST THE INDIVIDUAL’S WILL;

16 (V) CAUSING OR THREATENING TO CAUSE FINANCIAL HARM TO
17 AN INDIVIDUAL OR EXERTING FINANCIAL CONTROL OVER A DISABLED OR ELDERLY
18 ADULT; OR

19 (VI) DEPRIVING AN INDIVIDUAL OF MEDICAL CARE.

20 (3) “CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE” HAS THE MEANING
21 STATED IN § 5–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

22 (4) “DECEPTION” MEANS:

23 (I) CREATING OR CONFIRMING ANOTHER PERSON’S
24 IMPRESSION OF AN EXISTING FACT OR PAST EVENT THAT IS FALSE AND THAT THE
25 ACCUSED KNOWS OR BELIEVES TO BE FALSE; OR

26 (II) PROMISING BENEFITS OR THE PERFORMANCE OF SERVICES
27 THAT THE ACCUSED DOES NOT INTEND TO DELIVER OR PERFORM OR KNOWS WILL
28 NOT BE DELIVERED OR PERFORMED.

29 (5) “EXPLOITATION” MEANS ILLEGALLY OR IMPROPERLY USING AN
30 INDIVIDUAL OR AN INDIVIDUAL’S GOVERNMENT BENEFITS THROUGH UNDUE
31 INFLUENCE, HARASSMENT, DURESS, FALSE REPRESENTATION, FALSE PRETENSE,
32 OR OTHER SIMILAR MEANS FOR PERSONAL PROFIT OR ADVANTAGE OR FOR THE
33 PROFIT OR ADVANTAGE OF ANOTHER.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 216 3

1 (6) “GOVERNMENT BENEFITS” INCLUDES:

2 (I) MEDICARE BENEFITS;

3 (II) MEDICAID BENEFITS;

4 (III) TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES (TANF)
5 BENEFITS;

6 (IV) SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION PROGRAM FOR
7 WOMEN, INFANTS, AND CHILDREN (WIC) BENEFITS;

8 (V) SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
9 (SNAP) BENEFITS;

10 (VI) SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS;

11 (VII) SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY (SSDI) BENEFITS;

12 (VIII) VETERANS BENEFITS;

13 (IX) PENSION BENEFITS;

14 (X) TEMPORARY DISABILITY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (TDAP)
15 BENEFITS; AND

16 (XI) PUBLIC ASSISTANCE TO ADULTS (PAA) BENEFITS.

17 (7) “ISOLATION” MEANS PREVENTING AN INDIVIDUAL FROM HAVING
18 CONTACT WITH FRIENDS OR FAMILY, A WELFARE AGENCY, LAW ENFORCEMENT
19 OFFICERS, HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, OR OTHER INDIVIDUALS OR ENTITIES
20 WITHOUT THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE INDIVIDUAL OR AGAINST THE INDIVIDUAL’S
21 WISHES.

22 (B) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT, THROUGH DECEPTION, COERCION,
23 EXPLOITATION, ISOLATION, OR ANY OTHER MEANS, KNOWINGLY RECRUIT, HARBOR,
24 TRANSPORT, OR OBTAIN AN INDIVIDUAL FOR THE PURPOSE OF APPROPRIATING THE
25 GOVERNMENT BENEFITS OF AN INDIVIDUAL FOR PERSONAL BENEFIT OR TO
26 BENEFIT ANOTHER.

27 (2) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY BENEFIT FINANCIALLY OR BY
28 RECEIVING ANYTHING OF VALUE FROM PARTICIPATION IN A VENTURE THAT
29 VIOLATES PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 216

1 (3) A PERSON MAY NOT AID, ABET, OR CONSPIRE WITH ONE OR MORE
2 PERSONS TO VIOLATE PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

3 (C) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS GUILTY
4 OF A FELONY AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING
5 25 YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $15,000 OR BOTH.

6 (D) (1) EACH VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSIDERED A
7 SEPARATE OFFENSE.

8 (2) A SENTENCE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE SEPARATE
9 FROM AND CONSECUTIVE TO OR CONCURRENT WITH A SENTENCE FOR ANY CRIME
10 BASED ON THE ACT ESTABLISHING THE VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
12 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4