START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 217

P1 6lr1351
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 229

By: Delegates Stein, Guyton, Forbes, and Ruth
Requested: October 27, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Provisions – Commemorative Month – Maryland Native Plant Month

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to annually proclaim a certain month as
4 Maryland Native Plant Month; requiring the proclamation to urge educational and
5 environmental organizations and businesses to observe Maryland Native Plant
6 Month properly; and generally relating to Maryland Native Plant Month.

7 BY renumbering
8 Article – General Provisions
9 Section 7–504 through 7–507
10 to be Section 7–505 through 7–508, respectively
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Agriculture
15 Section 10–401(a) and (c)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – General Provisions
20 Section 7–504
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That Section(s) 7–504 through 7–507 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code
25 of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–505 through 7–508, respectively.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0217*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 217

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
2 as follows:

3 Article – Agriculture

4 10–401.

5 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (c) (1) “Native plant” means a plant that occurs naturally in the State and
7 surrounding region, ecosystem, and habitat, without direct or indirect human actions.

8 (2) “Native plant” includes a plant that:

9 (i) Was present before colonial settlement; or

10 (ii) Is listed as native to Maryland on the Maryland Plant Atlas
11 website.

12 Article – General Provisions

13 7–504.

14 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “NATIVE PLANT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
15 10–401 OF THE AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

16 (B) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF MAY AS
17 MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT MONTH IN RECOGNITION OF THE BENEFITS THAT
18 NATIVE PLANTS HAVE ON MARYLAND’S NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.

19 (C) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL URGE EDUCATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
20 ORGANIZATIONS AND BUSINESSES TO OBSERVE MARYLAND NATIVE PLANT MONTH
21 PROPERLY WITH APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS, EVENTS, AND ACTIVITIES.

22 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2