START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 271

P2 6lr0286
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0285

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – General Services)
Requested: September 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Procurement – Streamlining Contract Modifications

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the approval of certain contract modifications to State
4 contracts under certain circumstances; altering the definition of “contract
5 modification” for certain State procurements; requiring a procurement officer to
6 document certain contract modifications; and generally relating to State
7 procurement.

8 BY renumbering
9 Article – State Finance and Procurement
10 Section 11–101(h) through (aa)
11 to be Section 11–101(i) through (bb), respectively
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – State Finance and Procurement
16 Section 11–101(a)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – State Finance and Procurement
21 Section 11–101(h) and 15–112.1
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
25 Article – State Finance and Procurement

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0271*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 271

1 Section 13–201
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

4 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
5 That Section(s) 11–101(h) through (aa) of Article – State Finance and Procurement of the
6 Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 11–101(i) through (bb),
7 respectively.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
9 as follows:

10 Article – State Finance and Procurement

11 11–101.

12 (a) In this Division II the following words have the meanings indicated unless:

13 (1) the context clearly requires a different meaning; or

14 (2) a different definition is provided for a particular title or provision.

15 (H) “CONTRACT MODIFICATION” MEANS A WRITTEN ALTERATION THAT
16 AFFECTS SPECIFICATIONS, DELIVERY POINT, DATE OF DELIVERY, PERIOD OF
17 PERFORMANCE, PRICE, QUANTITY, OR OTHER PROVISIONS OF A PROCUREMENT
18 CONTRACT AND IS ACCOMPLISHED:

19 (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH A CONTRACT PROVISION; OR

20 (2) BY MUTUAL ACTION OF THE PARTIES TO AN EXISTING
21 PROCUREMENT CONTRACT.

22 13–201.

23 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

24 (b) “Change order” means a written order that:

25 (1) is signed by the procurement officer; and

26 (2) directs the contractor to make changes that the procurement contract
27 authorizes the procurement officer to order without the consent of the contractor.

28 (c) “Contract modification” [means a written alteration that:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 271 3

1 (1) affects specifications, delivery point, date of delivery, period of
2 performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of a procurement contract; and

3 (2) is accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the procurement
4 contract] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 11–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

5 (d) “Cost–reimbursement contract” means a procurement contract under which
6 the State reimburses a contractor for fees and other costs that are:

7 (1) recognized as allowable and allocable under the regulations of the
8 Board on price and cost principles; and

9 (2) within a stated ceiling.

10 15–112.1.

11 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “CONTRACT MODIFICATION” HAS THE MEANING
12 STATED IN § 11–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

13 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO ALL STATE PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS.

14 (C) A PROCUREMENT OFFICER MAY APPROVE A CONTRACT MODIFICATION
15 IF:

16 (1) THE CONTRACT MODIFICATION DOES NOT MATERIALLY CHANGE
17 THE SCOPE OF WORK; AND

18 (2) THE CONTRACT MODIFICATION DOES NOT INCREASE THE VALUE
19 OF THE CONTRACT BY AN AMOUNT THAT EXCEEDS THE SMALL PROCUREMENT
20 AMOUNTS SPECIFIED IN § 13–109 OF THIS ARTICLE.

21 (D) THE HEAD OF A PRIMARY PROCUREMENT UNIT, THE CHIEF
22 PROCUREMENT OFFICER, OR THE HEAD OF A PRIMARY PROCUREMENT UNIT’S
23 DESIGNEE OR THE CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER’S DESIGNEE MAY APPROVE A
24 CONTRACT MODIFICATION IF:

25 (1) THE CONTRACT MODIFICATION DOES NOT MATERIALLY CHANGE
26 THE SCOPE OF WORK; AND

27 (2) THE CONTRACT MODIFICATION DOES NOT INCREASE THE TOTAL
28 VALUE OF THE CONTRACT BY MORE THAN FIVE TIMES THE SMALL PROCUREMENT
29 AMOUNTS SPECIFIED IN § 13–109 OF THIS ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 271

1 (E) A PROCUREMENT OFFICER SHALL DOCUMENT ANY CONTRACT
2 MODIFICATION IN THE PROCUREMENT FILE.

3 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4