START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 249

R5 6lr0146
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 173

By: Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Transportation)
Requested: September 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Automated Enforcement – Reciprocal Agreements,
3 Arrangements, and Declarations

4 FOR the purpose of altering the policy of the State regarding reciprocal vehicle registration
5 agreements, arrangements, and declarations; authorizing the Motor Vehicle
6 Administrator to enter into reciprocal agreements, arrangements, or declarations to
7 provide for reciprocal enforcement of certain automated enforcement violations; and
8 generally relating to automated enforcement of vehicle laws.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Transportation
11 Section 12–402
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Transportation
16 Section 12–411.1
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Transportation

22 12–402.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0249*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 249

1 It is the policy of this State to promote and encourage the fullest possible use of its
2 highway system by authorizing vehicle reciprocal or proportional registration agreements,
3 arrangements, and declarations with other jurisdictions as to vehicles registered in this
4 State and in those other jurisdictions, thus contributing to the SAFETY AND economic and
5 social development and growth of this State.

6 12–411.1.

7 (A) THE ADMINISTRATOR MAY MAKE AN AGREEMENT, AN ARRANGEMENT,
8 OR A DECLARATION WITH THE AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF ANY OTHER
9 JURISDICTION TO PROVIDE FOR RECIPROCAL ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS
10 RECORDED BY TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEMS AND SPEED
11 MONITORING SYSTEMS BETWEEN THIS STATE AND THE OTHER JURISDICTION.

12 (B) AN AGREEMENT, AN ARRANGEMENT, OR A DECLARATION MADE UNDER
13 THIS SECTION MAY AUTHORIZE THE ADMINISTRATION TO REFUSE TO REGISTER OR
14 REREGISTER A MOTOR VEHICLE.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
16 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2