START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 244 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Natural Resources – Vessel Transfers – Transfer–on–Death Beneficiary 
Designation 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes an individual who is the sole owner of a vessel to 
designate a beneficiary to take ownership of the vessel on the death of the owner outside 
of estate administration. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues may increase, beginning in FY 2027, potentially 
significantly, as discussed below (under one scenario, special fund revenues increase by 
$265,540 in FY 2027). General fund revenues may decrease each year, potentially only 
minimally, beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Transfer-on-death Beneficiary Designation 
 
An individual who is the sole owner of a vessel may apply to DNR to designate a 
beneficiary to take ownership of the vessel on the death of the owner. The designation of a 
beneficiary may be shown by the words “transfer‑on‑death” (TOD) after the name of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 244/ Page 2 
registered owner on a certificate of title. The application for the certificate of title must 
include the name and mailing address of the beneficiary. DNR is authorized to charge a 
fee, not to exceed its costs, for issuing the certificate of title. Designation of a beneficiary 
does not affect the ownership of the vessel until the owner dies. 
 
The owner of a vessel may cancel or change the designation of a beneficiary at any time 
without the consent of the beneficiary by applying to DNR. The designation of a 
beneficiary is not required to be supported by consideration, and the certificate of title of 
the vessel for which the designation is made is not required to be delivered to the 
beneficiary in order for the designation to be effective. 
 
On the death of the owner, ownership of the vessel passes to the beneficiary if the 
beneficiary survives the owner. If a designated beneficiary does not survive the owner, the 
vessel is part of the deceased owner’s estate. 
 
A surviving designated beneficiary must apply to DNR for a new certificate of title for the 
vessel. The application must include (1) the original certificate of title designating the 
beneficiary; (2) a death certificate for the deceased owner; (3) proof of the identity of the 
beneficiary; and (4) any applicable taxes or fees. The bill does not limit the rights of 
creditors of vessel owners against beneficiaries and other transferees under Maryland law. 
 
DNR is authorized to adopt regulations to carry out these provisions. 
 
Vessel Definition 
 
“Vessel” means a vessel, as the term is defined under the vessel excise tax and certificate 
of title fee provisions of the Natural Resources Article (§ 8-716). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Motor Vehicles – Transfer‑on‑death Beneficiary Designation  
 
Under current law, an individual who is the sole owner of a motor vehicle may apply to the 
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to designate a beneficiary to take ownership of the 
motor vehicle on the death of the owner. The provisions of the bill (applicable to  
vessels – see Bill Summary) are substantively identical to the provisions in § 13-115 of the 
Transportation Article that allow an individual who is the sole owner of a motor vehicle to 
designate a TOD beneficiary. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 244/ Page 3 
Certificate of Title – Fees 
 
DNR charges a $20 fee to issue a certificate of title, a transfer of title, or a duplicate or 
corrected certificate of title. 
 
Property of a Deceased Person 
 
Under the Estates and Trusts Article, all property of a decedent (deceased person) is subject 
to the estates of decedents law, and upon the person’s death must pass directly to the 
personal representative (a fiduciary who settles and distributes the estate of the decedent in 
accordance with the terms of any will and the estates of decedents law) for administration 
and distribution. “Property” is all real and personal property of the decedent and any right 
or interest in the property, which does not pass, at the time of the decedent’s death, to 
another person by the terms of the instrument under which it is held, or by operation of 
law. 
 
Background:  DNR indicates that it does not have authority (that MVA has with respect 
to motor vehicles) to allow an individual vessel owner to designate a beneficiary on the 
certificate of title to take ownership when the vessel owner dies. Allowing an individual 
owner of a vessel to designate a TOD beneficiary outside of estate administration 
streamlines DNR’s administrative process to transfer title at the death of the owner, and 
simplifies acquiring title to the vessel by the beneficiary. 
 
State Revenues:   
 
State Boat Act Fund 
 
Special fund (State Boat Act Fund) revenues may increase, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the 
extent that individuals who are sole owners of vessels apply for a new certificate of title in 
order to designate a TOD beneficiary under the bill. DNR indicates that there are currently 
approximately 132,770 vessels with sole ownership, and an individual who is a sole owner 
who applies for a new certificate of title in order to designate a TOD beneficiary will go 
through the current replacement or corrected title application process and be charged the 
applicable $20 fee. The number of such individuals that will apply for a new certificate of 
title in order to add a TOD beneficiary designation cannot be reliably estimated; however, 
for illustrative purposes only, if 10% of the owners of the 132,770 vessels with sole 
ownership apply for a new certificate of title as result of the bill in fiscal 2027, special fund 
revenues increase by $265,540. 
 
DNR advises that adding a TOD beneficiary designation as part of an application for 
issuance of a certificate of title for other reasons (after a purchase, for example) will not 
add any cost to the $20 fee charged for the title. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 244/ Page 4 
General Fund 
 
General fund revenues may decrease each year, beginning in fiscal 2027, due to reduced 
probate fee and inheritance tax revenues collected by the registers of wills, which oversee 
administration of decedents’ estates. Vessels transferred under the bill’s TOD provisions 
are transferred outside of the probate estate, removing property from the probate estate, 
and probate fees are collected by the registers of wills based on the value of the probate 
estate. The transfers are still subject to inheritance tax if the beneficiary is a taxable 
individual, but if the decedent has no other probate assets, the transfer may not be reported, 
and the tax may not be collected. The extent of any decrease in general fund revenues 
cannot be reliably estimated but may only be minimal, in part because the transfer of a 
vessel upon the owner’s death may, in many cases, be to a person exempt from the 
inheritance tax (e.g., spouse, child, other lineal descendant, or other specified family 
members – see § 7-203 of the Tax-General Article). 
 
Registers of wills’ salaries and office expenses are paid from fees and inheritance tax 
revenues collected by the registers, with the remainder of the revenues deposited in the 
State general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 1011 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 214 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Natural Resources; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 244/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Natural Resources - Vessel Transfers - Transfer-on-Death Beneficiary 
Designation 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 244 
 
PREPARED BY: Lydia McPherson | lydia.mcpherson1@maryland.gov 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
Minimal impact expected. Watermen looking to pass down their business to family 
members or a close partner/friend may find this new streamlined process to be beneficial. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5