START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 222 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
 
 
Educational Institutions - Opioid Overdose-Reversing Medications - Policy 
Requirements (Naloxone Access Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Education to update its program of drug addiction and 
prevention education to include instruction related to the mitigating effects of naloxone or 
other opioid overdose-reversing medications. Similarly, certain institutions of higher 
education must expand heroin and opioid addiction trainings to include information related 
to the mitigating effects of naloxone or other opioid overdose-reversing medications. Each 
local board of education and certain institutions of higher education must also expand 
authorization to use naloxone, or an opioid-overdose reversing medication and expand 
exemptions from liability for individuals who do so in good faith to include any individual 
who responds to the overdose emergency of a student, staff member, or any other 
individual lawfully present. Both local boards and institutions of higher education must 
update existing policies to authorize the possession of naloxone or other opioid 
overdose‑reversing medications. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State institutions of higher education can update policies as specified with 
existing budgeted resources. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can 
update its program of drug addiction and prevention education in public schools as 
specified with existing budgeted resources. The Maryland Department of Health’s 
Prevention 
and 
Health 
Promotion 
Administration 
can 
support 
MSDE 
in 
developing/updating guidance as needed with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local boards of education can likely update policies and curricula as 
specified with existing budgeted resources. Similarly, local community colleges can update 
policies as specified with existing budgeted resources. Local revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 222/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill makes technical clarifications to specify that 
(1) policies and reports must relate to naloxone or other opioid overdose-reversing 
medications and (2) institutions of higher education must obtain and store at the institution 
naloxone or other opioid overdose-reversing medication to be used in an emergency 
situation. The bill makes further technical changes to remove outdated language referring 
to previously appropriated funding and prior reports MSDE and the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC) were required to make to the General Assembly. 
 
Public Schools – Program of Drug Addiction Prevention and Education 
 
Chapters 573 and 574 of 2017, the Heroin and Opioid Education and Community Action 
Act (Start Talking Maryland Act) require the State Board of Education to implement a 
program of drug addiction and prevention education in schools that includes instruction 
related to heroin and opioid addiction and prevention, including information relating to the 
lethal effect of fentanyl. This instruction must be delivered in grade bands as follows:   
(1) third grade through fifth grade; (2) sixth grade through eighth grade; and (3) ninth grade 
through twelfth grade. The instruction must be delivered as a stand-alone unit in the 
program. 
 
Under the bill, the program of drug addiction and prevention education in schools must 
include instruction related to the mitigating effects of naloxone or other opioid 
overdose-reversing medications. 
 
Public Schools – Authority to Administer and Possess Overdose-reversing Medication 
 
Under Chapters 573 and 574, each local board of education, in accordance with 
school health guidelines and State laws and regulations, must authorize the school nurse, 
school health services personnel, and other school personnel to administer naloxone or 
another overdose-reversing medication to a student or other person on school property who 
is reasonably believed to be experiencing an opioid overdose. The policy must include  
(1) a provision requiring all public schools to obtain and store naloxone or another 
overdose-reversing medication and (2) a requirement that each public school develop and 
implement a method for notifying parents or guardians of the policy. Current law exempts 
a school nurse, other school health services personnel who are licensed or certified under 
the Health Occupations Article, and other school personnel who respond in good faith to 
an overdose emergency from personal liability for any act or omission in the course of 
responding to the emergency, except for willful or grossly negligent acts. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 222/ Page 3 
The bill expands authorization to administer naloxone or other opioid overdose-reversing 
medication to include any individual acting in good faith and exempts any individual who 
responds in good faith to the overdose emergency of a student, school staff member, or any 
other individual lawfully present at a school from liability. Additionally, the bill requires 
each local board of education’s policy to include authorization for a student, a member of 
the school’s staff, or any lawfully present individual at the school or a school-sponsored 
event or activity to possess naloxone or other opioid overdose‑reversing medication. 
 
Current law requires that, by October 1 of each year, each public school must submit 
specified reports to MSDE on each incident at the school that required the use of naloxone 
or another overdose-reversing medication on a form developed and disseminated by MSDE. 
 
The bill clarifies that the reports must include information on the use of naloxone or other 
opioid overdose-reversing medication. 
 
Comprehensive Health Education Framework 
 
MSDE advises that its Comprehensive Health Education Standards and Frameworks 
Validation Committee has adopted recommendations for updates to the State’s health 
education framework that include instruction on opioid reversal methods for high school 
students. The recommendations are slated to go before the State Board of Education for 
adoption on February 24, 2026.  
 
Institutions of Higher Education – Policy on Heroin and Opioid Addiction and Prevention 
and Possession of Naloxone or Other Opioid Overdose-reversing Medication 
 
Under Chapters 573 and 574, each institution of higher education that receives State 
funding must establish a policy on heroin and opioid addiction and prevention that requires 
(1) each institution to require incoming full-time students to participate in in‑person 
awareness training, unless in-person training is impracticable, in which case such training 
must be conducted electronically; (2) each institution to provide incoming part-time 
students with educational resources on heroin and opioid addiction and prevention; 
(3) each institution to obtain and store naloxone or another overdose-reversing medication; 
and (4) training for campus police or other designated personnel on symptom recognition, 
medication 
administration 
procedures, 
and 
follow‑up 
emergency 
procedures. 
Requirements relating to awareness training for incoming full-time students and obtaining 
and storing naloxone or another overdose-reversing medication do not apply to (1) the 
University of Maryland Global Campus; (2) the University of Maryland Center for 
Environmental Science; or (3) an off-campus nonresidential location of an institution of 
higher education. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 222/ Page 4 
Under the bill, any awareness training must include information on the mitigating effects 
of naloxone or other opioid overdose-reversing medication. Further, any policies 
developed must also include authorization for a student, member of the institution’s staff, 
or any lawfully present individual at the institution to possess naloxone or other opioid 
overdose‑reversing medication. 
 
Current law exempts campus police and other designated personnel who have been trained 
and who respond in good faith from personal liability for any act or omission in the course 
of responding to a student’s overdose emergency, except for willful or grossly negligent 
acts. 
 
Under the bill, any individual who responds in good faith to the overdose emergency of a 
student, staff member, or any other individual lawfully present is exempt from liability. 
Current law requires each institution of higher education to submit a report by October 1 
of each year on each incident that required the use of naloxone or another 
overdose-reversing medication to MHEC. 
 
The bill clarifies that the reports must include information on the use of naloxone or other 
opioid overdose-reversing medication. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 852 of 2025 and HB 1268 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland’s Office of Overdose 
Response; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College 
of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University Association; Baltimore City 
Community College; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Anne Arundel 
County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
gj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4