START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 260 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 260 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of 
Elections) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Financing Act – Fair Campaign Financing Fund – Distributions 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the earliest date on which distributions from the Fair 
Campaign Financing Fund (FCFF) may be made to candidates for Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor participating in the gubernatorial public campaign financing program 
under the Public Financing Act (PFA). The bill moves the date from January 1 of the year 
of the election to July 1 of the year before the election. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under PFA, SBE must authorize distribution of money in FCFF 
(distribution of “public contribution matching amounts”, see Background) to participating 
gubernatorial tickets (candidates for Governor and Lieutenant Governor), and the 
Comptroller must make distributions from the fund promptly on authorization by SBE. 
Distributions may not begin earlier than January 1 of the year of the election. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 260/ Page 2 
Background:   
 
Earlier Distribution Date 
 
SBE indicates that giving gubernatorial tickets participating in the public campaign 
financing program access to public funding six months earlier makes the program more 
advantageous for those candidates. 
 
Public Financing Act 
 
PFA established FCFF to provide voluntary public financing of elections for candidates for 
Governor and Lieutenant Governor. Chapter 733 of 2021 (the Maryland Fair Elections Act) 
modified the qualifying requirements and matching contributions under PFA, and 
mandated appropriations to FCFF that ensure there is enough funding available for each 
gubernatorial election to provide up to $3.0 million of public funding to each of 
two primary election campaigns and up to $3.0 million for one general election campaign. 
The fund is administered by the Comptroller. In October 2025, there was a balance of 
$10.4 million in FCFF. 
 
To qualify for public funding, a gubernatorial ticket must raise at least 1,500 eligible 
private contributions totaling at least $120,000 during the qualifying period (the period 
from the first day of the four‑year election cycle through the first Monday in May of the 
election year). Eligible private contributions are contributions of $250 or less from a 
resident of the State who submits a signed document (“contribution card”) stating that the 
contribution is made using personal funds.  
 
The public contribution matching amounts available to each qualifying gubernatorial 
ticket, to match eligible private contributions, are shown in Exhibit 2. An eligible 
gubernatorial ticket can receive up to $3.0 million in matching funds for each election. If a 
ticket receives public funds for both the primary and general elections, it can receive up to 
a total of $6.0 million unless the ticket is unopposed in a primary election. A gubernatorial 
ticket that is unopposed in a primary election receives one‑third of the public contribution 
amount the gubernatorial ticket would otherwise be entitled to receive. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 260/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
Public Contribution Matching Amounts for Gubernatorial Tickets 
 
Portion of Eligible 
Private Contribution 
(Maximum of $250) 
Public Contribution Matching Amount 
(Per Each Dollar of an  
Eligible Private Contribution) 
First $50 
$8 
Second $50 
6 
Third $50 
2 
Remaining $100 
0 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 11 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 260/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
 
Public Financing Act - Fair Campaign Financing Fund - 
Distributions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 260 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
State Board of Elections 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X__¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The proposal exclusively affects candidates for Governor, and will have no impact on 
small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 4