START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 225 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 225 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Agriculture) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Horse Industry Board - Sunset Extension 
 
  
This departmental bill extends the termination date of the Maryland Horse Industry Board 
(MHIB) by 10 years, from July 1, 2026, to July 1, 2036. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained from 
FY 2027 through 2036. The FY 2027 budget as introduced includes $435,471 in special 
funds and $12,298 in federal funds for the operation of the board. 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  MHIB, within MDA, is responsible for licensing and 
inspecting horse stables, advising MDA regarding matters affecting the horse industry in 
the State, supporting research related to equine health and related issues, promoting the 
development and uses of horses in the State, creating public awareness of the value of 
equine activities as they relate to the preservation of green space and agricultural land, and 
developing and disseminating information concerning the horse industry. The board 
currently regulates more than 800 licensed stables.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 225/ Page 2 
The operations of the board are primarily supported by the Maryland Horse Industry Fund, 
which receives revenues from licensing and inspection fees collected by the board and an 
assessment on commercial equine feed sold in the State. The revenues generated from the 
commercial equine feed assessment may only be used for education, research, and 
promotional materials and activities intended to benefit the Maryland equine industry. 
Money in the fund in general must be used to fulfill the statutory duties of the board. 
 
MHIB is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026. Chapter 170 of 2006 extended the 
termination date of the board from July 1, 2006, to July 1, 2016. Chapter 52 of 2014 further 
extended the termination date of the board from July 1, 2016, to July 1, 2026.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture;  Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 225/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Maryland Horse Industry Board - Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 225 
 
PREPARED BY: Cassie Shirk 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3