START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 272 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 272 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Health 
 
 
Food Establishments - Lavatory Requirement and On-Farm Food Service 
Facility License 
 
   
This departmental bill alters the definition, duration, and license fee for an “on-farm food 
service facility.” The license fee must be determined by the Department of Health (MDH) 
based on the anticipated cost of licensing, regulating, and inspecting licensees, and cannot 
exceed $100. A license is valid for one year unless renewed. The bill outlines requirements 
for the adoption of regulations related to on-farm food service facilities. The bill also 
expands the type of portable toilets that can be used in conjunction with food service related 
to agritourism. The bill’s provision relating to portable toilets takes effect July 1, 2026, 
while provisions relating to on‑farm food service facility licenses take effect January 
31, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2027, 
as discussed below. MDH can train local health department (LHD) inspectors to enforce 
the bill using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) advises 
that LHDs can likely handle inspection and enforcement responsibilities with existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 272/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
On‑farm Food Service Facilities 
 
The current definition of on‑farm food services facility is repealed. Instead, the bill defines 
“on-farm food service facility” as a food service facility that is located on a farm and serves 
food as designated by MDH.  
 
MDH must, in consultation with the Maryland Department of Agriculture and the 
Maryland Department of the Environment, adopt regulations for an on-farm food service 
facility regarding access to water, management of wastewater, outdoor cooking and food 
preparation, the use of on-farm structures for food preparation and patron seating, toileting 
facilities, and other requirements necessary for the protection of public health. In adopting 
the regulations, MDH may consider the expected number of patrons, the expected 
frequency of operation, how to assess current or planned physical structures, and how to 
assess whether the anticipated operation of an on-farm food service facility is consistent 
with the continued operation of the farm on which it is located. 
 
Portable Toilets 
 
The bill expands the type of portable toilets that can be used by certain food establishments 
(a business that conducts agritourism, Class 4 limited wineries, and Class 8 farm breweries) 
from a portable chemical toilet to a portable toilet, thereby allowing businesses to use 
either chemical or water-based flush portable toilets. 
 
Current Law: 
 
On-farm Food Service Facilities 
 
An “on-farm food service facility” is a food service facility that is located on a farm, serves 
food as designated by MDH, and operates for no more than 30 consecutive days with up to 
two renewals during a one-year period. A license to operate an on-farm food service facility 
expires after 30 consecutive days unless renewed and may be renewed up to two times in 
a one-year period.  
 
At least one month before an on-farm food service facility license expires, MDH must send 
a renewal notice to the last known address of the licensee that includes (1) the date on 
which the license expires, and (2) the date by which a completed renewal application must 
be received for the renewal to be issued.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 272/ Page 3 
Portable Toilets 
 
“Food establishment” means a food service facility or a food processing plant. Every food 
establishment is required to provide: 
 
 
a convenient toilet, separated from any room containing or involving food, and kept 
in a sanitary condition; and 
 
a convenient lavatory that is (1) supplied with soap, water, and a method to dry 
hands; (2) kept in a sanitary condition; and (3) properly ventilated. 
 
Chapters 761 and 762 of 2025 specified that certain food establishments – a business that 
conducts agritourism, Class 4 limited wineries, and Class 8 farm breweries – can comply 
with the requirement to have a convenient lavatory by providing a portable chemical toilet 
that is (1) supplied with soap, water, and a method to dry hands; (2) kept in sanitary 
condition; (3) properly ventilated; and (4) placed at least 25 feet from a well. Prior to those 
Acts, under Maryland regulations (COMAR 26.04.02.08), chemical toilets could only be 
used for special-term events such as construction projects or music festivals. 
 
Background:  Chapter 179 of 2005 defined an on-farm food service facility and set the 
term of a license at no more than 30 consecutive days with up to two renewals per year. 
MDH reports that many agritourism businesses feel the current license for on-farm food 
service facilities is too restrictive in its duration, while the resources needed to become a 
licensed food service facility that can operate year-round are too costly. Thus, the bill 
expands opportunities for agritourism businesses and other on-farm food service facilities 
to operate under current costs but for a longer period. 
 
State Revenues:  MDH’s Office of Food Protection (OFP) estimates that between 30 and 
50 facilities will seek licensure as an on-farm food service facility. If OFP sets the license 
fee to its maximum permitted amount of $100 and 50 facilities seek licensure, general fund 
revenues increase by $5,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. However, MDH advises 
that the license fee could also be set to $0, in which case revenues would not be affected. 
Thus, MDH general fund revenues increase indeterminately beginning in fiscal 2027, 
dependent on the number of facilities seeking licensure and the license fee set by OFP. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Though LHDs can likely fulfill their responsibilities under the bill 
with existing resources, MACHO notes that the actual cost to LHDs of licensing, 
inspecting, and regulating on-farm food service facilities would likely exceed the revenue 
generated by the bill, given the $100 cap on license fees. Thus, LHDs will have to fill in 
the gap with existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 272/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 272/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Food Establishments - Lavatory Requirement and On-Farm Food 
Service Facility License 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB 272 
 
PREPARED BY: Samuel Paul 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal will have a meaningful fiscal impact for small on-farm businesses seeking 
to obtain an on-farm food service facility license, as it will reduce the barrier of entry to 
allow them to operate year-round without requiring them to adhere to more limiting 
regulatory requirements under a conventional food service facility license (e.g., 
requirements for building infrastructure, equipment, lavatory facilities, etc.). 
 
While larger on-farm businesses are more likely to have the resources, infrastructure, 
equipment, etc. needed to comply with existing requirements under a conventional food 
service facility license, and are likely to be less impacted by the legislation. 
 
The number of businesses which will pursue the new on-farm food service facility license 
is unknown. The Office of Food Protection believes the number may be thirty to fifty, but 
not enough information exists to confirm the estimate. The dollar amount increase of 
revenues for the licensees is not calculable, but the proposed bill does significantly 
improve the availability of on-farm food service as a source of revenue. 
 

END OF PAGE 5