START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 263 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 263 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of 
Elections) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Early Voting Centers - Bus Stops 
 
 
This departmental bill requires that – if an early voting center is located within 
one-half mile of a fixed local bus route – each bus operating on that route must, to the 
maximum extent practicable and consistent with accessibility requirements, allow 
passengers to embark and disembark at the entrance of the early voting center on the days 
the center is open for voting. The bill applies only to a fixed local bus route funded by a 
county or municipality and operated by the county or municipality or a contractor for the 
county or municipality. The bill does not apply to (1) an express or commuter bus route 
that has limited stops between its origin and destination; (2) a bus route operated by the 
Maryland Transit Administration; or (3) a bus route operated by Washington Metropolitan 
Area Transit Authority. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are expected to be affected in at least some 
jurisdictions, beginning in FY 2028, as discussed below. This bill imposes a mandate on 
a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 263/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The number of required early voting centers in a county is based on the 
number of registered voters in the county, ranging from one early voting center in a county 
with fewer than 50,000 registered voters to 13 early voting centers in a county with at least 
600,000 registered voters. In addition to the required early voting centers, each county may 
establish one additional center if the local board of elections and the governing body of the 
county agree to establish an additional center and SBE approves the establishment of the 
center. Early voting centers are open from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. from the second Thursday 
before a primary or general election through the Thursday before the election. 
 
At least seven months before each statewide primary election, each local board of elections 
must submit an election plan to SBE for approval that includes an early voting center plan, 
a polling place plan, a ballot drop box plan, and an analysis of how to maximize voter 
participation in the county and each precinct. 
 
An early voting center plan must use the following factors when determining the location 
of an early voting center in the county: 
  
 
accessibility of the early voting center to historically disenfranchised communities, 
including cultural groups, ethnic groups, and minority groups; 
 
proximity of the early voting center to dense concentrations of voters; 
 
accessibility of the early voting center by public transportation; 
 
for counties with four or more early voting centers, ensuring equitable geographic 
distribution of early voting centers throughout the county; and 
 
the use of community centers and public gathering places. 
 
Background:  For the 2024 primary and general elections, 97 early voting centers were 
made available statewide for voters to cast their ballots in person. SBE indicates that use 
of early voting centers has been growing in recent elections, and the centers are far more 
limited in number than Election Day polling places making it more likely that voters do 
not live at walkable distances from their nearest early voting location. The bill is intended 
to help make early voting centers more accessible to voters. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government finances are expected to be affected in  
at least some jurisdictions, beginning in fiscal 2028 (accounting for the bill’s  
January 1, 2027 effective date) due to the deviation of fixed local bus routes to early voting 
centers within one-half mile of a route over the course of the eight days of early voting 
each fiscal year. 
 
The extent of the impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time, in part due to uncertainty 
of how local governments will interpret the bill’s qualifying language that the buses on 
fixed local bus routes within one-half mile of an early voting center allow for embarking 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 263/ Page 3 
and disembarking at the center entrance to the maximum extent practicable. Modification 
of existing bus routes during the early voting period may result in: 
 
 
increased costs of operating the buses due to additional distance added to the route; 
 
costs of communicating changes to bus routes and schedules to the public; and 
 
costs to temporarily identify/designate specific bus stop locations in front of early 
voting centers and ensure the locations meet accessibility requirements. 
 
Any increase in expenditures may be offset, at least to some extent, by increased fare 
revenue from deviated routes during early voting (if the bus is not a free service) to the 
extent that additional individuals use the bus routes in order to reach early voting centers 
as a result of the route deviations. 
 
For illustrative purposes, Prince George’s County indicates that its expenditures increase 
by at least $37,300 in fiscal 2028, consisting of $25,750 in additional costs for its 
contracted bus services due to additional operating time and mileage resulting from route 
deviations and $11,550 for temporary signage and associated site-specific improvements 
at the bus stop locations in front of early voting centers. Prince George’s County provides 
fare-free bus service; therefore, its revenues are not affected. 
 
This estimate assumes that the bill does not require expansion of service hours of bus routes 
in order to provide service throughout early voting hours. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 100 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Calvert, Frederick, Howard, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal 
League; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 263/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Election Law - Early Voting Centers - Bus Stops 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 263 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
State Board of Elections 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X__¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Small businesses have not been and are not expected to be significant users of or 
competitors with public bus services. Therefore, modest changes to those services will 
have minimal or no impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 4