START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 252

M3 6lr0074
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 203

By: Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Environment)
Requested: September 25, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Environment – Lead Paint Abatement Services – Performance Bond and
3 Liability Insurance

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing certain regulations adopted by the Department of the
5 Environment to include certain requirements for any person who is accredited by the
6 Department to provide lead paint abatement services to be covered by a performance
7 bond or liability insurance; and generally relating to lead paint abatement services.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Environment
10 Section 6–1001 and 6–1002
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Environment
15 Section 6–1003
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Environment

21 6–1001.

22 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0252*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 252

1 (b) “Abatement” means a set of measures that eliminate or reduce lead–based
2 paint hazards in residential, public, or commercial buildings, bridges, or other structures
3 or superstructures in accordance with standards established by the Department which may
4 include:

5 (1) The removal of lead–based paint and lead–contaminated dust, the
6 containment or encapsulation of lead–based paint, the replacement or demolition of
7 lead–painted surfaces or fixtures, and the removal or covering of lead–contaminated soil;

8 (2) All preparation, cleanup, disposal, and postabatement clearance testing
9 activities associated with these measures; and

10 (3) The renovation, repair, and painting of a lead–containing substance in
11 a residential, public, or commercial building built before 1978.

12 (c) “Lead containing substance” means:

13 (1) Any paint, plaster, or surface encapsulation material containing more
14 than 0.50 percent lead by weight calculated as lead metal in the dried solid or more than
15 0.7 milligrams lead per square centimeter as measured by an X–ray fluorescence analyzer;
16 or

17 (2) Such other standards consistent with an applicable federal definition
18 as the Department may set by regulation.

19 (d) “Person” includes any public or municipal corporation, or any agency, bureau,
20 department, or instrumentality of federal, State, or local government.

21 (e) “Provide lead paint abatement services” means to engage in the risk
22 assessment, inspection, or abatement of lead–containing substances.

23 6–1002.

24 (a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, unless the person is
25 accredited by the Department under this subtitle, a person may not:

26 (1) Act as a contractor or supervisor for the purpose of providing lead paint
27 abatement services;

28 (2) Provide training to others who provide lead paint abatement services;
29 or

30 (3) Engage in the inspection of lead–based paint hazards.

31 (b) The Department shall, by regulation, create exceptions to the accreditation
32 requirement for instances where the disturbance of lead–containing substance is
33 incidental.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 252 3

1 (c) An individual who acts only as a worker or project designer need not be
2 accredited, but must be trained.

3 6–1003.

4 (a) The Department shall adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this
5 subtitle.

6 (b) Regulations adopted under this subtitle may include:

7 (1) Initial and continuing standards and procedures for accreditation,
8 including education, training, examination, and job performance standards;

9 (2) Standards and procedures for renewal of accreditation;

10 (3) Standards and procedures for modification, suspension, or revocation of
11 accreditation;

12 (4) Different standards and procedures for different lead paint abatement
13 services;

14 (5) Standards and procedures for abatement involving the renovation,
15 repair, and painting of lead–containing substances, including a requirement for lead–dust
16 testing;

17 (6) Recognition of accreditation or similar approvals of persons by other
18 governmental entities; [and]

19 (7) REQUIREMENTS FOR ANY PERSON WHO IS ACCREDITED BY THE
20 DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE LEAD PAINT ABATEMENT SERVICES TO BE COVERED BY
21 A REASONABLE PERFORMANCE BOND OR REASONABLE LIABILITY INSURANCE; AND

22 (8) Such other provisions as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of
23 this subtitle.

24 (c) The Department shall review and revise its certification and other regulations
25 under this subtitle as necessary to ensure continued eligibility for federal funding of
26 lead–hazard activities in the State.

27 (d) The Department shall set reasonable fees for the accreditation of persons who
28 provide lead paint abatement services sufficient to cover the Department’s direct and
29 indirect costs of administering this subtitle.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 252
END OF PAGE 4