START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 236

C2 6lr0126
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 32

By: Chair, Economic Matters Committee (By Request – Departmental – Labor)
Requested: September 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Athletic Commission – Blood Testing of Contestants – Timing

3 FOR the purpose of extending the period of time before applying for a license to participate
4 in a boxing, kick boxing, wrestling, or mixed martial arts contest and before
5 participating in the contest during which certain blood testing may be conducted for
6 purposes of submission of the results to the State Athletic Commission; and
7 generally relating to the State Athletic Commission and required blood testing of
8 contestants.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Business Regulation
11 Section 4–101(a) and (c) through (e)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Business Regulation
16 Section 4–304.1(a) and (b)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Business Regulation

22 4–101.

23 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0236*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 236

1 (c) “Commission” means the State Athletic Commission.

2 (d) (1) “Contest” means a boxing, kick boxing, or wrestling:

3 (i) competition;

4 (ii) exhibition;

5 (iii) match;

6 (iv) performance; or

7 (v) show.

8 (2) “Contest” includes a mixed martial arts:

9 (i) competition;

10 (ii) match;

11 (iii) performance; or

12 (iv) show.

13 (3) “Contest” does not include a mixed martial arts exhibition.

14 (e) “Contestant” means an individual who participates in a boxing, professional
15 kick boxing, amateur kick boxing, professional mixed martial arts, or amateur mixed
16 martial arts contest.

17 4–304.1.

18 (a) Each applicant for a license to participate as a contestant in a contest shall
19 present documentary evidence, satisfactory to the Commission, that:

20 (1) within the prior [30–day] 90–DAY period, the applicant has been tested
21 for the presence of:

22 (i) antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV);

23 (ii) the antigen of virus hepatitis B; and

24 (iii) antibodies to virus hepatitis C; and

25 (2) the results of all tests are negative.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 236 3

1 (b) Whenever directed by the Commission, an individual who is licensed to
2 participate as a contestant in a contest shall present documentary evidence, satisfactory to
3 the Commission, that:

4 (1) within [30] 90 days prior to participating in a contest, the individual
5 has been tested for the presence of:

6 (i) antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV);

7 (ii) the antigen of virus hepatitis B; and

8 (iii) antibodies to virus hepatitis C; and

9 (2) the results of all tests are negative.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
11 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3