START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 298 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 298 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation – County Supervisor Residency 
Requirement and Location of County Assessment Offices – Alteration 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals a requirement that a county Supervisor of Assessments 
reside in the county for which the supervisor is appointed. The bill also repeals the 
requirement that the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) locate county 
assessment offices in the county seat of a county. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The provisions of the bill can be handled with SDAT’s existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each county supervisor of assessments is appointed by the Director of 
SDAT and must be in the management service of the State Personnel Management System. 
The director must appoint each supervisor from a list of five qualified individuals that are 
submitted to the department by a specified appropriate county official after the director 
provides written notice to the appropriate county official that a vacancy exists in that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 298/ Page 2 
county. In general, counties have 60 days to provide the department with a list of nominees, 
unless otherwise specified by the department. 
 
If the director finds that none of the nominees meet specified qualifications, the director 
may reject all of them and request a new list of nominees. If the appropriate county official 
does not submit a new list within 20 days of receiving the director’s request, the director 
may appoint any qualified individual. 
 
Generally, on appointment, a county supervisor of assessment does not need to be a 
resident of the county for which the supervisor was appointed. However, the supervisor 
must become a resident of the county after the appointment is made. This requirement may 
be waived under specified circumstances. 
 
Each county must provide the supervisor of the county with an office in the county seat or 
in Baltimore City, for the supervisor of Baltimore City. SDAT is responsible for providing 
each supervisor with clerical staff, equipment, and other facilities and assistance that the 
department considers necessary and as provided in the State budget. 
 
Background:  SDAT reports that all county assessment offices are located in the county 
seat of each county. The department advises that in some counties the county seat is not 
centrally located, and, in some cases, the county seat may have limited locations that meet 
the needs of housing an assessment office. As a result, the bill provides the department 
with more flexibility in determining the location of county assessment offices. 
 
The department also notes that all county supervisors live in their respective counties, as 
required by law. The bill allows the department to go outside the county if there are not 
qualified candidates residing in the county, and other candidates do not want to relocate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 146 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 298/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 298/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - County Supervisor 
Residency Requirement and Location of County Assessment Offices - Alteration 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 298 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Joshua Greenberg 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4