START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 260

G1 6lr0086
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 11

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – State Board of Elections)
Requested: September 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Financing Act – Fair Campaign Financing Fund – Distributions

3 FOR the purpose of altering the earliest date on which the State Board of Elections may
4 begin making distributions from the Fair Campaign Financing Fund; and generally
5 relating to distributions from the Fair Campaign Financing Fund.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Election Law
8 Section 15–102(a) and (f)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Election Law
13 Section 15–107(a)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Election Law

19 15–102.

20 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (f) “Fund” means the Fair Campaign Financing Fund.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0260*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 260

1 15–107.

2 (a) (1) In accordance with subsection (c) of this section and regulations
3 adopted by the State Board, the State Board shall authorize distribution of money in the
4 Fund on a continuing basis on certification that the qualifications under § 15–104 of this
5 title have been met.

6 (2) Distributions shall begin not earlier than [January] JULY 1 of the year
7 [of] BEFORE the election.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2