START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 225

M4 6lr0044
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr0043

By: Chair, Appropriations Committee (By Request – Departmental – Agriculture)
Requested: September 25, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Horse Industry Board – Sunset Extension

3 FOR the purpose of continuing the Maryland Horse Industry Board in accordance with the
4 provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by extending to a
5 certain date the termination provisions relating to the statutory and regulatory
6 authority of the Board; and generally relating to the Maryland Horse Industry
7 Board.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Agriculture
10 Section 2–703
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Agriculture
15 Section 2–719
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Agriculture

21 2–703.

22 There is a Maryland Horse Industry Board.

23 2–719.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0225*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 225

1 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Program Evaluation
2 Act, the provisions of this subtitle and of any rule or regulation adopted under this subtitle
3 shall terminate and be of no effect after July 1, [2026] 2036.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2