START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 207 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 207 
(Delegate Vogel) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Certificate of Candidacy for Congressional Offices - Stock 
Trading Activities (Congressional Stock Trading Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to include on the certificate of 
candidacy form for congressional candidates the option to indicate that, if elected, the 
candidate and the candidate’s spouse will not buy, sell, or exchange individual stocks 
during the candidate’s term of office. If a candidate makes this indication, SBE must 
publish that information on its website. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual may become a candidate for a public or party office only if 
the individual files a certificate of candidacy, which must be filed under oath on a 
prescribed form. Certificates of candidacy filed by candidates for the U.S. Senate or 
U.S. House of Representatives are filed with SBE. On the certificate of candidacy form 
prescribed by SBE, a candidate must specify:   
 
 
the office, including, if applicable, the party, district, and circuit to which the 
candidacy relates; 
 
the year of the election; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 207/ Page 2 
 
the name of the individual filing the certificate; 
 
the address on the statewide voter registration list or the current address of that 
individual; 
 
a statement that the individual satisfies the requirements of law for candidacy for 
the office for which the certificate is being filed; and 
 
any information requested by SBE to verify the accuracy of the information 
provided by the individual. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2