START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 242 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Confidentiality of Information 
 
 
This departmental bill updates the existing framework for the protection of sensitive 
unemployment insurance (UI) information to comply with federal requirements. The bill 
requires that (1) the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) maintain the 
confidentiality of specified claimant and employer records and (2) confidentiality 
provisions in State law related to UI data be interpreted in a manner that ensures 
compliance with federal law. It authorizes the Secretary of Labor to disclose certain 
information under specified circumstances to comply with federal regulations. 
Additionally, the bill expands criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of 
information to former MD Labor employees and third-party recipients.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill likely has a beneficial operational impact on MD Labor and can be 
implemented with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.   
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 242/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definition  
 
“Confidential unemployment insurance information,” is defined as any information in 
MD Labor records that reveals the name or identifying information of an individual or an 
employing unit and could foreseeably be combined with other publicly available 
information to reveal identifying information about an individual, employer, or employing 
unit. “Confidential unemployment insurance information” includes both wage and UI 
claim information.  
 
Federal Conformity and Disclosure Limits 
 
MD Labor must disclose confidential information for the proper administration of the UI 
program and as required by federal law. Furthermore, the Secretary of Labor is granted 
discretionary authority to disclose information to, among other persons: 
 
 
any individual or employer requesting their own records; 
 
public officials in the performance of their official duties; 
 
attorneys representing a claimant or employer; or 
 
any person or entity with the claimant or employer’s informed, written consent. 
 
Data Safeguards and Penalties  
 
In general, any recipient of confidential UI information must use the information only for 
the purposes for which it was disclosed and safeguard the information against unauthorized 
access as specified, including (1) storing and processing information electronically and 
physically to protect the data from unauthorized access or disclosure and (2) properly 
disposing of the records once the authorized purpose for the disclosure has been served. 
Additionally, the bill prohibits elected officials from using confidential UI information for 
the solicitation of contributions for political candidates or parties.  
 
The Secretary of Labor may authorize a recipient of confidential UI information in 
accordance with federal law to redisclose the information under specified circumstances, 
including (1) to an attorney representing the individual or employer; (2) for any 
administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding on behalf of the recipient; (3) to any agent of 
a child support enforcement unit, as specified; or (4) when specifically authorized by a 
written release, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 242/ Page 3 
The bill expands existing criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of protected 
information to apply to former MD Labor employees and to third-party recipients who 
redisclose data without permission or for unauthorized purposes.  
 
Current Law:  For a general overview of the State’s UI program, see the Appendix – 
Unemployment Insurance. 
 
Each employer must keep accurate employment records, which are confidential. The 
Secretary of Labor and Board of Appeals are prohibited from allowing public inspection 
of UI records that reveal the identity of an employer, except to public employees in the 
performance of their official duties or to agents of child support enforcement units, as 
specified. To the extent necessary, the Secretary of Labor or Board Appeals must provide 
UI information to a claimant at a hearing before a special examiner, hearing examiner, the 
Secretary, or the Board of Appeals. 
 
On request, MD Labor must provide to the chief elected official of a county specified 
demographic and occupational data of UI recipients who live in the county. Any such 
disclosure is subject to regulations designed to protect personally identifiable information 
of UI recipients.  
 
An employee of the Secretary of Labor or Board of Appeals who violates confidentiality 
requirements in current law is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 or a prison term of up to one year, or both.  
 
Background:  MD Labor advises that the bill is necessary to modernize State UI 
confidentiality laws to ensure full compliance with federal law (20 C.F.R. § 603) and to 
codify authorized exceptions to confidentiality requirements. MD Labor reports that 
Mayland’s existing laws are more restrictive than federal law requires.  
 
The bill consolidates various confidentiality provisions, including those for employer 
records, claim information, and child support enforcement into one section of the code. 
The U.S. Department of Labor previous raised conformity concerns regarding 
2021 legislation; this bill clarifies that data disclosure will be conducted in a manner 
consistent with federal law to protect Maryland’s federal UI funding.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 242/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 216 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 242/ Page 5 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MD Labor) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. 
State UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly. As UI taxes are applied to 
the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each calendar year, the first two quarterly tax 
payments are typically the largest. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 242/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from 
Annual Tax Per Employee 
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
n/a 
$1,043.8 
n/a 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
939.4 
$1,043.8 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
835.0 
939.4 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
730.6 
835.0 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
626.3 
730.6 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
626.3 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2024 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. State law also generally requires a federal solvency goal to be met prior to moving to a tax table 
with lower rates (i.e., from Table F to Table A). The federal solvency goal, which is designed to ensure the State’s 
ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and varies with the total 
wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recent recessions. 
A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with nonzero (.0001 to .0027) 
benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; compensation less than that 
amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. Table A went into effect starting in 2024 and will remain in effect through 
2026. 
As of January 1, 2026, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the  
first four of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the 
benefit year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most 
recently completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 242/ Page 7 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MD Labor-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
2025 Legislation Established Administrative Fee, Reducing Future Trust Fund Revenues 
 
Chapter 604 of 2025 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act) established, beginning 
January 1, 2026, an administrative fee of 0.15% on each taxable employer, while generally 
reducing the UI tax rate assigned to each taxable employer by the same amount. The 
administrative fee accrues to a special fund and is to be used by MD Labor for specified 
administrative expenses. While there is generally no effect on the total amount each taxable 
employer pays to MD Labor each year, the reallocation was estimated to reduce UITF 
revenues by approximately $33.0 million annually. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 242/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Unemployment Insurance - Confidentiality of Information 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 242 
 
PREPARED BY:  Sabrina Steel 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8