START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 299 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 299 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Fraud Prevention, Prevailing Wage, and Living Wage - Prohibitions, Penalties, 
and Enforcement 
 
 
This departmental bill enhances enforcement provisions of the Workplace Fraud Act, 
prevailing wage law, and living wage law, and increases penalties for violations of those 
labor laws.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Most State agencies can implement the bill with existing resources; however, 
general fund expenditures increase by $110,800 in FY 2027 for new staff at the Office of 
the Attorney General (OAG). General fund and nonbudgeted Unemployment Insurance 
Trust Fund (UITF) revenues may increase, likely minimally, but a reliable estimate is not 
feasible. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
110,800 
132,000 
138,000 
144,200 
150,500 
Net Effect 
($110,800) 
($132,000) 
($138,000) 
($144,200) 
($150,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues may increase, likely minimally, but a reliable 
estimate is not feasible. Expenditures are not materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) has determined 
that this bill has a minimal impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment as discussed below.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 299/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland False Claim Act 
 
The bill alters the Maryland False Claims Act (MFCA) to prohibit a person from knowingly 
making, using, or causing to be made or used, a false record or statement that results in the 
underpayment of contributions to UITF or the payment of unemployment insurance (UI) 
benefits of more than $15,000 in a calendar year. If a violation of MFCA involves the 
failure to pay prevailing wage rates, the bill requires that civil penalties and damages 
collected also be used to pay restitution to affected workers. The Commissioner of Labor 
and Industry and the Attorney General are required to cooperate in the investigation of an 
alleged violation of MFCA that is of unusual scope or complexity or involves novel or 
complex legal issues if the violation is of a nature and scope that could give rise to a 
violation or an action under the Workplace Fraud Act, prevailing wage law, or living wage 
law.  
 
Penalties Payable to Workers 
 
The bill requires that one-third of the civil penalties paid by employers found to have 
misclassified an employee under the Workplace Fraud Act must be paid directly to an 
individual affected by the employer’s violation, in addition to any other restitution to which 
the employee is entitled.   
 
General Contractor Liability for Workplace Fraud Violations 
 
The bill establishes that a general contractor on a construction project is jointly and 
severally liable for any workplace fraud violations committed by its subcontractors. This 
liability applies regardless of whether the subcontractor is in a direct contractual 
relationship with the general contractor.  
 
Expanding Avenues for Redress and Increased Cooperation 
 
The commissioner and Attorney General, or their designees, must meet at least monthly to 
share information concerning matters related to the Workplace Fraud Act, prevailing wage 
law, and living wage law. At a minimum, the meetings must share information about (1) the 
content of complaints or referrals received concerning potential violations and actions 
taken and (2) the status of investigations initiated, as specified. 
 
The commissioner must refer to the Attorney General any complaint or referral for which 
the commissioner has (1) not initiated an investigation within six months; (2) declined to 
investigate; or (3) not issued a citation or has closed an investigation due to a finding of no 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 299/ Page 3 
merit. The Attorney General may exercise the commissioner’s investigative powers, as 
specified, and provide notice to the commissioner of the disposition of the referral. 
 
The bill authorizes the commissioner to refer specified possible violations of the prevailing 
wage law and living wage law to the Attorney General to file a civil action. In addition, the 
commissioner is empowered to file a suit for restitution on behalf of an employee who is 
not paid the proper prevailing wage or living wage.  
 
Licensing and Other Sanctions 
 
The commissioner must notify the applicable licensing authority when a licensee is found 
to have misclassified an employee by a final order or a court or an administrative unit if 
the licensee (1) has not paid all penalties assessed for the violation and (2) within 45 days 
of the issuance of a final order, has failed to comply with the order, as specified. Upon 
receiving a notice from the commissioner, the licensing authority must suspend or revoke 
the license of the licensee, subject to notification and hearing requirements. The bill 
specifies the conditions under which a license may be reinstated. 
 
The bill also expands the circumstances for debarment from entering into contracts with 
the State to encompass repeated (not just knowing or willful) violations as well as 
uncontested findings of violations.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Workplace Fraud Act 
 
Chapter 188 of 2009 (the Workplace Fraud Act) established, for the purpose of 
enforcement only, a presumption that work performed by an individual paid by an 
employer creates an employer-employee relationship, subject to specified exemptions. It 
prohibits construction companies and landscaping businesses from failing to properly 
classify an individual as an employee and establishes investigation procedures and 
penalties for noncompliance.  
 
The “ABC test” incorporated in the Workplace Fraud Act is used by MD Labor to establish 
whether an employer-employee relationship exists for the purpose of determining whether 
an employee has been misclassified under the Act. While only used to detect workplace 
fraud in the specified industries, MD Labor is required to use the ABC test in determining 
whether an individual is an employee in any industry for the purpose of determining 
whether the employer should pay UI for the individual. The ABC test has 
three components, all of which must be met to establish that an individual is an independent 
contractor and not an employee:   
 
A. 
the individual is free from control and direction over his or her performance both in 
fact and under the contract (Alone);  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 299/ Page 4 
B.  
the individual customarily is engaged in an independent business or occupation 
(Business); and  
C.  
the work performed is outside the usual course of business, or outside the place of 
business, of the person for whom work is performed (Control).  
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry in MD Labor is responsible for enforcing the 
Act. The Act distinguishes between an employer who improperly misclassifies an 
employee and an employer who knowingly misclassifies an employee, and civil penalties 
are more severe for an employer who is guilty of knowingly misclassifying an employee. 
The maximum penalty for a knowing violation is a $10,000 fine for each employee who 
was not properly classified. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry or the administrative 
law judge must consider specified factors when determining the penalty amount. Penalties 
can be doubled for employers who have previously violated the Act’s provisions. An 
employer who has been found to have knowingly misclassified employees on three or more 
occasions may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to $20,000 for each 
misclassified employee.  
 
Joint Enforcement Task Force on Workplace Fraud 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.04, dated January 9, 2024, establishes the Joint Enforcement 
Task Force on Workplace Fraud to coordinate the investigation and enforcement of 
workplace fraud. Among its charges is to facilitate data sharing among task force members, 
including maintaining an interagency online platform to share such information. The 
task force must report to the Governor by December 31 of each year as specified in the 
executive order; the report must, among other things, identify successful strategies for 
preventing workplace fraud that reduce the need for greater enforcement.  
 
Maryland False Claims Act 
 
Enacted under Chapter 165 of 2015, MFCA prohibits a person from knowingly making a 
false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval by a governmental entity (defined as the 
State, a county, or a municipal corporation). A person who does so is liable to the 
governmental entity for a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for each violation, plus an 
additional amount of up to three times the amount of actual damages that the governmental 
entity sustains. 
 
Prevailing Wage Law 
 
For an overview of the prevailing wage law, please see the Appendix – Maryland’s 
Prevailing Wage Law. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 299/ Page 5 
Living Wage Law 
 
Chapter 284 of 2007 made Maryland the first state to require State service contractors to 
pay their employees a “living wage.” For fiscal 2008, the living wage was set at $11.30 in 
Montgomery, Prince George’s, Howard, Anne Arundel, and Baltimore counties and 
Baltimore City (Tier 1). It was set at $8.50 for all other areas of the State (Tier 2). The 
living wage rates are adjusted annually for inflation by the Commissioner of Labor and 
Industry. Effective September 28, 2025, the Tier 1 living wage is $17.17 and the  
Tier 2 wage is $15.00. Montgomery and Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City have 
local living wage ordinances that apply to their procurement of services. The living wage 
law does not apply to State contracts with nonprofit organizations. 
 
Background:  The Joint Enforcement Task Force on Workplace Fraud issued its  
2024 annual report. According to the report, task force agencies discovered 
5,595 misclassified workers through their enforcement actions. MD Labor’s Division of 
Unemployment Insurance uncovered more than $36 million in unreported taxable wages 
paid to workers due to workplace fraud, and the Comptroller assessed $3.5 million in tax, 
interest, and penalties on businesses for misclassifying workers.  
 
To combat the prevalence of misclassification and failure to pay prevailing and living 
wages, MD Labor advises that stronger enforcement strategies are needed. Enhancing 
cooperation with OAG as well as increasing the stakes for violations of the labor laws by, 
for instance, allowing for the suspension of professional licenses or subjecting violations 
to prosecution under MFCA, are designed to increase compliance.   
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
General Fund and Unemployment Insurance Fund Revenues 
 
To the extent that the bill results in more widespread compliance with the Workplace Fraud 
Act, income tax withholdings and employer contributions to UITF may increase due to 
more workers being classified as employees instead of independent contractors. It is not 
possible to predict the extent to which compliance increases in the absence of experience 
under the bill. Although any such increase in revenues may be significant, this analysis 
assumes that they are more likely to be minimal. General fund revenues may also increase, 
particularly in the years immediately following enactment, due to more employers paying 
civil penalties, but any such increase is also expected to be minimal and is partially offset 
by direct payment of one-third of such penalties to affected individuals.   
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 299/ Page 6 
Office of the Attorney General Expenditures 
 
OAG anticipates an increased workload due to more investigations and adjudications of 
MFCA violations under the bill. It anticipates needing two attorneys and one paralegal to 
handle that workload, but DLS disagrees. Any initial increase in OAG’s caseload is likely 
to be minimal until enforcement ramps up, likely requiring only one additional attorney. 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $110,797 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, to hire one assistant Attorney General to handle 
additional MFCA cases resulting from the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-
time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
OAG Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$101,656 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total OAG FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$110,797 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that OAG’s 
caseload increases more than anticipated in the out-years, it can request additional attorneys 
through the annual budget process.  
 
Local Revenues:  As with general fund revenues, local income tax revenues may increase 
due to greater compliance with the Workplace Fraud Act. However, as with the State, any 
such increase is anticipated to be minimal.  
 
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor advises that the bill is intended to create a strong set 
of tools to encourage compliance with existing laws and should not result in an economic 
impact for small businesses that are already compliant. However, as the Joint Enforcement 
Task Force found substantial noncompliance with the Workplace Fraud Act, the bill may 
have a meaningful economic impact on small businesses that are currently misclassifying 
employees. As under current law, to come into compliance, these businesses must pay 
unpaid UI taxes, workers’ compensation premiums, and payroll taxes on behalf of 
misclassified employees. Furthermore, these entities face significant civil and 
administrative penalties of up to $10,000 per violation. Under the bill, however, they may 
also have their professional or occupational licenses suspended or revoked for 
noncompliance, be more likely to face debarment from entering into contracts with the 
State, and be liable for subcontractor violations  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 299/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last  
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 60 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Board of Public Works; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 299/ Page 8 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland, 
including mechanical service contractors that are part of public works projects, must pay 
their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, including 
a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that are 
constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
Eligible public works projects are: 
 
● 
those carried out by the State; 
● 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; 
● 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
● 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
Applicability in Maryland 
 
Generally, any public works contract valued at less than $250,000 is not required to pay 
prevailing wages. However, the prevailing wage law was amended in 2022 to include 
mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. Mechanical service contracts are 
defined as contracts for (1) heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, including duct work; 
(2) refrigeration systems; (3) plumbing systems, as specified; (4) electrical systems, as 
specified; and (5) elevator systems, as specified. 
 
The State prevailing wage rate also does not apply to (1) any part of a public works contract 
funded with federal funds for which the contractor must pay the prevailing wage rate 
determined by the federal government; (2) specified construction projects carried out by 
public service companies under order of the Public Service Commission (except the 
underground projects mentioned above); or (3) local House or Senate initiatives that 
receive State funds in the capital budget. 
 
Prevailing wages are wages paid to at least 50% of workers in a given locality who perform 
the same or similar work on projects that resemble the proposed public works project. If 
fewer than 50% of workers in a job category earn the same wage, the prevailing wage is 
the rate paid to at least 40% of those workers. If fewer than 40% receive the same wage 
rate, the prevailing wage is calculated using a weighted average of local pay rates. The 
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry is responsible for determining prevailing wages 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 299/ Page 9 
for each public works project and job category based on annual wage surveys, in which 
contractors and subcontractors working on both public works and private construction 
projects may participate. 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) are all 
exempt from the prevailing wage law. However, USM and MSU advise that they 
voluntarily comply with prevailing wage requirements for contracts that exceed the 
$250,000 threshold. MSA largely administers its own prevailing wage program, using 
wage rates borrowed from the commissioner’s annual wage survey. 
 
Enforcement 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including issuing a stop work order if the commissioner makes an initial 
determination that a contractor or subcontractor may have violated the prevailing wage 
requirements. Contractors found to have violated the prevailing wage law must pay 
restitution to the employees and liquidated damages to the public body in the amount of 
$20 a day for each worker who is paid less than the prevailing wage, or $250 per worker 
per day if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the obligation to pay the 
prevailing wage. If an employer fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to pay 
restitution, either the commissioner or an employee may sue the employer to recover the 
difference between the prevailing wage and paid wage. The court may order the employer 
to pay double or triple damages if it finds that the employer withheld wages or fringe 
benefits willfully and knowingly or with deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the 
law. 
 
The Governor must include at least $385,000 in the budget each year for the  
Prevailing Wage Unit within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor). 
 
The number of prevailing wage projects rose dramatically following the Great Recession 
and has remained high each year since. MD Labor recently developed and unveiled a new 
pay log system, which provides more accurate tracking of prevailing wage projects than its 
previous database. Using the new system, MD Labor advises that, during fiscal 2025, its 
Prevailing Wage Unit monitored 889 projects, up from the 816 projects in fiscal 2024 and 
757 projects in fiscal 2023, and still significantly more than the 496 projects reported in 
fiscal 2014. 
 
To accommodate the increase in projects, the number of prevailing wage investigators has 
increased, starting with doubling investigative staff in the unit from three to six in 
fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2024, the legislature again increased staffing for the division allowing 
for eight investigators in the unit. The fiscal 2025 budget provided nine new wage and hour 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 299/ Page 10 
positions for the division, eight of which were assigned to the Prevailing Wage Unit. As of 
January 2026, the unit has seven investigators, including two bilingual Spanish speakers, 
and two interpreters/interviewers bilingual Spanish speakers. Although the unit is currently 
down one investigator from the previous year, the division has received hiring freeze 
exemptions for its vacancies and is in active recruitment to return to full staffing levels. 
 
History of the Prevailing Wage 
 
The federal Davis-Bacon Act, originally enacted in 1931, requires contractors working on 
federal public works contracts valued at more than $2,000 to pay their employees the 
prevailing local wage for their labor class, as determined by the U.S. Secretary of Labor. 
The general intent of the law, and similar state and local laws, is to stabilize local wage 
rates by preventing unfair bidding practices and wage competition. Thirty-two states and 
the District of Columbia currently have prevailing wage laws; since 1979, nine states have 
repealed their prevailing wage laws. 
 
Maryland adopted a prevailing wage law in 1945 (Chapter 999), but it only applied to road 
projects in Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. In 1969, the statute was amended 
to include State public works contracts of $500,000 or more. There have been periodic 
changes to the law and the definition of “prevailing wage.” In 1983, the law was broadened 
to include public works projects in which the State funds 50% or more of the total project 
costs and 75% or more in the case of public schools. Chapter 208 of 2000 reduced the 
prevailing wage threshold for public schools from 75% to 50% of construction costs, 
thereby bringing school construction projects in line with prevailing wage requirements for 
other public works projects. Chapters 281 and 282 of 2014 further lowered the State 
funding threshold for school construction projects to 25% of total construction costs, 
thereby requiring the vast majority of public school construction projects in the State to 
pay the prevailing wage, subject to the $500,000 contract value threshold.  
Chapters 57 and 58 of 2021 lowered the State funding threshold for all public works 
projects (including school construction) to 25% of total construction costs and lowered the 
contract value threshold for payment of prevailing wages to $250,000; however, legislative 
bond initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget are exempt from the 
requirement to pay prevailing wages. As noted above, Chapter 51 of 2022 extended the 
prevailing wage requirement to mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. 
 
Six Maryland jurisdictions – Allegany, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City – have local prevailing wage laws requiring 
public works projects in the jurisdiction to pay prevailing wages. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 299/ Page 11 
Research on the Effects of Prevailing Wage on Contract Costs 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has reviewed research on the effect of 
prevailing wage laws on the cost of public works contracts and has found inconsistent 
and/or unreliable results. The primary challenge confronted by all prevailing wage 
researchers is identifying an appropriate “control group” consisting of projects of similar 
type, timing, and location that do not pay the prevailing wage. In most jurisdictions that 
require a prevailing wage, all projects of a specified type and size are subject to it, so there 
is no natural control group. Some researchers have compared project costs in states or 
localities before and after they adopted prevailing wage requirements, but their findings 
are clouded by the difference in time, during which construction costs changed and other 
factors were not consistent. Another deficiency in the research is that it almost always relies 
on project bid prices (i.e., the anticipated cost prior to the beginning of construction) rather 
than actual final costs. As most construction projects experience change orders or cost 
overruns affecting their cost, reliance on bid prices negatively affects the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, research findings related to the effect of the prevailing wage on project 
costs are inconsistent and often inconclusive. A similar review of research conducted by  
MD Labor (at the time, the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) for the  
Task Force to Study the Applicability of the Maryland Prevailing Wage Law also 
concluded that “data limitations create difficulty for researchers on both sides of the issue.” 
 
Local school systems occasionally solicit side-by-side bids with and without prevailing 
wages to help them decide whether they want to accept the full State match (and, thus, be 
subject to the prevailing wage) or a lesser State match without being subject to the 
prevailing wage. Data provided to the Public School Construction Program by 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Frederick, Howard, and Washington counties, from 2012 through 
2015, shows that the cost differential between bids with and without prevailing wages for 
266 individual bids submitted for 26 different school construction and renovation projects 
averaged 11.7%, with a range from 0% to 49%. As with other research data, these represent 
bid prices, not actual construction costs. An independent analysis of the Maryland 
side-by-side bid data concluded that factors other than prevailing wages, including bid 
timing and the level of competition for the bids, accounted for most of the differences 
between the prevailing wage and nonprevailing wage bids. 
 
One area of the research in which there is a general consensus, and which is supported by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, is that labor costs represent between 20% and 30% of 
construction costs (with materials and site costs making up most of the rest). Therefore, a 
10% gap between prevailing wages and market wages could theoretically increase total 
contract costs by about 2.5%, and a 20% gap in wages could increase total contract costs 
by about 6%. Given the empirical evidence that prevailing wages tend to be higher than 
nonprevailing wages and that labor costs are a significant portion of overall project costs, 
DLS believes that it is reasonable to expect that the prevailing wage requirement adds 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 299/ Page 12 
between 2% and 5% to the cost of a public works project. Given the inconsistency and 
inconclusiveness of the empirical research, however, actual effects may vary by project, 
with some projects exhibiting higher cost differences and others experiencing negligible 
differences. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 299/ Page 13 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Fraud Prevention, Prevailing Wage, and Living Wage - Prohibitions, 
Penalties, and Enforcement 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 299 
 
PREPARED BY: Devki Virk 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The bill is intended to encourage compliance with existing laws. Although it does 
increase the potential sanctions for noncompliance, it should not result in economic 
impact for those businesses who are already compliant. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13