START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 259

I1 6lr0110
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 43

By: Chair, Economic Matters Committee (By Request – Departmental – Labor)
Requested: September 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Financial Institutions – Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund and
3 Regulation of Entities – Revisions

4 FOR the purpose of repealing certain fees charged to certain banking institutions by the
5 Commissioner of Financial Regulation; altering certain provisions relating to the
6 Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund, including the purpose and
7 administration of the Fund and the date by which the Commissioner may match
8 certain investments in the Fund; altering and providing for certain assessment offset
9 credits for certain banking institutions and credit unions; altering the definition of
10 “emergency” for purposes of determining closures of banking institutions; altering
11 which financial entities are included in certain prohibitions on using an entity’s
12 likeness; and generally relating to the Maryland Community Investment Venture
13 Fund and regulation of financial institutions in the State.

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – Financial Institutions
16 Section 1–101(a) and (d) and 1–301(a)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Financial Institutions
21 Section 1–301(b), 2–108(a)(8), 2–118.1, 3–213, 5–203, 5–707, 5–806, 6–712, and
22 6–901
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
26 Article – State Finance and Procurement
27 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0259*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 259

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

3 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
4 Article – State Finance and Procurement
5 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

8 BY adding to
9 Article – State Finance and Procurement
10 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Financial Institutions

16 1–101.

17 (a) In this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following
18 words have the meanings indicated.

19 (d) “Banking institution” means an institution that is incorporated under the
20 laws of this State as a State bank, trust company, or savings bank.

21 1–301.

22 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) (1) “Fiduciary institution” means:

24 (i) A national banking association;

25 (ii) A [State] banking institution;

26 (iii) An other–state bank that maintains a branch in this State;

27 (iv) A credit union that is organized under the laws of this State or
28 of the United States;

29 (v) Any other organization that is organized under the banking laws
30 of this State and subject to the supervision of the Commissioner; or
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 259 3

1 (vi) A savings and loan association that is organized under the laws
2 of this State or of the United States.

3 (2) “Fiduciary institution” does not include any person licensed by the
4 Commissioner under Title 11 of this article.

5 2–108.

6 (a) The Commissioner shall charge and collect, in advance, the following
7 nonrefundable fees:

8 (8) A fee for a certificate of valid charter[:

9 (i) If requested by or on behalf of a banking institution…………$25

10 (ii) If] requested by or on behalf of a person other than a banking
11 institution..............................................................................................................................$50

12 2–118.1.

13 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (2) “Fund” means the Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund.

15 (3) “Low– to moderate–income tract” has the meaning stated in § 5–203 of
16 this article.

17 (b) (1) There is a Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund.

18 (2) The Fund is a private venture fund that:

19 (i) Is an instrumentality of the State; and

20 (ii) Uses public and private investment funds.

21 (c) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the purpose of the Fund is
22 to develop opportunities for banking institutions and credit unions to better serve the needs
23 of low– to moderate–income tracts by:

24 (i) [Investing in] PROMOTING the development of financial
25 product or financial product underwriting innovations that enhance access to capital,
26 funding, and other financial services for CONSUMERS AND businesses in low– to
27 moderate–income tracts in the State THROUGH INVESTMENTS, GRANTS, AND OTHER
28 FORMS OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 259

1 (ii) Deploying, testing, and evaluating the innovations for providing
2 capital and funding to CONSUMERS AND businesses in low– to moderate–income tracts in
3 the State; and

4 (iii) Promoting and making the innovations available to banking
5 institutions and credit unions for use in enhancing access to capital, funding, and other
6 financial services for CONSUMERS AND businesses in low– to moderate–income tracts in
7 the State.

8 (2) With the approval of the Commissioner, the purpose of the Fund may
9 be altered in a manner that is consistent with the intent and requirements of this section.

10 (d) (1) (i) The Commissioner shall establish a governance structure for the
11 Fund.

12 (ii) The Commissioner may collaborate with investors in the Fund
13 when establishing the governance structure.

14 (2) The Commissioner, or the Commissioner’s designee, shall serve on the
15 governing body of the Fund.

16 (e) (1) The Commissioner may use up to $250,000 from the Banking
17 Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund established under § 2–118 of this subtitle to
18 cover the expenses associated with establishing AND ADMINISTERING the Fund, including
19 accounting, advisory, third–party service provider, marketing, and other necessary
20 expenses.

21 (2) To encourage private investment, the Commissioner may provide an
22 [initial] equity capital investment in the Fund in an amount up to $2,500,000 from the
23 Banking Institution and Credit Union Regulation Fund.

24 (f) (1) Through June 30, [2028] 2030, the Commissioner may match an
25 investment made in the Fund by a banking institution or credit union up to the amount of
26 the assessment credit earned by the banking institution or credit union in accordance with
27 § 5–203(d) or § 6–712(c)(4) of this article.

28 (2) The Commissioner may not make an investment in the Fund after June
29 30, [2028] 2030.

30 (g) All investment returns or return of capital from the Fund with respect to an
31 investment authorized by the Commissioner shall be credited to the Banking Institution
32 and Credit Union Regulation Fund.

33 (h) At the direction of the Commissioner, and in addition to any customary and
34 appropriate audits of the Fund, the governing body of the Fund shall obtain the services of
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 259 5

1 an independent third party designated by the Commissioner on an annual basis to evaluate
2 whether the investments made to the Fund comply with this section.

3 (i) (1) If the Commissioner determines that separate private venture funds
4 are necessary to accomplish the purpose of the Fund, the Commissioner may use money
5 from the Fund to establish additional private venture funds.

6 (2) An additional private venture fund established in accordance with this
7 subsection shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) through (f) of this section.

8 (J) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
9 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND
10 MAY NOT BE DEEMED A PART OF THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

11 (2) UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, NO PART OF THE FUND
12 MAY REVERT OR BE CREDITED TO:

13 (I) THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE; OR

14 (II) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION,
15 A SPECIAL FUND OF THE STATE.

16 (K) (1) THE STATE TREASURER IS THE CUSTODIAN OF THE FUND.

17 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
18 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

19 (3) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
20 THE FUND.

21 (L) THE COMMISSIONER MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS REASONABLY
22 NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

23 3–213.

24 (a) Any commercial bank may amend its charter, in any manner not inconsistent
25 with law, as provided in this section.

26 (b) A proposed amendment shall be approved at a meeting called for that purpose,
27 by the affirmative vote of the holders of two thirds of the capital stock of the commercial
28 bank.

29 (c) If the proposed amendment is to authorize the issuance of preferred stock, the
30 proposed amendment shall be approved by the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority
31 of the capital stock of the commercial bank.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 259

1 (d) After an amendment is approved by the stockholders:

2 (1) The president of the commercial bank and either its cashier or treasurer
3 shall certify the amendment; and

4 (2) The amendment shall be signed, filed with the Commissioner for
5 examination, and, if approved by the Commissioner, filed for record as required for articles
6 of incorporation.

7 [(e) On filing the amendment for examination, the commercial bank shall pay to
8 the Commissioner an examination fee of $20.]

9 5–203.

10 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

11 (2) “Branch” means a deposit–taking office of a banking institution [other
12 than the main office as defined by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] IN THE
13 STATE THAT IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AS OF DECEMBER 31 OF THE CALENDAR YEAR
14 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING A REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT.

15 (3) “De novo branch” [has the meaning stated in § 5–1001 of this title]
16 MEANS A DEPOSIT–TAKING OFFICE OF A BANKING INSTITUTION IN THE STATE THAT
17 WAS OPENED TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE FIRST TIME DURING THE CALENDAR YEAR
18 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING A REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT THAT:

19 (I) WAS ORIGINALLY ESTABLISHED BY THE BANKING
20 INSTITUTION AS A BRANCH; BUT

21 (II) DID NOT BECOME A BRANCH OF THE BANKING INSTITUTION
22 AS A RESULT OF:

23 1. THE ACQUISITION BY THE BANKING INSTITUTION OF
24 AN INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION OR A BRANCH OF AN INSURED DEPOSITORY
25 INSTITUTION; OR

26 2. THE CONVERSION, MERGER, OR CONSOLIDATION OF
27 AN INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION OR A BRANCH OF AN INSURED DEPOSITORY
28 INSTITUTION.

29 (4) [“Deposit growth cap” means the year–over–year percentage change of
30 domestic office deposits as reported on December 31 each year by the Federal Deposit
31 Insurance Corporation in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation quarterly bank
32 profile.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 259 7

1 (5)] “Deposits” means deposits originated and housed at a branch located in
2 a low– to moderate–income tract as reported by a banking institution to the Federal Deposit
3 Insurance Corporation each year as of [June 30] DECEMBER 31.

4 [(6)] (5) “Low– to moderate–income tract” means a census tract
5 delineated by the U.S. Bureau of the Census in the most recent decennial census as
6 published by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council that corresponds to
7 low– to moderate–income level classifications as defined by the regulation of the Federal
8 Reserve Board implementing the federal Community Reinvestment Act, 12 C.F.R. § 228.12.

9 (6) “MARYLAND OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT” MEANS A TRANSACTION
10 ACCOUNT OFFERED BY A BANKING INSTITUTION TO CUSTOMERS THAT MEETS
11 STANDARDS ANNUALLY DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER THAT PROMOTE FAIR
12 AND EQUAL ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES.

13 (b) The Commissioner shall impose annual assessments on each banking
14 institution as provided in this section[,] to cover the expense of regulating banking
15 institutions.

16 (c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the
17 Commissioner shall assess each banking institution the sum of:

18 (i) $8,000; plus

19 (ii) 1. 12 cents for each $1,000 of the assets of the institution over
20 $50,000,000, but not more than $250,000,000;

21 2. 10 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $250,000,000, but
22 not more than $500,000,000;

23 3. 9 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $500,000,000, but not
24 more than $1,000,000,000;

25 4. 8 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $1,000,000,000, but
26 not more than $10,000,000,000; and

27 5. 7 cents for each $1,000 of assets over $10,000,000,000.

28 (2) If a banking institution is not in the business of accepting deposits or
29 retaining funds in a deposit account as defined in § 5–509 of this title, the Commissioner
30 shall assess the banking institution the sum of:

31 (i) $5,000; plus
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 259

1 (ii) 1. 0.3 cents for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
2 fiduciary capacity up to $5,000,000,000;

3 2. 0.2 cents for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
4 fiduciary capacity over $5,000,000,000, but not more than $20,000,000,000;

5 3. 0.1 cent for each $1,000 of managed assets held in a
6 fiduciary capacity over $20,000,000,000 up to $27,500,000,000;

7 4. 0.2 cents for each $1,000 of nonmanaged and custodial
8 assets held in a fiduciary capacity up to $5,000,000,000; and

9 5. 0.1 cent for each $1,000 of nonmanaged and custodial
10 assets held in a fiduciary capacity over $5,000,000,000 up to $20,000,000,000.

11 (3) The assessments shall be based on assets stated in a banking
12 institution’s most recent financial report.

13 (d) (1) A well–capitalized banking institution with a composite CAMELS
14 rating of 1 or 2 may file with the Commissioner a request for an assessment offset credit of:

15 [(1)] (I) 12 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a de novo branch located
16 in a low– to moderate–income tract IN THE STATE for the first 5 years after the date the
17 branch opened; or

18 [(2)] (II) 6 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a branch located in a
19 low– to moderate–income tract not to exceed the [deposit growth] cap SET BY THE
20 COMMISSIONER BY DECEMBER 31 OF THE CALENDAR YEAR IMMEDIATELY
21 PRECEDING THE REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT.

22 (2) IN ADDITION TO AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT UNDER
23 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A WELL–CAPITALIZED BANKING INSTITUTION
24 WITH A COMPOSITE CAMELS RATING OF 1, 2, OR 3 MAY FILE WITH THE
25 COMMISSIONER A REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT OF:

26 (I) $5,000 ON RECEIVING THE COMMISSIONER’S INITIAL
27 APPROVAL THAT THE BANKING INSTITUTION OFFERS AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND
28 OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT; AND

29 (II) $3,000 FOR EACH YEAR THEREAFTER THAT THE BANKING
30 INSTITUTION OFFERS AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT THAT, AS
31 DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER, REMAINS IN ACTIVE USE BY THE BANKING
32 INSTITUTION’S CUSTOMERS.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 259 9

1 (e) Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, for a banking institution with
2 a composite CAMELS rating of 3, 4, or 5 for its most recent examination, the annual
3 assessment imposed under this section shall be increased by an additional 25%.

4 (f) A banking institution shall pay the assessment imposed under this section to
5 the Commissioner on or before the April 15 after it is imposed.

6 (g) The Commissioner may designate a successor index for[:

7 (1) The] THE low– to moderate–income tract if the Federal Financial
8 Institutions Examination Council tract income level data is no longer published[; or

9 (2) The deposit growth cap if the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
10 report of domestic office deposits is no longer published].

11 5–707.

12 (a) (1) In this section, “emergency” has the meaning stated in § 14–307 of the
13 Public Safety Article.

14 (2) “EMERGENCY” INCLUDES A CYBERSECURITY INCIDENT THAT
15 NECESSITATES THE CLOSURE OF A BANKING INSTITUTION OR A BRANCH OF A
16 BANKING INSTITUTION.

17 (b) (1) If the Governor proclaims that an emergency exists in a political
18 subdivision and designates days for the general cessation of business in the subdivision,
19 each banking office that is located within the subdivision shall be closed on those days.

20 (2) If the Governor proclaims that an emergency exists in a political
21 subdivision, the Governor may designate days on which each banking office that is located
22 within the subdivision may be closed.

23 (3) If the Governor proclaims that an emergency exists as to a particular
24 banking office, that office may be closed on those days that the Governor designates.

25 (4) When the Governor authorizes, but does not require, the banking
26 institution to be closed, the chairman of its board of directors or its president shall decide
27 whether to close or remain open.

28 (c) (1) If an emergency exists and affects a banking institution and if it is not
29 practical to obtain a proclamation from the Governor before closing the affected institution,
30 the chairman of its board of directors or its president:

31 (i) May close the banking institution; and
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 259

1 (ii) As soon as possible, but within 24 hours after the closing, shall
2 notify the Governor of the reasons for the closing.

3 (2) A banking institution may be closed under this subsection until the
4 earlier of:

5 (i) Issuance by the Governor of a proclamation that relates to the
6 emergency closing;

7 (ii) Notice to the banking institution that the Governor will not issue
8 a proclamation;

9 (iii) Reopening of the banking institution by the chairman of its board
10 of directors or by its president; or

11 (iv) 5 p.m. on the third day after the closing, except for Saturdays,
12 Sundays, and legal holidays.

13 5–806.

14 (a) Except for a [bank, trust company, savings bank,] BANKING INSTITUTION,
15 A NATIONAL BANKING ASSOCIATION, AN OTHER–STATE BANK, or A savings and loan
16 association that is authorized to do business in this State, a person may not use any name,
17 title, or other words that represent that the person is authorized to do the business of
18 banking in this State.

19 (b) (1) (i) In this subsection the following terms have the meanings
20 indicated.

21 (ii) 1. “Bank” means any [bank, trust company, savings bank,]
22 BANKING INSTITUTION, NATIONAL BANKING ASSOCIATION, OTHER–STATE BANK, or
23 savings and loan association that is authorized to do business in this State, and any
24 subsidiary or affiliate of the entity.

25 2. “Bank” includes any Farm Credit System institution in
26 this State.

27 (iii) “Name” means the name, trade name, trademark, service mark,
28 logo, or tagline used by a bank to identify itself.

29 (2) Except with the consent of the bank, a person may not use the name of
30 a bank or any term or design that is similar to the name of a bank in any marketing
31 material provided to another person or in any solicitation of another person in a manner
32 that may cause a reasonable person to be confused, mistaken, or deceived that the
33 marketing material or solicitation:

34 (i) Originated from the bank;
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 259 11

1 (ii) Originated from someone affiliated, connected, or associated
2 with the bank;

3 (iii) Is approved or sponsored by the bank; or

4 (iv) Is the responsibility of the bank.

5 (c) In addition to any other remedies a bank may have under any other provision
6 of law, a bank that is affected by a violation of subsection (b) of this section may bring an
7 action against the person that committed the violation to recover:

8 (1) Actual damages sustained as a result of the violation;

9 (2) Either:

10 (i) All profits attributable to the violation; or

11 (ii) $1,000 for each violation; and

12 (3) Court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.

13 (d) Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a
14 misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $3,000 or imprisonment
15 not exceeding 5 years or both.

16 6–712.

17 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

18 (2) “BRANCH” MEANS A DEPOSIT–TAKING OFFICE OF A CREDIT
19 UNION IN THE STATE THAT IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AS OF DECEMBER 31 OF THE
20 CALENDAR YEAR PRECEDING THE REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT.

21 (3) “De novo branch” means a [branch of a credit union that was originally
22 established by the credit union in the State] DEPOSIT–TAKING OFFICE OF A CREDIT
23 UNION IN THE STATE THAT WAS OPENED TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE FIRST TIME
24 DURING THE CALENDAR YEAR IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING A REQUEST FOR AN
25 ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT THAT:

26 (I) WAS ORIGINALLY ESTABLISHED BY THE CREDIT UNION AS A
27 BRANCH; BUT

28 (II) DID NOT BECOME A BRANCH OF THE CREDIT UNION AS A
29 RESULT OF:
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 259

1 1. THE ACQUISITION BY THE CREDIT UNION OF AN
2 INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION OR A BRANCH OF AN INSURED DEPOSITORY
3 INSTITUTION; OR

4 2. THE CONVERSION, MERGER, OR CONSOLIDATION OF
5 AN INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION OR A BRANCH OF AN INSURED DEPOSITORY
6 INSTITUTION.

7 [(3) “Deposit growth cap” means the year–over–year percentage change of
8 total shares and deposits reported December 31 each year by federally insured credit unions
9 to the National Credit Union Administration and published in the National Credit Union
10 Administration Call Report Aggregate Financial Performance Reports.]

11 (4) “Deposits” means deposits originated and housed at a credit union
12 branch located in a low– to moderate–income tract as reported by a credit union to the
13 Commissioner each year as of [June 30] DECEMBER 31.

14 (5) “Low– to moderate–income tract” has the meaning stated in § 5–203 of
15 this article.

16 (6) “MARYLAND OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT” MEANS A TRANSACTION
17 ACCOUNT OFFERED BY A CREDIT UNION TO ITS MEMBERS THAT MEETS STANDARDS
18 ANNUALLY DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER THAT PROMOTE FAIR AND EQUAL
19 ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES.

20 (b) This section applies only to a credit union with assets of $300,000 or greater.

21 (c) (1) The Commissioner shall impose an annual assessment on each credit
22 union as provided in this subsection to cover the expense of regulating credit unions.

23 (2) The Commissioner shall assess each credit union the sum of:

24 (i) $1,000; and

25 (ii) 8 cents for each $1,000 of the assets of the credit union over
26 $1,000,000.

27 (3) The assessment shall be based on assets stated in the credit union’s
28 most recent financial report.

29 (4) A well–capitalized credit union with a composite CAMELS rating of 1
30 or 2 may file with the Commissioner a request for an assessment offset credit of:

31 (i) 12 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a de novo branch located
32 in a low– to moderate–income tract for the first 5 years after the date the de novo branch
33 opened; or
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 259 13

1 (ii) 6 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a branch located in a
2 low– to moderate–income tract not to exceed the [deposit growth] cap SET BY THE
3 COMMISSIONER BY DECEMBER 31 OF THE CALENDAR YEAR PRECEDING THE
4 REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT.

5 (5) IN ADDITION TO AN ASSESSMENT OFFSET CREDIT UNDER
6 PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A WELL–CAPITALIZED CREDIT UNION WITH A
7 COMPOSITE CAMELS RATING OF 1, 2, OR 3 MAY FILE WITH THE COMMISSIONER A
8 REQUEST FOR AN ASSESSMENT CREDIT OF:

9 (I) $5,000 ON RECEIVING THE COMMISSIONER’S INITIAL
10 APPROVAL THAT THE CREDIT UNION OFFERS AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND
11 OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT; AND

12 (II) $3,000 FOR EACH YEAR THEREAFTER THAT THE CREDIT
13 UNION OFFERS AT LEAST ONE MARYLAND OPPORTUNITY ACCOUNT THAT, AS
14 DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER, REMAINS IN ACTIVE USE BY THE CREDIT
15 UNION’S MEMBERS.

16 (d) A credit union shall pay the assessment imposed under this section to the
17 Commissioner on or before the [March 1] APRIL 15 after the assessment is imposed.

18 [(e) The Commissioner may designate a successor index for the deposit growth cap
19 if the National Credit Union Administration Call Report Aggregate Financial Performance
20 Reports is no longer published.]

21 6–901.

22 (a) (1) Except for a credit union OR AN OUT–OF–STATE CREDIT UNION
23 authorized to do business in this State, a person may not:

24 (i) Use or advertise any name or title that contains the words “credit
25 union” or any derivation of that term;

26 (ii) Represent itself as a credit union;

27 (iii) Conduct business as a credit union; or

28 (iv) Conduct business under a name or title that:

29 1. Indicates or reasonably implies that the person engages in
30 or transacts the type of business conducted by a credit union; or
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 259

1 2. Is calculated to lead a person to believe that the business
2 engaged in or transacted is the type of business conducted by a credit union.

3 (2) Any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a
4 misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $3,000 or imprisonment
5 not exceeding 5 years or both per occurrence.

6 (b) This section does not apply to an association or league of credit unions,
7 whether or not the association or league is incorporated.

8 Article – State Finance and Procurement

9 6–226.

10 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.

11 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
12 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
13 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
14 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
15 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
16 Fund of the State.

17 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
18 apply to the following funds:

19 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
20 Fund; [and]

21 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

22 214. THE MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT VENTURE
23 FUND.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 14