START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 210

R7 6lr0642
HB 915/25 – ENT (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Foley
Requested: July 23, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motor Vehicles – Out–of–State Drivers – Automated Enforcement
3 (Out–of–State Driver Accountability Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring each county and municipal automated traffic enforcement
5 program to submit to the Vision Zero coordinator a quarterly report containing
6 certain information regarding each citation issued under the program during the
7 quarter to a motor vehicle registered in another state; and generally relating to
8 automated enforcement of the Maryland Vehicle Law against out–of–state drivers.

9 BY renumbering
10 Article – Transportation
11 Section 8–1006 and 8–1007
12 to be Section 8–1007 and 8–1008, respectively
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – Transportation
17 Section 8–1001 through 8–1003
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY adding to
21 Article – Transportation
22 Section 8–1006
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0210*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 210

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That Section(s) 8–1006 and 8–1007 of Article – Transportation of the Annotated Code of
3 Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 8–1007 and 8–1008, respectively.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
5 as follows:

6 Article – Transportation

7 8–1001.

8 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

9 (b) “Coordinator” means the individual designated by the Department to oversee
10 the implementation of Vision Zero throughout the State.

11 (c) “Vision Zero” means a program for planning and developing a State roadway
12 system that has zero vehicle–related deaths or serious injuries.

13 8–1002.

14 There is a program within the Department known as Vision Zero.

15 8–1003.

16 (a) The purpose of Vision Zero is to develop strategies to make roadways safer for
17 drivers and passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians.

18 (b) The goal of Vision Zero is to have zero vehicle–related deaths or serious
19 injuries on roadways by the year 2030.

20 8–1006.

21 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL AUTOMATED
22 TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT PROGRAMS THAT IMPLEMENT:

23 (1) TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER §
24 21–202.1 OF THIS ARTICLE;

25 (2) AUTOMATED RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING ENFORCEMENT
26 SYSTEMS UNDER § 21–704.1 OF THIS ARTICLE;

27 (3) SCHOOL BUS MONITORING CAMERAS UNDER § 21–706.1 OF THIS
28 ARTICLE;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 210 3

1 (4) STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER § 21–707.1 OF THIS
2 ARTICLE;

3 (5) SPEED MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER § 21–809 OF THIS ARTICLE;

4 (6) WORK ZONE SPEED CONTROL SYSTEMS UNDER § 21–810 OF THIS
5 ARTICLE;

6 (7) BUS LANE MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER § 21–1134 OF THIS
7 ARTICLE;

8 (8) NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER § 22–612 OF
9 THIS ARTICLE;

10 (9) VEHICLE HEIGHT MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER § 24–111.3 OF
11 THIS ARTICLE; OR

12 (10) ANY OTHER COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL AUTOMATED TRAFFIC
13 ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM AUTHORIZED UNDER STATE LAW.

14 (B) EACH COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
15 PROGRAM SHALL SUBMIT A QUARTERLY REPORT TO THE COORDINATOR STATING,
16 FOR EACH CITATION ISSUED DURING THE APPLICABLE QUARTER TO A MOTOR
17 VEHICLE REGISTERED IN ANOTHER STATE:

18 (1) THE REGISTRATION PLATE NUMBER AND STATE OF
19 REGISTRATION;

20 (2) WHETHER THE CITATION HAS BEEN PAID; AND

21 (3) WHETHER THE CITATION IS PAST DUE.

22 (C) EACH QUARTERLY REPORT SHALL:

23 (1) INCLUDE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)
24 OF THIS SECTION FOR THE PREVIOUS QUARTER;

25 (2) UPDATE THE INFORMATION PROVIDED IN PREVIOUS QUARTERLY
26 REPORTS TO REFLECT CITATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN SUBSEQUENTLY PAID AND ARE
27 NO LONGER CONSIDERED PAST DUE; AND

28 (3) PROVIDE A CUMULATIVE SUMMARY OF:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 210

1 (I) CITATIONS ISSUED UNDER THE PROGRAM TO MOTOR
2 VEHICLES REGISTERED IN ANOTHER STATE;

3 (II) THE NUMBER OF CITATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN PAID; AND

4 (III) THE NUMBER OF CITATIONS THAT ARE PAST DUE.

5 (D) THE COORDINATOR SHALL COLLABORATE WITH COUNTY AND
6 MUNICIPAL AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT PROGRAMS TO IMPLEMENT THIS
7 SECTION.

8 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4