START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 278 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 278 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Aging) 
Health 
 
 
Human Services - Department of Aging and Commission on Aging (The 
Longevity Ready Maryland Act) 
 
 
This departmental bill codifies the “Longevity Ready Maryland (LRM) Plan,” and requires 
the Secretary of Aging to lead implementation of the LRM Plan with the goals of:  
(1) building a longevity ecosystem; (2) promoting economic opportunity; (3) preparing 
State residents to afford longevity; and (4) optimizing health, wellness, and mobility. By 
July 1, 2029, and every four years thereafter, the Secretary must provide the Governor and 
the General Assembly with an updated comprehensive LRM Plan. By January 1 each year, 
the Secretary must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on specified activities. 
The bill alters the membership and duties of the Commission on Aging. The bill also makes 
conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill generally codifies existing policies and procedures. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill generally codifies existing policies and procedures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) has determined that 
this bill has a meaningful impact on small businesses (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Longevity Ready Maryland Plan 
 
“Longevity Ready Maryland Plan” means a multisector plan on aging that (1) transforms 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 278/ Page 2 
programs, services, policies, institutions, and systems to address the growing population of 
older adults; and (2) incorporates streamlined, innovative approaches to aging services. 
 
To implement the LRM Plan, the Secretary of Aging must:  (1) evaluate the service needs 
of older adults in the State; (2) determine the extent to which existing public and private 
programs, policies, institutions, and systems support older adults; (3) establish priorities 
for meeting the needs of older adults; and (4) coordinate, assess and evaluate, and educate 
the public and professionals about all State and local programs and services, both public 
and private, that relate and are important to the well-being of older adults in the State. 
 
The Secretary must:   
 
 
represent the interests of older adults by serving as an advocate for policy, systems, 
and institutional change at all levels of government and within the private sector in 
support of the LRM Plan; 
 
emphasize cross-sector collaboration, including consulting and advising units of 
State government and State boards and commissions about any action the unit, 
board, or commission may take to assist in implementing the LRM Plan; 
 
consult with the Commission on Aging on implementation of the LRM Plan; 
 
provide consultation and technical assistance to organizations and other entities or 
persons developing local services for older adults in partnership with area agencies 
on aging (AAAs) and other organizations and entities funded by the department; 
 
maintain a system that provides information, referrals, and counseling for older 
adults and their caregivers related to the interests of older adults and the 
implementation of the LRM Plan; and 
 
review and recommend legislation and other policy action to the Governor on 
publicly funded plans, programs, institutions, and systems that affect older adults 
and the implementation of the LRM Plan. 
 
By July 1, 2029, and every four years thereafter, the Secretary must provide an updated 
comprehensive LRM Plan that, among other things, includes progress made on existing 
goals, objectives, and strategies identified in the immediately preceding LRM Plan; 
maintains existing goals and includes any additional goals; and updates objectives and 
strategies (if appropriate) based on evolving circumstances and population projections. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By January 1 each year, the Secretary must submit a report that includes a summary of:  
(1) the progress made during the immediately preceding year to implement the most 
recently published comprehensive LRM Plan; (2) recommendations for legislation, policy 
change, or other related planning or advocacy efforts made by the Commission on Aging 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 278/ Page 3 
to the department; (3) any study, survey, or other form of research conducted by the 
department or commission; and (4) any available research and best practices reviewed by 
the commission. 
 
Commission on Aging 
 
The bill alters the membership of the commission by (1) repealing the nonvoting status of 
the two legislative members and specifying that such members are appointed by the 
President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House (rather than by the Governor); 
(2) adding the Secretary of Aging (or their designee); and (3) adding the following 
members, appointed by the Governor:  one director of an AAA, serving as the President of 
the Maryland Association of Area Agencies on Aging; three representatives of 
organizations located in the State that advocate for older adults and caregivers; five experts 
on aging representing the disciplines of health care, technology, academia, innovation, and 
the private sector and philanthropy; and five individuals with a demonstrated interest in the 
implementation of the LRM Plan. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that 11 members be selected to reflect the geographic 
diversity of the State and because of their interest in the needs of seniors and the 
requirement that at least 7 members be at least 55 years old. Instead, the bill specifies that, 
to the extent practicable, commission membership must reflect the age, race, ethnicity, 
disability, gender identity, sexual orientation, immigrant heritage, lived and professional 
experience, and regional geographic representation diversity of the State. A member of the 
commission who fails to attend at least 50% of the meetings during any consecutive 
12-month period must be considered to have resigned. 
 
The Secretary must designate the chair of the commission and may designate a vice chair. 
The chair may establish subcommittees. The commission may consult and collaborate with 
local commissions on aging. The commission must determine the frequency, dates, times, 
and places of its meetings. A majority of the members serving on the commission is a 
quorum. MDOA must provide staff for the commission.  
 
The commission must:   
 
 
review and advise the department on the LRM Plan and overall progress of the 
department and multisector partners in implementing the recommendations of the 
most recently published LRM Plan; 
 
advise the Secretary on the legislative, policy, and other systems changes that could 
assist with implementation of the LRM Plan; and 
 
advise the Secretary on any update to the LRM Plan, including any update to the 
goals, objectives, and strategies to be included in subsequent LRM Plans.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 278/ Page 4 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Department of Aging 
 
MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the delivery of services for, and advocates on 
behalf of, older adults at all levels of government. The department also administers 
programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older Americans Act. 
 
The Secretary of Aging must:   
 
 
evaluate the service needs of seniors in the State; 
 
determine the extent to which existing public and private programs meet the needs 
of seniors; 
 
establish priorities for meeting the needs of seniors; 
 
coordinate, assess and evaluate, and educate the public and professionals about all 
State and local programs and services, both public and private, that relate and are 
important to the well-being of seniors in the State, including in the areas of income 
maintenance, public health, mental health, housing and urban development, 
employment, education, recreation, and rehabilitation of seniors with physical or 
mental disabilities;  
 
develop a statewide plan incorporating local plans for a comprehensive and 
coordinated system of health, social, and community services for seniors, including 
housing, and institutional and noninstitutional care; 
 
represent the interests of seniors by serving as an advocate at all levels of 
government; 
 
consult with and advise the secretaries of the principal departments of State 
government about the programs and services for seniors that are the primary 
responsibility of those departments; 
 
consult with the Commission on Aging on all matters pertaining to programs for 
seniors; 
 
provide consultation and technical assistance to communities and civic groups 
developing local services for seniors; 
 
maintain a clearinghouse of information related to the interests of seniors; and 
 
review and recommend policies to the Governor on publicly funded plans and 
programs that affect seniors.  
 
By January 1 each year, the Secretary must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly that must include information regarding the operation and performance 
of accessible housing services counseling provided by the Aging and Disability Resource 
Center Program and, with the advice and recommendation of the Commission of Aging, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 278/ Page 5 
(1) a description of the senior citizen activities centers in each county; (2) the allocation 
and use of funds made available for senior citizen activities centers; (3) the results of any 
studies; and (4) any recommendations for legislation. 
 
Longevity-Ready Maryland Initiative 
 
On January 3, 2024, Governor Wes Moore issued Executive Order 01.01.2024.01 to direct 
MDOA to develop and implement the Longevity-Ready Maryland Initiative, a multisector 
plan to evaluate existing services, support, and care options for older adults and recommend 
a plan of action to address demographic trends, such as the falling birth rate and longer life 
spans of residents in Maryland. The Secretary of Aging must (1) convene workgroups to 
develop and implement the initiative and (2) engage and coordinate with independent State 
agencies, federal, State, local partners, and private entities to gather information that may 
assist in the development of the initiative. 
 
The initiative must:   
 
 
evaluate the utility of existing services, support, and care options for older adults, 
including those with different abilities;  
 
review current data and establish a comprehensive framework of policies and 
programs that seek to improve and support the health, well-being, and quality of life 
for older adults;  
 
set forth a plan to transform the infrastructure and coordination of services among 
State agencies for older adults;  
 
identify goals with measurable outcomes, necessary to implement the initiative; and  
 
include specified recommendations. 
 
On June 26, 2025, MDOA released the required interim report (The Longevity Ready 
Maryland Plan) summarizing the findings and recommendations of the initiative, and a 
proposed development timeline to implement the initiative.  
 
Commission on Aging 
 
The commission consists of 13 members appointed by the Governor:  (1) 1 member of the 
Senate of Maryland, who may not vote; (2) 1 member of the House of Delegates, who may 
not vote; and (3) 11 members selected to reflect the geographic diversity of the State and 
because of their interest in the needs of seniors. At least 7 members must be at least 
55 years old. From among the members of the commission, the Governor must designate 
a chair.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 278/ Page 6 
The commission must (1) exercise the powers and perform the duties specified in Title 10 
of the Human Services Article; (2) review ongoing statewide programs and activities for 
seniors and new statewide programs for seniors before the programs are implemented; and 
(3) make recommendations to the Secretary about statewide programs and activities for 
seniors. 
 
Background:  MDOA advises that the bill largely codifies Executive Order 01.01.2024.01 
by defining the LRM Plan, identifying the plan’s overarching goals, and updating the duties 
of the Secretary of Aging to manage implementation of the LRM Plan. Required 
annual reporting on the progress of the LRM Plan, in addition to a four-year comprehensive 
update to the LRM Plan, aligns with the department’s existing required federal reporting. 
Accordingly, MDOA advises that the bill replaces outdated language regarding MDOA’s 
role, from focusing solely on the service needs of older adults, to instead reflect a new, 
broader function of advocating for relevant legislation, policies, systems, and institutional 
change within the State. 
 
MDOA further advises that the department is currently the agency responsible for staffing 
the Commission on Aging. The bill updates the commission’s membership and scope of 
work to allow the commission to function as an advisory group for LRM Plan 
implementation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS advises that, since the bill largely codifies 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.01, any economic impact on small business is not a direct 
result of the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 113 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Aging) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 278/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Human Services - Department of Aging and Commission on Aging (The  
Longevity Ready Maryland Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 278 
 
PREPARED BY: Andrea Nunez, MDOA (Aging) 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill’s embrace of the state’s all-of-government and multisector approach to preparing for 
longer lives and our growing older adult population will grow our economy and have positive 
small business impact.  As the preamble of the bill text notes in stunning statistics, older adults 
are a growing, powerful workforce and powerful contributor to the state’s GDP and economic 
success.  Longevity Ready Maryland Plan implementation over the coming decades will 
emphasize a multigenerational workforce, upskilling older adults, and greater support for formal 
and informal caregivers of all ages, among many other topics as described in the initial Plan.  All 
of these types of state systems improvements will benefit Maryland small businesses.  They’ll 
benefit from more older Marylanders staying in the workforce or returning to work, providing 
care for family members, and their significant spending power as consumers.  As more older 
Marylanders remain in Maryland with a more Longevity Ready state, not only does our state tax 
picture benefit, but small businesses benefit from their availability as capable, available part-time 
or full-time workers, and their spending.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7