START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 227 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 227 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Environmental Service) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Environmental Service - Authorizations and Requirements - 
Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) expands the duties that the Treasurer of the Maryland 
Environmental Service (MES) is authorized to delegate (with the approval of the Board of 
Directors of MES) to the deputy treasurer; (2) increases the maximum dollar value 
threshold for small procurements by MES from $25,000 to $50,000; and (3) updates the 
public notice requirements for rate changes in service districts.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect on MES finances, but MES may experience 
administrative efficiencies to the extent that it is able to procure more goods and services 
using small procurement methods.    
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  MES has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 227/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:            
 
Duties of the Deputy Treasurer of the Maryland Environmental Service 
 
Under current law and the bill, with board approval, the Treasurer is authorized to appoint 
an MES employee to serve as the deputy treasurer. Under current law, the Treasurer is 
authorized to allow the deputy treasurer only to disburse money for the purposes of MES 
as provided by law. Under the bill, with board approval and as authorized by the Treasurer, 
the deputy treasurer is eligible to perform any of the following duties (which are duties of 
the Treasurer mandated in current law):  
 
 
develop and maintain a detailed and accurate accounting system for all of MES’s 
financial transactions;  
 
perform other duties related to MES’s financial affairs, as specified;  
 
except in specified circumstances, to receive MES’s money until otherwise 
prescribed by law and deposit the money to the credit of MES upon receipt; 
 
disburse money for the purposes of MES in accordance with law; and  
 
make arrangements for the payment of interest on and principal of MES debt.  
 
Threshold Dollar Amount for Small Procurements  
 
Under current law, which is unchanged by the bill, in general, State procurement law 
defines a small procurement to be a procurement for which an agency spends $100,000 or 
less, or for which a contractor provides specified services with expected annual revenues 
of $100,000 or less. These limits were raised from $50,000 by Chapter 161 of 2023. 
Procurement law specifies additional thresholds for specialized procurements, including 
(1) $200,000 for construction contracts by Department of General Services or the Maryland 
Department of Transportation and (2) $200,000 for capital or maintenance projects by the 
Department of Natural Resources.  
 
MES has a service-specific small procurement threshold amount that was not changed by 
Chapter 161. Under current law, MES may procure materials, equipment, services, or 
supplies through a small procurement process if the procurement is estimated to be  
$25,000 or less. Under the bill, this threshold is increased to $50,000.   
 
Required Public Notice for Service District Rate Changes   
 
Under current law, MES must publish notice before establishing or adjusting charges in a 
service district. At least once a week for two weeks, the notice must be published in at least 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 227/ Page 3 
one newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the service district is 
located, and MES must hold a public hearing on the proposed changes. Current law also 
specifies the format and location where the notice must appear in the newspaper. Under 
the bill, the newspaper notice must be placed with legal notices, have the headline bolded 
with capital letters, and have the remainder of the notice be typed in upper and lowercase 
letters.  
 
The bill further specifies that the notice must be published at least 60 days before the change 
goes into effect. In addition to publishing notice in a newspaper, the bill requires MES to 
use one or more of the following methods to notify residents:  
 
 
posting proposed charges on MES’s website for at least two consecutive weeks; 
 
if the service district is already established and the established charges are changing, 
sending an e-mail or text notification of the proposed charges at least once a week 
for two consecutive weeks to all affected ratepayers who have provided contact 
information; or  
 
mailing notice of the proposed charges through the U.S. Postal Service to each 
affected property owner and physical address.  
 
Background:  MES notes that the bill’s changes regarding authorized duties of the  
deputy treasurer align statute with current practice regarding duties that the  
deputy treasurer is performing with board approval.  
 
The changes to the threshold dollar amount for small procurements bring MES closer to 
the standard small procurement threshold amount for other State agencies. MES notes that 
the change will allow the service to obtain goods and services more quickly and efficiently. 
According to MES, in fiscal 2025, 85 out of 327 (26%) of its contracts and purchase orders 
fell in the $25,000 to $50,000 range. Thus, increasing the threshold dollar amount for small 
procurement contracts will likely result in meaningful efficiencies for MES.  
 
MES has the authority to establish service regions for water, wastewater, and solid waste 
and establishes charges for these services to recover costs. According to MES, current law 
standards for public notice of rate changes were established in 1993 and do not align with 
modern forms of communication. With the bill’s changes, MES intends to both modernize 
and align the notice provisions with standards followed by other State agencies.      
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 227/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 228 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland Environmental Service) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Maryland Energy 
Administration; Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 227/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Environmental Service - Authorizations and Requirements 
– Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 227 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Environmental Service 
 
 
 
Jeff Tosi, Director of Government Affairs 
 
 
 
jtosi@menv.com 
 
 
 
410-303-9352 (cell) 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5