START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 213 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 213 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Evidence – Interception of Oral Communications – Fair Housing Testing 
 
 
This bill establishes that it is lawful for a person to intercept an oral communication if 
(1) the person is working as a fair housing tester for a fair housing testing program operated 
by the federal government, the State, a local government, or a “nonprofit civil rights 
organization”; (2) the person is a party to the communication; and (3) the interception is 
being made for the purpose of obtaining evidence of a fair housing violation under federal, 
State, or local law. The contents of an intercepted oral communication may be used only 
to enforce federal, State, or local fair housing laws. Otherwise, the contents of an 
intercepted communication and any evidence derived therefrom are inadmissible in any 
trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any court, grand jury, department, officer, 
agency, regulatory body, legislative committee, or other authority of the State or a political 
subdivision of the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “nonprofit civil rights organization” is (1) a qualified fair housing 
enforcement organization or a fair housing organization, as defined under 
24 C.F.R. § 125.103, or (2) an organization incorporated under Maryland law as a private, 
tax-exempt civil rights organization that has at least two years of experience in complaint 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 213/ Page 2 
intake, complaint investigation, and testing for fair housing violations or enforcement of 
meritorious claims. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Interception of a Communication 
 
Except as otherwise provided in statute, it is unlawful for a person to:   
 
 
willfully intercept, endeavor to intercept, or procure any other person to intercept a 
wire, oral, or electronic communication; 
 
willfully disclose, or endeavor to disclose, to any other person the contents of a wire, 
oral, or electronic communication, knowing or having reason to know that the 
information was obtained through an illegal intercept; or 
 
willfully use, or endeavor to use, the contents of a wire, oral, or electronic 
communication, knowing or having reason to know that the information was 
obtained through an illegal intercept. 
 
One specified exception is the interception of a communication where the interceptor is a 
party to the communication and all the parties to the communication have given prior 
consent to the interception, unless the communication is intercepted for the purpose of 
committing any criminal or tortious act in violation of State or federal law. Exceptions also 
exist for law enforcement activities that meet specified criteria. 
 
Violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a 
$10,000 maximum fine. 
 
Admission of Evidence Obtained through an Intercepted Communication/Disclosure 
during Testimony 
 
Except as specified, whenever any wire, oral, or electronic communication has been 
intercepted, no part of the contents of the communication and no evidence derived from 
the communication may be received in evidence in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding 
if the disclosure of that information would be in violation of the State’s wiretap and 
electronic surveillance laws. 
 
However, any person who has received information concerning a communication that was 
obtained through an authorized interception or evidence derived from an authorized 
interception may disclose the contents of that communication or the derivative evidence 
while giving testimony under oath or affirmation in any federal, State, or local proceeding. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 213/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 107 and HB 392 of 2025; SB 57 and HB 392 of 2024; and SB 47 of 
2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 180 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3