START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 274

J2 6lr0210
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 119

By: Chair, Health Committee (By Request – Departmental – Health)
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Environmental Health Specialists – Sunset Extension

3 FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Environmental Health Specialists, in
4 accordance with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset
5 law), by extending to a certain date the termination provisions relating to the
6 statutory and regulatory authority of the Board; and generally relating to the State
7 Board of Environmental Health Specialists.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Health Occupations
10 Section 21–201
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Health Occupations
15 Section 21–502
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Health Occupations

21 21–201.

22 There is a State Board of Environmental Health Specialists in the Department.

23 21–502.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0274*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 274

1 Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Program Evaluation
2 Act, the provisions of this title and of any rule or regulation adopted under this title shall
3 terminate and be of no effect after July 1, [2027] 2032.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2