START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 297 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 297 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Adult Education – High School Diploma Pathways – GED Option Pilot Program 
and MDiplomaWorks Pathway 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes (1) a two‑year GED Option Pilot Program to expand the 
existing GED Option Program as specified and (2) the MDiplomaWorks (MDW) Pathway 
within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) to recognize and certify high school 
diploma achievement through alternate means. MD Labor must oversee the GED Option 
Pilot Program. MD Labor and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must 
report to the Governor and General Assembly on the pilot program’s effectiveness by 
December 1, 2028 and December 1, 2029. Provisions relating to the GED Option Pilot 
Program terminate September 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MD Labor can implement both programs with existing resources. MSDE 
can likely collaborate with MD Labor on the development of the pilot program and MDW 
Pathway with existing resources. However, to the extent that the bill requires substantial 
statutory and regulatory changes related to graduation requirements, MSDE may require 
additional staff, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  For local school systems participating in the pilot program, expenditures 
increase to expand GED Option Programs to non-English learner students for  
FY 2027 through 2029. No effect for nonparticipating school systems. Local revenues are 
not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with 
this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 297/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:        
 
GED Option Pilot Program 
 
The bill establishes the GED Option Pilot Program for a period of two school years 
beginning in the 2027-2028 school year. The pilot program aims to expand the GED Option 
Program to students beyond English language learners in selected school districts to ensure 
that students have a pathway to obtain a high school diploma and are prepared to enter 
postsecondary programming or the workforce. MD Labor and MSDE jointly may adopt 
regulations to implement the pilot. 
 
MD Labor, in consultation with MSDE and the Public School Superintendents’ 
Association of Maryland must develop criteria for pilot participation, including a 
recognition of geographic diversity. MD Labor in consultation with MSDE must use the 
criteria to select at least three local school systems to participate in the pilot.  
 
Participating school systems may select up to 150 students to participate in the pilot 
program. Selected students may begin the GED Option Program when the student is at 
least 17 years old, must be at significant risk of not successfully completing high school, 
and must take the high school diploma by examination before the conclusion of the GED 
Option Program.  
 
MD Labor and MSDE must explore options for expanding the GED Option Program based 
on the results of the pilot and jointly report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
the effectiveness of the program by December 1, 2028 and December 1, 2029. The report 
must include the number of students participating in the pilot from each participating 
school system, feedback from educators, students, and parents of students participating in 
the pilot on ways to improve the GED Option Program, the number of students who earned 
a high school diploma as a result of completing the pilot, and an evaluation of the pilot 
program and the GED Option Program with any recommendations for improvements. 
 
MDiplomaWorks 
 
The bill also establishes the MDW Pathway in MD Labor to recognize and certify high 
school diploma achievement through demonstrated academic and career competencies, 
including workforce experience. 
 
Individuals eligible to obtain a high school diploma through the MDW Pathway must not 
have obtained a high school diploma, reside in the state, not be subject to the compulsory 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 297/ Page 3 
school attendance requirement, and have withdrawn from a regular full-time public or 
private school program.  
 
To earn a diploma through the MDW Pathway, an individual must demonstrate 
equivalency to a Maryland high school diploma by completion of a combination of 
four components as approved by MD Labor, including (1) earning industry-recognized 
credentials; (2) demonstrating foundational academic skills through formal assessments; 
(3) completing career and technical education coursework; and (4) completing an 
on‑the‑job learning experience. A high school diploma must be awarded to an individual 
who completes the MDW pathway in accordance with the regulations adopted by the 
Secretary of Labor and the Maryland State Board of Education. 
 
Current Law:  A Maryland resident may obtain a high school diploma by examination 
(GED) if the individual is at least 18 years old and has not obtained a high school diploma. 
To qualify, the individual must have withdrawn from a regular full-time public or private 
school program.  
 
Chapters 373 and 374 of 2018 exempt specified English language learners from the 
requirement to withdraw from high school prior to obtaining a diploma by examination 
(GED). Specifically, individuals are exempt if they:  (1) are a currently enrolled English 
language learner; (2) are under the age of 21; (3) have experienced interrupted education; 
(4) have a lower level of English proficiency than their peers; and (5) participate in a GED 
Option Program administered by MSDE. 
 
MD Labor must offer examinations to individuals who are pursuing a high school diploma 
at least twice each year at places throughout the State that are reasonably convenient for 
the applicants. The examination must be in appropriate high school subject areas and be of 
a comprehensive nature as determined by the State Board of Education.  
Chapters 327 and 328 of 2025 also require MD Labor to allow an individual to choose to 
take all components of the high school diploma by examination (e.g., GED) in either 
English or Spanish.  
 
Background:  MD Labor advises that there are nearly 500,000 Marylanders who do not 
have a high school diploma, which often prevents them from accessing quality jobs and 
job training programs like registered apprenticeships. 
 
There are currently three alternative pathways through which individuals can obtain a high 
school diploma outside of traditional K-12 schooling in Maryland. Individuals can either 
(1) take the GED test, consisting of four different modules including Mathematical 
Reasoning, Reasoning through Language Arts, Social Studies, and Science; (2) complete 
the National External Diploma Program (NEDP), which is completed working 
independently on a series of assigned tasks or competencies on computer, at their own 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 297/ Page 4 
pace, while meeting periodically with a trained NEDP assessor to develop a portfolio that 
proves that they have acquired the skills required to be awarded a Maryland High School 
Diploma; or (3) attend one of Maryland’s two adult high schools that offer adults 21 years 
and older the opportunity to earn a high school diploma based on the Maryland High School 
Graduation Requirements and potentially earn a post-secondary credit or an 
industry‑recognized credential.  
 
State Expenditures:  MD Labor advises that the agency can absorb any additional 
administrative burdens associated with the expansion of the GED Option Program and the 
establishment of the MDW Pathway with existing resources.  
 
MSDE advises that, for fiscal 2028 through 2032, the agency requires additional support 
in the form of a full-time policy specialist to continue coordination with partners in 
MD Labor and contractual support for legal analysis and data system adjustment related to 
diploma reclassification and federal counting reporting. DLS advises that, since the bill 
positions MD Labor as the primary agency responsible for both GED Option program 
expansion (with local school systems also individually responsible for much of the 
implementation, as discussed below) and MDW Pathway development, MSDE can likely 
consult on the creation of these programs using existing resources. Nevertheless, DLS 
acknowledges MSDE’s concerns that, should the implementation of the bill require 
significant statutory and regulatory changes and updates to graduation, transcript, and data 
reporting systems, MSDE may require additional staff to support the program and the 
pilot’s implementation. 
 
As the expansion of the GED Option Program is designed to retain students at-risk of 
dropping out of school, it is assumed that participants are already enrolled in school and 
therefore do not affect enrollment counts used to determine State education aid for local 
school systems. Although participants in the MDiplomaWorks pathway are required to 
have dropped out of the school, that program is administered by MD Labor and not by local 
school systems. Therefore, State education aid is also not affected. 
 
Local Expenditures:  To the extent local school systems elect to participate in the GED 
Option Pilot Program, local expenditures increase for fiscal 2027 through 2029 to include 
students beyond the currently eligible English language learners. An exact estimate of costs 
depends on the size and scope of the expanded programs, primarily the additional number 
of students eligible for participation in the pilot program. To accommodate the new pilot 
program, school systems may either need to increase class sizes within existing general 
education setting or employ additional instructional staff to deliver the GED Option 
Program curricula. MSDE additionally advises that local school systems may face 
additional costs associated with support services needed to deploy GED-aligned 
coursework for students with disabilities or accommodations under an Individualized 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 297/ Page 5 
Education Program or 504 Plan. Additionally, an expanded GED Option program would 
require additional instructional support and administrative demands. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, Montgomery County Public Schools advises that costs to 
expand the county’s current GED Option Program to include an additional 130 students 
total at least $550,000 annually. This estimate includes the cost of (1) staffing, including 
four new teachers to provide instruction across the GED’s four domains and two support 
staff positions for paraeducators to provide classroom support and bus drivers to provide 
student transportation; (2) classroom materials and supplies; and (3) GED exam costs. 
Montgomery County Public Schools’ estimate does not include building space, utilities, 
and administrative staff, for which the county advises it can leverage its existing GED 
Option Program resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 70 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 297/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   Adult Education - High School Diploma Pathways - GED Option 
Pilot Program and MDiplomaWorks Pathway 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 297 
 
PREPARED BY: Jenna Bachman, Policy Analyst, MD Labor, DWDAL  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The attached proposal is likely to have a meaningful positive impact on Maryland’s small 
businesses. Many of MD Labor’s quality job training programs, including Registered 
Apprenticeship, require participants to have an HSD. Upon completion of these 
programs, participants leave with an industry-recognized credential and hands-on 
experience in a skilled occupation. By increasing the ability of individuals to earn an 
HSD, the attached proposal would increase the number of individuals qualified for RA 
and other similar job training programs, subsequently increasing the pool of skilled 
workers available to small businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6