START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 215

O2, J3 6lr1482
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Vogel
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Continuing Care Providers – Financial Stress Tests, Transparency, and
3 Governing Bodies

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Aging to conduct an annual financial
5 stress test for each continuing care in a retirement community provider; requiring a
6 continuing care in a retirement community provider to meet with a resident
7 association at least a certain number of times each year and in a certain manner;
8 requiring a provider to make agendas and minutes of certain meetings available to
9 the provider’s subscribers; requiring a continuing care in a retirement community
10 provider’s subscriber who serves as a regular or alternate member of the facility’s
11 governing body to be elected by the residents association rather than selected
12 according to certain standards and criteria and requiring that the elected member
13 has certain asset control and financial responsibility; and generally relating to
14 continuing care providers.

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – Human Services
17 Section 10–101(a), (d), and (f)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)
20 (As enacted by Chapters 33 and 34 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Human Services
23 Section 10–407
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 BY adding to
27 Article – Human Services

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0215*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 215

1 Section 10–417
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

4 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
5 Article – Human Services
6 Section 10–426 and 10–427
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
10 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

11 Article – Human Services

12 10–101.

13 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (d) “Department” means the Department of Aging.

15 (f) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Aging.

16 10–407.

17 This part applies only to continuing care in a retirement community operations.

18 10–417.

19 (A) AT LEAST ONCE A YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONDUCT A
20 FINANCIAL STRESS TEST FOR A PROVIDER.

21 (B) THE FINANCIAL STRESS TEST CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
22 THIS SECTION SHALL EXAMINE THE PROVIDER’S:

23 (1) COMMUNITY OCCUPANCY RATES;

24 (2) NET OPERATING MARGIN;

25 (3) LIQUIDITY;

26 (4) CAPITAL STRUCTURE;

27 (5) OPERATING RATIO;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 215 3

1 (6) DEBT SERVICE COVERAGE;

2 (7) AVERAGE AGE OF COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS;

3 (8) CUSHION RATIO;

4 (9) CASH TO DEBT RATIO;

5 (10) RISK FROM CURRENT AND PROPOSED INVESTMENTS;

6 (11) CORPORATE STRUCTURE;

7 (12) INTERSTATE FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS; AND

8 (13) ANY OTHER INDICATOR OF FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE AND
9 DURABILITY SELECTED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

10 (C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL HIRE TWO ANALYSTS TO:

11 (1) PERFORM THE FINANCIAL STRESS TESTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS
12 SECTION; AND

13 (2) PREPARE REPORTS ON THE FINANCIAL STRESS TESTS FOR THE
14 DEPARTMENT.

15 (D) (1) AFTER REVIEWING A FINANCIAL STRESS TEST REPORT PREPARED
16 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT’S FINANCIAL REVIEW
17 COMMITTEE SHALL ASSIGN A GRADE TO INDICATE THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OF
18 THE PROVIDER.

19 (2) THE GRADE ASSIGNED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
20 SUBSECTION SHALL BE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

21 10–426.

22 (a) (1) At least quarterly[, each]:

23 (I) EACH CONTINUING CARE AT HOME provider shall hold a
24 meeting open to all of the provider’s subscribers; AND

25 (II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, EACH
26 CONTINUING CARE IN A RETIREMENT COMMUNITY PROVIDER SHALL HOLD A
27 MEETING WITH THE PROVIDER’S RESIDENT ASSOCIATION.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 215

1 (2) (I) A PROVIDER MAY DETERMINE WHETHER A MEETING WITH
2 THE RESIDENT ASSOCIATION AS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS
3 SUBSECTION IS OPEN TO ALL OF THE PROVIDER’S SUBSCRIBERS.

4 (II) AT LEAST TWICE A YEAR, A MEETING HELD IN ACCORDANCE
5 WITH PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE HELD IN PERSON AT THE
6 FACILITY REPRESENTED BY THE RESIDENT ASSOCIATION.

7 (b) At the meetings, an authorized officer of the provider shall:

8 (1) summarize the provider’s operations, significant changes from the
9 previous year, and goals and objectives for the next year; and

10 (2) answer subscribers’ questions.

11 (c) At the last quarterly meeting of the year, an authorized officer of the provider
12 shall provide an aggregated, deidentified summary of internal grievances submitted under
13 § 10–428 of this subtitle.

14 (D) A COPY OF THE AGENDAS AND MINUTES OF MEETINGS REQUIRED
15 UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PROVIDER’S
16 SUBSCRIBERS.

17 10–427.

18 (a) (1) If a provider has a governing body, at least one of the provider’s
19 subscribers shall be a full and regular member of the governing body.

20 (2) If the provider owns or operates more than three facilities in the State,
21 the governing body shall include at least one of the provider’s subscribers for every three
22 facilities in the State.

23 (3) (i) If the governing body has only one subscriber, the governing body
24 shall authorize [the appointment of] an alternate subscriber to serve as a regular member
25 of the governing body if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the subscriber’s duties.

26 (ii) The alternate subscriber may:

27 1. attend all meetings of the governing body; and

28 2. vote only if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the
29 subscriber’s duties as a regular member of the governing body.

30 (4) [Subject to paragraph (5) of this subsection, a] A regular or alternate
31 member of the governing body who is selected to meet the requirements of this subsection
32 shall be a subscriber at a facility in the State and be [selected according to the same general
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 215 5

1 written standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing body]
2 ELECTED BY THE RESIDENT ASSOCIATION OF THE FACILITY.

3 (5) [The governing body shall confer with the resident association at each
4 of the provider’s facilities before the subscriber or alternate subscriber officially joins the
5 governing body] IF MEMBERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY HAVE DIFFERENT POWERS
6 AND RESPONSIBILITIES REGARDING ASSET CONTROL AND FINANCIAL
7 CONSEQUENCES FOR SUBSCRIBERS, A SUBSCRIBER MEMBER ELECTED UNDER
8 PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL HAVE AT LEAST THE SAME POWERS
9 AND RESPONSIBILITIES AS THE OTHER MEMBERS WHO HOLD THE MOST POWERS
10 AND RESPONSIBILITIES REGARDING ASSET CONTROL AND FINANCIAL
11 CONSEQUENCES FOR SUBSCRIBERS.

12 (6) (i) A subscriber member or alternate subscriber member of a
13 governing body may report on nonconfidential deliberations, actions, and policies of the
14 governing body to the resident association.

15 (ii) The governing body in its sole but reasonable discretion shall
16 determine whether a matter is confidential.

17 (7) The Secretary may waive the requirements of this subsection for a
18 provider in the process of decertifying as a provider, if the Secretary determines that there
19 are no subscribers willing and able to serve on the governing body.

20 (b) (1) If a provider does not have a governing body, the provider shall appoint
21 a select committee of its officers or partners to meet at least quarterly with the resident
22 association at each of its facilities to address concerns of the subscribers and to ensure that
23 the opinions of subscribers are relayed to all officers or partners of the provider.

24 (2) If a facility does not have a resident association, the committee shall
25 meet with a reasonable number of representatives, not required to exceed fifteen, that the
26 subscribers elect.

27 (c) As determined by the provider’s governing body, the provider shall make
28 available to subscribers either the nonconfidential portions of the minutes of each meeting
29 of the governing body or a summary of the nonconfidential portions of the minutes, within
30 1 month of approval of the minutes.

31 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
32 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5