START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 238 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 238 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Planning) 
Economic Matters and Government, 
Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland Heritage Area Authority and Heritage Areas - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill modifies provisions governing the Maryland Heritage Areas 
Authority (MHAA) and the Maryland Heritage Areas Program (MHAP) primarily by 
(1) adding certain voting members to MHAA, and removing one member; (2) modifying 
requirements and authority relating to MHAA’s awarding of grants and loans under 
MHAP; and (3) modifying the manner in which State official MHAA members support 
and assist activities in certified heritage areas.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Overall funding under MHAP available to local jurisdictions and other 
eligible applicants is not affected; however, individual local jurisdictions may benefit to 
the extent the discretion given to MHAA (under the bill) – to determine the extent to which 
matching funding must be provided by a recipient of an MHAP grant or loan – gives any 
jurisdictions greater access to existing MHAP funding.    
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 238/ Page 2 
Analysis 
Bill Summary:       
 
Maryland Heritage Areas Authority – Membership 
 
The bill makes the following changes to the membership of MHAA:   
 
 
It adds two State officials as members – the Secretary of Agriculture and the 
State Superintendent of Schools – increasing the membership of MHAA from 17 to 
19, and the quorum requirement from 9 to 10 voting members.  
 
It replaces a requirement that one of the ten Governor-appointed members be a 
public member of the Maryland Greenways Commission, with a requirement that 
one of the appointed members be a member of the public who has significant 
education or experience in natural resource stewardship or climate resiliency. The 
newly appointed member must serve the remainder of the term of the member who 
is a public member of the Maryland Greenways Commission until a successor is 
appointed and qualifies.  
 
Grant and Loan Assistance 
 
In existing provisions governing grants and loans awarded by MHAA to local jurisdictions 
or other appropriate entities under MHAP, the bill replaces requirements that grants not 
exceed 50% of the cost of a project or management plan, as well as certain guidance 
regarding the use of grants, with authorizations for MHAA to (1) require matching funds 
for grants or loans in whatever proportion MHAA considers appropriate and (2) establish 
terms and conditions for grants and loans. 
 
Other Changes 
 
The bill also repeals:   
 
 
a requirement that MHAA send a copy of each boundary map of a recognized 
heritage area to the office of the county clerk where the recognized heritage area is 
located; and 
 
a requirement that State official MHAA members who have program 
responsibilities that affect heritage area resources prepare and submit program 
statements (and any revisions) to MHAA detailing actions that support and assist 
the establishment and management of certified heritage areas.  
 
Instead of preparing and submitting the program statements, the State officials must simply 
support and assist activities in certified heritage areas in the areas the program statements 
currently cover – planning, development, use, assistance, and regulation – as well as 
implementation (an area added by the bill), with respect to specified subject areas related 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 238/ Page 3 
to the officials’ program responsibilities. The two new State officials added to MHAA – 
the Secretary of Agriculture and the State Superintendent of Schools – are assigned the 
subject areas of agricultural resources within certified heritage areas and educational 
resources and their interpretation within certified heritage areas, respectively. 
 
Current Law:      
 
Maryland Heritage Areas Authority – Generally 
 
MHAA is an independent unit within MDP, staffed by the Maryland Historical Trust 
(MHT). MHAA, along with MHT, implements MHAP. MHAA consists of 17 members, 
7 of whom are State officials (including the Secretary of Planning, who serves as chair) 
and 10 of whom are appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
The appointed members serve a four-year term. Members of MHAA may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
 
MHAA has authority to, among other things, (1) recognize heritage areas and certify 
recognized heritage areas as certified heritage areas; (2) approve or reject management 
plans for certified heritage areas; and (3) make and participate in making loans or grants, 
or otherwise provide financial assistance for any project that serves to preserve, develop, 
maintain, or protect a State designated heritage area. 
 
Maryland Heritage Areas 
 
“Heritage area” is defined in statute as a developed area of public and private uses that 
(1) ranges in size from a portion of a county or municipality to a regional area with special 
coherence; (2) is distinguished by physical and cultural resources, which have played a 
vital role in the historic life and development of the community and contribute to the public 
through interpretive, educational, and recreational use; (3) is composed of contiguous or 
noncontiguous geographic areas; and (4) may include traditional parks and historic places 
or property on the national or State register of historic properties. 
 
Statute establishes that there is a system of recognized heritage areas and certified heritage 
areas that (1) reflects the cultural themes of the State’s development and (2) provides 
educational, inspirational, economic, and recreational benefits for present and future 
generations. Local jurisdictions propose designation of recognized heritage areas (with 
boundary maps that, once approved, MHAA must send to the relevant office(s) of the 
county clerk) and subsequently prepare and develop a proposal and management plan 
necessary for designation of a recognized heritage area as a certified heritage area. 
 
Grants and Loans to Local Jurisdictions or Other Appropriate Entities 
 
MHAA uses the MHAA Financing Fund (that receives up to $6.0 million annually through 
Program Open Space) to award (1) grants and loans to local jurisdictions or other 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 238/ Page 4 
appropriate entities for planning, design, acquisition, development, preservation, 
restoration, interpretation, marketing, and programming of certified heritage areas and 
(2) grants to local jurisdictions or other appropriate entities to develop management plans 
for proposed certified heritage areas.  
 
Acquisition/development grants, program grants, and grants to develop a management plan 
each may not exceed 50% of the cost of the project (or cost of the management plan). 
Acquisition/development grants must be used for implementation of the certified heritage 
area in conformity with the approved management plan. Program grants are made to 
(1) develop and present interpretive exhibits, materials, or other appropriate products to 
further the educational and recreational objectives of the certified heritage areas program 
and (2) encourage revitalization of, and reinvestment in, certified heritage area resources.  
 
Background:  MDP indicates that the bill helps MHAA in implementing recommended 
actions in its recently adopted strategic plan for MHAP, including by (1) broadening the 
members, and their perspectives, that guide MHAA, to include perspectives from the 
agricultural, education, and environment sectors and (2) increasing access to funding, for 
organizations or local jurisdictions who may not be able to meet current grant matching 
requirements, by allowing MHAA to require matching funds from an applicant for a grant 
or loan in a proportion considered appropriate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 226 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Planning) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Montgomery County; Maryland-National 
Capital Park and Planning Commission; City of Laurel; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 238/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Heritage Area Authority and Heritage Areas - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 238 
 
PREPARED BY: Andrew Wilson, MDP Government Affairs Specialist 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X___     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill purely looks to update administrative matters within the Maryland Heritage Area 
Authority. The proposed updates are in-line with goals and recommendations for the Authority 
established within its most recently adopted strategic plan. These updates include adding 
voting members to the board, removing project funding caps for grant awards, allowing the 
Authority to determine an appropriate funding level when issuing grants, and removing an 
outdated requirement of both MHAA and state agencies. These changes will have minimal 
impact on Maryland small businesses. The only foreseeable impact will come in the way of the 
variable matching percentage. This change may allow a proposed project which supports traffic 
to nearby small businesses to see less financial impact from the Authority’s currently enshrined 
50% match requirement. Not having the added financial responsibility of a 1-to-1 match may 
allow for the project to be developed, and thereby potentially increasing traffic to the nearby 
businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5