START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 243

L6 6lr0064
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 197

By: Chair, Economic Matters Committee (By Request – Departmental – Planning)
Requested: September 16, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Land Use – Comprehensive and General Plans – Alteration of Elements

3 FOR the purpose of altering the required elements of comprehensive and general plans for
4 charter counties and other local jurisdictions; establishing requirements and
5 guidelines for each element; requiring certain State agencies to provide charter
6 counties and other local jurisdictions with assistance and information relevant to the
7 preparation of each element; and generally relating to comprehensive and general
8 plans.

9 BY renumbering
10 Article – Land Use
11 Section 1–414 through 1–418
12 to be Section 1–417 through 1–421, respectively
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Land Use
17 Section 1–406 and 3–206
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing
21 Article – Land Use
22 Section 1–407, 1–407.1, 1–408 through 1–412, and 3–102 through 3–114
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY adding to
26 Article – Land Use

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0243*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 243

1 Section 1–407 through 1–414 and 3–102 through 3–110
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

4 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
5 Article – Land Use
6 Section 3–101
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
10 That Section(s) 1–414 through 1–418 of Article – Land Use of the Annotated Code of
11 Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 1–417 through 1–421, respectively.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
13 as follows:

14 Article – Land Use

15 1–406.

16 (a) [(1)] The planning commission for a charter county shall include in the
17 comprehensive or general plan the [visions] PLANNING PRINCIPLES under § 1–201 of this
18 title and the following elements:

19 [(i)] (1) a [development regulations] LAND element;

20 (2) A TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT;

21 [(ii)] (3) a housing element;

22 [(iii) a sensitive areas element;]

23 [(iv)] (4) [a transportation] AN ECONOMY element; [and]

24 [(v)] (5) [a water resources] AN EQUITY element;

25 (6) A RESILIENCE ELEMENT;

26 (7) A PLACE ELEMENT; AND

27 (8) AN ECOLOGY ELEMENT.

28 [(2) If current geological information is available, the plan shall include a
29 mineral resources element.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 243 3

1 (b) The planning commission for a charter county may include in the plan a
2 priority preservation area element developed in accordance with § 2–518 of the Agriculture
3 Article.]

4 (B) THE PLAN SHALL PROVIDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, GUIDELINES,
5 STANDARDS, AND STRATEGIES FOR THE ORDERLY AND BALANCED FUTURE
6 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, AND FISCAL DEVELOPMENT OF
7 THE COUNTY.

8 (C) (1) THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR A CHARTER COUNTY SHALL:

9 (I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
10 DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATE FORMAT AND ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE
11 PLAN, PROVIDED THE ELEMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE ARE
12 ADDRESSED; AND

13 (II) DETERMINE WHETHER TO INCLUDE ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS
14 IN THE PLAN.

15 (2) ELEMENTS MAY BE FORMATTED AS INDIVIDUAL CHAPTERS OR
16 ADDRESSED IN MULTIPLE CHAPTERS.

17 (D) (1) EACH ELEMENT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

18 (I) INCLUDE AND ADDRESS ALL REQUIRED SUBELEMENTS;

19 (II) BE INFORMED BY RELEVANT EXISTING AND ANTICIPATED
20 FUTURE CONDITIONS AND STATE AND LOCAL PLANS; AND

21 (III) IDENTIFY THE NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED AND THE GOALS TO
22 BE ACHIEVED.

23 (2) (I) THE PLAN SHALL INCLUDE A STATEMENT OF GOALS AND
24 OBJECTIVES, POLICIES, AND STANDARDS.

25 (II) THE STATEMENT SHALL:

26 1. SERVE AS A GUIDE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND
27 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL WELL–BEING OF THE COUNTY;

28 2. BE INFORMED BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL
29 COORDINATION WITH ADJACENT JURISDICTIONS AND RELEVANT REGULATORY
30 AUTHORITIES; AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 243

1 3. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
2 IDENTIFY STRATEGIES TO BE IMPLEMENTED, INCLUDING APPROPRIATE
3 RECOMMENDED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND OTHER
4 MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS THE NEEDS AND GOALS OF THE PLAN.

5 (3) THE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND
6 OTHER MECHANISMS INCLUDED IN THE PLAN SHALL ENCOURAGE:

7 (I) THE USE OF FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS TO
8 PROMOTE INNOVATIVE AND COST–SAVING SITE DESIGN, IMPLEMENT THE PLANNING
9 PRINCIPLES, AND PROTECT THE ENVIRONMENT; AND

10 (II) WITHIN THE AREAS DESIGNATED FOR GROWTH IN THE
11 PLAN:

12 1. PROMOTE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THROUGH THE
13 USE OF INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES; AND

14 2. PROVIDE FOR THE STREAMLINED REVIEW OF
15 APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING PERMIT REVIEW AND SUBDIVISION
16 PLAT REVIEW.

17 (E) (1) IN PREPARING THE PLAN, THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR A
18 CHARTER COUNTY MAY REQUEST THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING TO FACILITATE
19 STATE AGENCY ASSISTANCE WITH AVAILABLE DATA AND ANALYSIS.

20 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL PROVIDE GUIDELINES
21 ON HOW TO ADDRESS THE ELEMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND
22 IDENTIFY BEST PRACTICES TO BE CONSIDERED.

23 [1–407.

24 (a) The development regulations element shall include the planning commission’s
25 recommendation for land development regulations to implement the plan.

26 (b) The development regulations element shall encourage:

27 (1) the use of flexible development regulations to promote innovative and
28 cost–saving site design and protect the environment; and

29 (2) within the areas designated for growth in the plan:

30 (i) economic development through the use of innovative techniques;
31 and
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 243 5

1 (ii) streamlined review of applications for development, including
2 permit review and subdivision plat review.]

3 1–407.

4 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
5 1–201(B)(1) OF THIS TITLE, THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

6 (1) THE GENERAL DISTRIBUTION, LOCATION, AND EXTENT OF USES
7 OF THE LAND FOR HOUSING, BUSINESS, INDUSTRY, AGRICULTURE, RECREATION,
8 EDUCATION, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS, OPEN SPACE, AND OTHER
9 CATEGORIES OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USES OF LAND APPROPRIATE TO THE
10 COUNTY;

11 (2) DESIRED PATTERNS AND LOCATIONS OF GROWTH CONSIDERING
12 EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT DELIVERY OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND PUBLIC
13 SERVICES AND THE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF VULNERABLE NATURAL
14 AND HISTORIC RESOURCES;

15 (3) COMMUNITY FACILITIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D)
16 OF THIS SECTION; AND

17 (4) IF APPLICABLE:

18 (I) MINERAL RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
19 (E) OF THIS SECTION; AND

20 (II) FISHERIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS
21 SECTION.

22 (B) (1) THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING
23 STATE PLANS:

24 (I) THE MARYLAND THE BEAUTIFUL PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN §
25 5–104 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE;

26 (II) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
27 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND

28 (III) THE STATEWIDE HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN, AS
29 REQUIRED UNDER THE NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT.

30 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (I) PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
2 POPULATION AND DEMOGRAPHIC DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND
3 STATE–LEVEL LAND USE DATA; AND

4 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
5 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE LAND ELEMENT FROM OTHER STATE
6 AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

7 (C) THE LAND ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

8 (1) DESIGNATION OF EXISTING AND PROPOSED LAND USE PATTERNS
9 USING LAND USE MAPS THAT DEPICT THE TYPES OF USES WITH RANGES OF DENSITY
10 OR INTENSITY;

11 (2) IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS OF FUTURE PLANNED MIXED–USE
12 DEVELOPMENT FOR WHICH SPECIAL REGULATIONS MAY BE NECESSARY TO ENSURE
13 DEVELOPMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF THE
14 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN;

15 (3) IDENTIFICATION AND DEPICTION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT
16 BOUNDARIES AND HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT PROPERTIES MERITING
17 PROTECTION; AND

18 (4) IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS OF RESOURCE PROTECTION AND
19 PRESERVATION.

20 (D) (1) THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A COMMUNITY FACILITIES
21 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

22 (2) ON A SCHEDULE THAT EXTENDS AS FAR INTO THE FUTURE AS IS
23 REASONABLE, THE COMMUNITY FACILITIES SUBELEMENT SHALL PROPOSE THE
24 MOST APPROPRIATE AND DESIRABLE PATTERNS FOR THE GENERAL LOCATION,
25 CHARACTER, SERVICE AREAS, AND EXTENT OF PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC BUILDINGS,
26 LAND, AND FACILITIES.

27 (3) THE COMMUNITY FACILITIES SUBELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

28 (I) PLACES OF WORSHIP;

29 (II) FIRE STATIONS;

30 (III) HOSPITALS;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 243 7

1 (IV) INSTITUTIONS;

2 (V) JAILS;

3 (VI) LIBRARIES;

4 (VII) PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS;

5 (VIII) POLICE STATIONS;

6 (IX) SCHOOLS AND OTHER EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES;

7 (X) CULTURAL FACILITIES;

8 (XI) SOCIAL WELFARE AND MEDICAL FACILITIES; AND

9 (XII) OTHER PUBLIC OFFICE OR ADMINISTRATIVE FACILITIES.

10 (E) (1) IF CURRENT GEOLOGICAL INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE, THE
11 LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT IN
12 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

13 (2) THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL IDENTIFY:

14 (I) UNDEVELOPED LAND THAT SHOULD BE KEPT IN ITS
15 UNDEVELOPED STATE UNTIL THE LAND CAN BE USED TO ASSIST IN PROVIDING A
16 CONTINUOUS SUPPLY OF MINERALS, AS DEFINED IN § 15–801 OF THE ENVIRONMENT
17 ARTICLE; AND

18 (II) APPROPRIATE POSTEXCAVATION USES FOR THE LAND THAT
19 ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE COUNTY’S LAND PLANNING PROCESS.

20 (3) THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL INCORPORATE
21 LAND USE POLICIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REGULATIONS TO:

22 (I) BALANCE MINERAL RESOURCE EXTRACTION WITH OTHER
23 LAND USES; AND

24 (II) PREVENT THE PREEMPTION OF MINERAL RESOURCES
25 EXTRACTION BY OTHER USES TO THE EXTENT FEASIBLE.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (4) BEFORE THE PLAN IS ADOPTED, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
2 ENVIRONMENT SHALL REVIEW THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT TO
3 DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS
4 AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENT.

5 (F) (1) IF THE CHARTER COUNTY IS LOCATED ON THE TIDAL WATERS OF
6 THE STATE, THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A FISHERIES SUBELEMENT IN
7 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

8 (2) THE FISHERIES SUBELEMENT SHALL DESIGNATE AREAS ON OR
9 NEAR THE TIDAL WATERS FOR:

10 (I) LOADING, UNLOADING, AND PROCESSING FINFISH AND
11 SHELLFISH; AND

12 (II) DOCKING AND MOORING COMMERCIAL FISHING BOATS AND
13 VESSELS.

14 (3) THE AREAS DESIGNATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
15 SUBSECTION SHALL BE GEOGRAPHICALLY LOCATED TO:

16 (I) FACILITATE THE COMMERCIAL HARVESTING OF FINFISH
17 AND SHELLFISH; AND

18 (II) ENSURE REASONABLE ACCESS TO THE WATERWAYS OF THE
19 STATE BY COMMERCIAL WATERMEN.

20 (G) THE LAND ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE A PRIORITY PRESERVATION AREA
21 SUBELEMENT DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–518 OF THE AGRICULTURE
22 ARTICLE.

23 [1–407.1.

24 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

25 (2) “Affirmatively further fair housing” has the meaning stated in § 2–401
26 of the Housing and Community Development Article.

27 (3) “Area median income” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the
28 Housing and Community Development Article.

29 (4) “Low–income housing” means housing that is affordable for a household
30 with an aggregate annual income that is below 60% of the area median income.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 243 9

1 (5) “Workforce housing” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the Housing
2 and Community Development Article.

3 (b) A housing element may include goals, objectives, policies, plans, and
4 standards.

5 (c) A housing element shall address the need for affordable housing within the
6 county, including:

7 (1) workforce housing; and

8 (2) low–income housing.

9 (d) (1) A county has a duty to affirmatively further fair housing through the
10 county’s housing and urban development programs.

11 (2) The housing element of a comprehensive plan that is enacted or
12 amended on or after January 1, 2025, shall include an assessment of fair housing to ensure
13 that the county is affirmatively furthering fair housing.

14 (3) On request of a county, the Department of Planning, in consultation
15 with the Department of Housing and Community Development, shall provide technical
16 assistance for the purpose of developing the housing element of the comprehensive plan.

17 (4) This subsection does not require a county to take, or prohibit a county
18 from taking, a specific action to affirmatively further fair housing.]

19 [1–408.

20 (a) (1) A sensitive areas element shall include the goals, objectives, principles,
21 policies, and standards designed to protect sensitive areas from the adverse effects of
22 development.

23 (2) A charter county shall consider wildlife movement and habitat
24 connectivity when enacting, adopting, amending, or executing a plan in accordance with §
25 1–405 of this subtitle.

26 (b) (1) Beginning October 1, 2013, the Department of Natural Resources shall
27 provide a statewide forest resource inventory to local jurisdictions at least every 5 years, to
28 be available for the local comprehensive plan review by local jurisdictions required under §
29 1–416(a) of this subtitle and § 3–301(a) of this article.

30 (2) The Department of Planning shall coordinate with the Department of
31 Natural Resources and the State Highway Administration to provide each charter county
32 with updated information on habitat connectivity concerns and current and planned
33 wildlife crossings.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment and the
2 Department of Natural Resources shall review the sensitive areas element to determine
3 whether the proposed plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the departments.]

4 1–408.

5 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
6 1–201(B)(2) OF THIS TITLE, THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

7 (1) A SAFE, BALANCED TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM FOR THE
8 MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE AND GOODS;

9 (2) A RANGE OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION CHOICES FOR
10 FUTURE TRANSPORTATION NEEDS; AND

11 (3) COORDINATION WITH THE LAND ELEMENT TO ENSURE
12 TRANSPORTATION EFFICIENCY FOR EXISTING AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.

13 (B) (1) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
14 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

15 (I) THE MARYLAND TRANSPORTATION PLAN, AS DESCRIBED
16 IN § 2–103.1 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE;

17 (II) THE STATEWIDE 20–YEAR BICYCLE–PEDESTRIAN MASTER
18 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–604 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE; AND

19 (III) THE MARYLAND STATE FREIGHT PLAN, AS REQUIRED
20 UNDER 49 U.S.C. § 70202.

21 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION SHALL:

22 (I) PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
23 STATE–LEVEL DATA; AND

24 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
25 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT FROM
26 OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

27 (C) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE ALL TYPES OF:

28 (1) AIRWAYS;

29 (2) HIGHWAYS OR STREETS;
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 243 11

1 (3) RAILWAYS;

2 (4) WATERWAYS;

3 (5) ROUTINGS FOR MASS TRANSIT; AND

4 (6) TERMINALS FOR INDIVIDUALS, GOODS, AND VEHICLES RELATED
5 TO AIRWAYS, HIGHWAYS, RAILWAYS, AND WATERWAYS.

6 (D) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL:

7 (1) PROPOSE, ON A SCHEDULE THAT EXTENDS AS FAR INTO THE
8 FUTURE AS IS REASONABLE, THE MOST APPROPRIATE AND DESIRABLE PATTERNS
9 FOR:

10 (I) THE GENERAL LOCATION, CHARACTER, AND EXTENT OF
11 CHANNELS, ROUTES, AND TERMINALS FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES; AND

12 (II) THE CIRCULATION OF INDIVIDUALS AND GOODS;

13 (2) PROVIDE FOR BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND
14 TRAVELWAYS; AND

15 (3) INCLUDE AN ESTIMATE OF THE USE OF ANY PROPOSED
16 IMPROVEMENT.

17 [1–409.

18 (a) The transportation element may include all types of:

19 (1) airways;

20 (2) highways or streets;

21 (3) railways;

22 (4) waterways;

23 (5) routings for mass transit; and

24 (6) terminals for individuals, goods, and vehicles related to airways,
25 highways, railways, and waterways.

26 (b) The transportation element shall:
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (1) propose, on a schedule that extends as far into the future as is
2 reasonable, the most appropriate and desirable patterns for:

3 (i) the general location, character, and extent of channels, routes,
4 and terminals for transportation facilities; and

5 (ii) the circulation of individuals and goods;

6 (2) provide for bicycle and pedestrian access and travelways; and

7 (3) include an estimate of the use of any proposed improvement.]

8 1–409.

9 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
10 INDICATED.

11 (2) “AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING
12 STATED IN § 2–401 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

13 (3) “AREA MEDIAN INCOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–1801
14 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

15 (4) “LOW–INCOME HOUSING” MEANS HOUSING THAT IS AFFORDABLE
16 FOR A HOUSEHOLD WITH AN AGGREGATE ANNUAL INCOME THAT IS BELOW 60% OF
17 THE AREA MEDIAN INCOME.

18 (5) “WORKFORCE HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–1801
19 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

20 (B) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
21 1–201(B)(3) OF THIS TITLE, THE HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

22 (1) THE PROVISION OF AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF HOUSING TO
23 ACCOMMODATE ALL CURRENT AND ANTICIPATED FUTURE RESIDENTS OF THE
24 COUNTY;

25 (2) THE AGE, STRUCTURAL TYPE, VALUE, AND OCCUPANCY
26 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE COUNTY’S HOUSING STOCK;

27 (3) THE ELIMINATION OF SUBSTANDARD DWELLING CONDITIONS;
28 AND
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 243 13

1 (4) THE PROVISION OF ADEQUATE SITES FOR FUTURE HOUSING,
2 INCLUDING AFFORDABLE HOUSING.

3 (C) (1) THE HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING
4 STATE PLANS:

5 (I) THE FAIR HOUSING CHOICE AND RACIAL AND ECONOMIC
6 HOUSING INTEGRATION REPORT, AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–302 OF THE HOUSING AND
7 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE; AND

8 (II) THE STATE OF MARYLAND FIVE YEAR CONSOLIDATED
9 PLAN, AS REQUIRED BY 24 C.F.R. § 91.300.

10 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

11 1. PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST
12 AVAILABLE HOUSING DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU; AND

13 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
14 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
15 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

16 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
17 DEVELOPMENT SHALL PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
18 STATE–LEVEL HOUSING DATA.

19 (D) A HOUSING ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, POLICIES,
20 PLANS, AND STANDARDS.

21 (E) A HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS THE NEED FOR AFFORDABLE
22 HOUSING WITHIN THE COUNTY, INCLUDING:

23 (1) WORKFORCE HOUSING; AND

24 (2) LOW–INCOME HOUSING.

25 (F) (1) A COUNTY HAS A DUTY TO AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR
26 HOUSING THROUGH THE COUNTY’S HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
27 PROGRAMS.

28 (2) THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT IS
29 ENACTED OR AMENDED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2025, SHALL INCLUDE AN
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 243

1 ASSESSMENT OF FAIR HOUSING TO ENSURE THAT THE COUNTY IS AFFIRMATIVELY
2 FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING FOR CURRENT AND FUTURE RESIDENTS.

3 (3) ON REQUEST OF A COUNTY, THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, IN
4 CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
5 DEVELOPMENT, SHALL PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
6 DEVELOPING THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

7 (4) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT REQUIRE A COUNTY TO TAKE, OR
8 PROHIBIT A COUNTY FROM TAKING, A SPECIFIC ACTION TO AFFIRMATIVELY
9 FURTHER FAIR HOUSING.

10 [1–410.

11 (a) Considering available data provided by the Department of the Environment,
12 the water resources element shall identify:

13 (1) drinking water and other water resources that will be adequate for the
14 needs of existing and future development proposed in the land use element of the plan; and

15 (2) suitable receiving waters and land areas to meet stormwater
16 management and wastewater treatment and disposal needs of existing and future
17 development proposed in the land use element of the plan.

18 (b) The Department of the Environment shall:

19 (1) provide, on request of a local jurisdiction, technical assistance on the
20 development of the water resources element; and

21 (2) review the water resources element to determine whether the proposed
22 plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the Department reflected in the general
23 water resources program required under § 5–203 of the Environment Article.]

24 1–410.

25 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
26 1–201(B)(4) OF THIS TITLE, THE ECONOMY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

27 (1) THE ECONOMIC BASE, LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS, AND
28 LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND RESOURCES OF THE
29 COUNTY;

30 (2) THE CATEGORIES OR TYPES OF BUSINESSES AND INDUSTRIES
31 DESIRED IN THE COUNTY; AND
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 243 15

1 (3) THE COORDINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT POPULATION
2 TRENDS AND CHARACTERISTICS, NATURAL RESOURCES, COMMUNITY FACILITIES
3 AND SERVICES, TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING, AND LAND USE SO THAT A STRATEGY
4 FOR THE ECONOMIC WELL–BEING OF CURRENT AND NEW RESIDENTS OF THE
5 COUNTY CAN BE DEVELOPED.

6 (B) (1) THE ECONOMY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
7 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

8 (I) THE STATE WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, AS
9 REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL WORKFORCE INNOVATION AND OPPORTUNITY
10 ACT FOR A 4–YEAR COMBINED STATE PLAN; AND

11 (II) THE MARYLAND STATE PLAN FOR POSTSECONDARY
12 EDUCATION, AS DESCRIBED IN § 11–105 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

13 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

14 1. PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST
15 AVAILABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU; AND

16 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
17 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ECONOMIC ELEMENT
18 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

19 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE SHALL PROVIDE A
20 CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL DATA ON ECONOMIC
21 DEVELOPMENT.

22 (III) THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR SHALL PROVIDE A CHARTER
23 COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL DATA ON THE LABOR FORCE.

24 (C) THE ECONOMY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

25 (1) AN ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMIC SECTORS TO DETERMINE
26 WHETHER AVAILABLE JOBS ALIGN WITH LOCAL LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS,
27 COMMUTING PATTERNS, AND WAGES PAID, AND WHAT STRATEGIES COULD IMPROVE
28 THE EXISTING ECONOMIC SITUATION;

29 (2) AN ANALYSIS OF EXISTING LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
30 PROGRAMS AND TOOLS, AND WHAT STRATEGIES ARE NEEDED TO FOSTER ECONOMIC
31 DEVELOPMENT;
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (3) AN ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMIC ASSETS, PROBLEMS, AND
2 OPPORTUNITIES OF THE LOCAL ECONOMY IN A REGIONAL CONTEXT AND WHAT
3 STRATEGIES ARE NEEDED TO POSITION THE LOCAL ECONOMY IN THE LARGER
4 REGIONAL CONTEXT; AND

5 (4) AN ASSESSMENT OF COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT
6 OPPORTUNITIES AND WHAT STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS SHOULD BE PURSUED.

7 [1–411.

8 (a) The mineral resources element shall identify:

9 (1) undeveloped land that should be kept in its undeveloped state until the
10 land can be used to assist in providing a continuous supply of minerals, as defined in §
11 15–801(i) of the Environment Article; and

12 (2) appropriate postexcavation uses for the land that are consistent with
13 the county’s land planning process.

14 (b) A mineral resources element shall incorporate land use policies and
15 recommendations for regulations:

16 (1) to balance mineral resource extraction with other land uses; and

17 (2) to the extent feasible, to prevent the preemption of mineral resources
18 extraction by other uses.

19 (c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment shall review
20 the mineral resources element to determine whether the proposed plan is consistent with
21 the programs and goals of the Department.]

22 1–411.

23 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
24 INDICATED.

25 (2) “ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
26 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

27 (3) “OVERBURDENED COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
28 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

29 (4) “UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
30 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 243 17

1 (B) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
2 1–201(B)(5) OF THIS TITLE, THE EQUITY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

3 (1) THE NEEDS OF OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED
4 COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTY; AND

5 (2) THE INTERESTS OF POPULATIONS IN THE COUNTY THAT
6 TYPICALLY HAVE NOT PARTICIPATED IN THE PLANNING PROCESS.

7 (C) (1) THE EQUITY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE ANNUAL
8 REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND SUSTAINABLE
9 COMMUNITIES, AS DESCRIBED IN § 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

10 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

11 1. PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST
12 AVAILABLE POPULATION AND DEMOGRAPHIC DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS
13 BUREAU; AND

14 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
15 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE EQUITY ELEMENT
16 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

17 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT SHALL PROVIDE
18 A CHARTER COUNTY WITH DATA ON ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.

19 (D) THE EQUITY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE POTENTIAL STRATEGIES TO:

20 (1) PROMOTE BROADER CIVIC ENGAGEMENT IN THE PUBLIC
21 DECISION–MAKING PROCESS;

22 (2) REDUCE THE UNIQUE OR COMPOUNDED HEALTH RISKS AND
23 ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS IN OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED
24 COMMUNITIES; AND

25 (3) PRIORITIZE IMPROVEMENTS AND PROGRAMS THAT ADDRESS THE
26 NEEDS OF OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

27 [1–412.

28 (a) This section applies only to a charter county or a code county that was required
29 before adopting home rule to designate in the comprehensive plan areas on or near the tidal
30 waters of the State under § 3–113 of this article.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (b) The planning commission of a charter county that is located on the tidal
2 waters of the State shall designate in the comprehensive plan areas on or near the tidal
3 waters for:

4 (1) loading, unloading, and processing finfish and shellfish; and

5 (2) docking and mooring commercial fishing boats and vessels.

6 (c) The areas designated under subsection (b) of this section shall be
7 geographically located to:

8 (1) facilitate the commercial harvesting of finfish and shellfish; and

9 (2) ensure reasonable access to the waterways of the State by commercial
10 watermen.]

11 1–412.

12 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
13 1–201(B)(6) OF THIS TITLE, THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

14 (1) THE COORDINATION OF LOCAL PREPAREDNESS EFFORTS TO
15 IDENTIFY POTENTIAL THREATS FACING THE COUNTY WITH THE LONG–TERM
16 STRATEGIES TO AVOID, REDUCE, AND RECOVER FROM CHANGING CONDITIONS AND
17 ASSOCIATED DISASTERS; AND

18 (2) THE MUTUAL ASSISTANCE NEEDED AMONG STATE AND LOCAL
19 PARTNERS TO:

20 (I) RESPOND TO THE CHALLENGES OF CHANGING CONDITIONS
21 AND DISASTERS, INCLUDING HUMAN–CAUSED AND NATURAL HAZARDS; AND

22 (II) BUILD, ADVANCE, AND MAINTAIN CAPACITIES RELATED TO
23 QUALITY OF LIFE, HEALTH AND WELL–BEING, DURABLE SYSTEMS, ECONOMIC
24 VITALITY, HUMAN–MADE AND NATURE–BASED INFRASTRUCTURE, AND
25 SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS.

26 (B) (1) THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
27 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

28 (I) THE STATE RESILIENCE STRATEGY, AS DESCRIBED IN §
29 14–1202 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE; AND
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 243 19

1 (II) THE STATE OF MARYLAND HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN, AS
2 REQUIRED UNDER 44 C.F.R. PART 201.

3 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

4 (I) PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
5 POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING DATA
6 FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

7 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
8 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT FROM OTHER
9 STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

10 (C) THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

11 (1) AN INVENTORY OF AREAS SUSCEPTIBLE TO NATURAL OR
12 HUMAN–CAUSED HAZARDS, SUCH AS FLOODING, INCLUDING RIVERINE AND
13 COASTAL FLOODING, SEA–LEVEL RISE, AND COASTAL STORM SURGE, WHICH
14 INVENTORY MAY CONSIDER THE POTENTIAL DISASTER IMPACTS ON INDIVIDUALS,
15 COMMUNITIES, INSTITUTIONS, BUSINESSES, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC
16 INFRASTRUCTURE AND FACILITIES, AND PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE;

17 (2) AN INVENTORY OF EXISTING RESILIENCY CONDITIONS THAT
18 PROMOTE RESILIENT PLANNING, DESIGN, AND DEVELOPMENT, AND THAT MAY BE
19 COORDINATED WITH OTHER JURISDICTIONS AND STATE AGENCIES; AND

20 (3) RECOMMENDED STRATEGIES AND POLICIES:

21 (I) TO PROTECT SUSCEPTIBLE AREAS AND RESOURCES AND
22 MITIGATE RISKS TO PUBLIC SAFETY, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, HISTORIC
23 STRUCTURES, PUBLIC INVESTMENTS, AND OTHER COMMUNITY RESOURCES; AND

24 (II) THAT ARE INTENDED TO:

25 1. REDUCE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH IDENTIFIED
26 HAZARDS;

27 2. ADAPT TO CHANGING CONDITIONS; AND

28 3. PROMOTE QUICKER RECOVERY AFTER A DISASTER.

29 1–413.
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
2 1–201(B)(7) OF THIS TITLE, THE PLACE ELEMENT SHALL:

3 (1) PLAN, DESIGN, AND PROGRAM NEW OR REVITALIZED PUBLIC
4 SPACES TO STRENGTHEN COMMUNITY COHESION WHILE CONTRIBUTING TO PUBLIC
5 HEALTH, CONNECTING PEOPLE WITH CULTURAL HERITAGE, CONSERVING NATURAL
6 RESOURCES, IMPROVING RESILIENCE, AND STRENGTHENING THE LOCAL ECONOMY;
7 AND

8 (2) PROMOTE THE ACTIVE CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC
9 SPACES BY THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND WORK THERE, SUPPORTING THE
10 CONTINUATION OF LOCAL WAYS OF LIFE AND CULTURAL MEMORIES.

11 (B) (1) THE PLACE ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING
12 STATE PLANS:

13 (I) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
14 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND

15 (II) THE STATEWIDE HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN, AS
16 REQUIRED UNDER THE NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT.

17 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

18 (I) PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
19 POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING DATA
20 FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

21 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
22 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE PLACE ELEMENT FROM OTHER
23 STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

24 (C) THE PLACE ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

25 (1) AN INVENTORY OF GATHERING PLACES FOR SOCIAL
26 INTERACTIONS AND CENTERS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY;

27 (2) AN ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC SPACES TO IDENTIFY THOSE OF UNIQUE
28 CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE; AND

29 (3) RECOMMENDED STRATEGIES, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS TO
30 BUILD SOCIAL COHESION AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
HOUSE BILL 243 21

1 1–414.

2 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
3 1–201(B)(8) OF THIS TITLE, THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

4 (1) THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL
5 RESOURCES, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES, MINERAL RESOURCES, AND
6 WATER AND AIR QUALITY;

7 (2) THE PROTECTION OF SIGNIFICANT ARCHITECTURAL, SCENIC,
8 CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES;

9 (3) THE CONSERVATION, USE, AND PROTECTION OF NATURAL
10 RESOURCES;

11 (4) THE PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF PRIME
12 AGRICULTURAL LAND AND STRATEGIES TO ENCOURAGE THE COMPATIBILITY OF
13 LAND USE WITH AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTRY OPERATIONS;

14 (5) THE PROTECTION OF A RELIABLE SUPPLY OF WATER AND ITS USES
15 AND LIMITATIONS;

16 (6) PREVENTING THE DEGRADATION OF THE ABOVE RESOURCES DUE
17 TO FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT;

18 (7) GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM ANY ADDITIONAL VEHICLE
19 MILES TRAVELED LIKELY TO RESULT FROM FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS
20 PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT;

21 (8) SENSITIVE AREAS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
22 SECTION; AND

23 (9) WATER RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E) OF
24 THIS SECTION.

25 (B) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
26 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

27 (I) MARYLAND’S CLIMATE POLLUTION REDUCTION PLAN, AS
28 DESCRIBED IN § 2–1205 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

29 (II) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
30 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
22 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (III) THE STATEWIDE COMPREHENSIVE OUTDOOR RECREATION
2 PLAN, AS REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION
3 FUND ACT OF 1965.

4 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

5 (I) PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE
6 POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING DATA
7 FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

8 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
9 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT FROM OTHER
10 STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

11 (C) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

12 (1) AN INVENTORY OF NATURAL, HISTORICAL, AND
13 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE RESOURCES;

14 (2) AN EVALUATION OF THE ISSUES, PROBLEMS, AND OPPORTUNITIES
15 ASSOCIATED WITH THESE RESOURCES; AND

16 (3) STRATEGIES AND POLICIES FOR THE APPROPRIATE USE,
17 PRESERVATION, AND PROTECTION OF THESE RESOURCES THAT ARE CONSISTENT
18 WITH THE STRATEGIES AND POLICIES ESTABLISHED FOR OTHER PLAN ELEMENTS.

19 (D) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A SENSITIVE AREAS
20 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

21 (2) THE SENSITIVE AREAS SUBELEMENT SHALL:

22 (I) INCLUDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, PRINCIPLES, POLICIES, AND
23 STANDARDS DESIGNED TO PROTECT SENSITIVE AREAS FROM THE ADVERSE
24 EFFECTS OF DEVELOPMENT;

25 (II) BE INFORMED BY CURRENT STATE AND FEDERAL
26 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE PROTECTION OF SENSITIVE AREAS; AND

27 (III) INDICATE WHAT ADDITIONAL MEASURES, IF ANY, THE
28 CHARTER COUNTY PROPOSES TO IMPLEMENT BEYOND THE REQUIREMENTS
29 DESCRIBED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
HOUSE BILL 243 23

1 (3) A CHARTER COUNTY SHALL CONSIDER WILDLIFE MOVEMENT AND
2 HABITAT CONNECTIVITY WHEN ENACTING, ADOPTING, AMENDING, OR EXECUTING A
3 PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 1–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

4 (4) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES SHALL
5 PROVIDE A CHARTER COUNTY WITH A STATEWIDE FOREST RESOURCE INVENTORY
6 AT LEAST EVERY 5 YEARS, TO BE AVAILABLE FOR THE LOCAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
7 REVIEW BY THE CHARTER COUNTY REQUIRED UNDER § 1–419(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

8 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL COORDINATE
9 WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE HIGHWAY
10 ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE EACH CHARTER COUNTY WITH UPDATED
11 INFORMATION ON HABITAT CONNECTIVITY CONCERNS AND CURRENT AND PLANNED
12 WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

13 (5) BEFORE THE PLAN IS ADOPTED, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
14 ENVIRONMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES SHALL REVIEW
15 THE SENSITIVE AREAS SUBELEMENT TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED
16 PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENTS.

17 (E) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A WATER RESOURCES
18 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

19 (2) CONSIDERING AVAILABLE DATA PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT
20 OF THE ENVIRONMENT, THE WATER RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL IDENTIFY:

21 (I) DRINKING WATER AND OTHER WATER RESOURCES THAT
22 WILL BE ADEQUATE FOR THE NEEDS OF EXISTING AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
23 PROPOSED IN THE LAND USE ELEMENT OF THE PLAN; AND

24 (II) SUITABLE RECEIVING WATERS AND LAND AREAS TO MEET
25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL NEEDS
26 OF EXISTING AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT OF THE
27 PLAN.

28 (3) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT SHALL:

29 (I) PROVIDE, ON REQUEST OF A CHARTER COUNTY, TECHNICAL
30 ASSISTANCE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WATER RESOURCES SUBELEMENT; AND

31 (II) REVIEW THE WATER RESOURCES SUBELEMENT TO
32 DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS
33 AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT REFLECTED IN THE
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
24 HOUSE BILL 243

1 GENERAL WATER RESOURCES PROGRAM REQUIRED UNDER § 5–203 OF THE
2 ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

3 1–415. RESERVED.

4 1–416. RESERVED.

5 3–101.

6 (a) A local jurisdiction shall enact, adopt, amend, and execute a plan in
7 accordance with this division.

8 (b) A municipal corporation may be included as part of a county plan under this
9 division if:

10 (1) the legislative body of the municipal corporation, by resolution directed
11 to the legislative body of the county where the municipal corporation is located, indicates
12 the intention to participate in the county plan; and

13 (2) the legislative body of the county approves the resolution.

14 [3–102.

15 (a) (1) The planning commission for a local jurisdiction shall include in the
16 comprehensive plan the following elements:

17 (i) a community facilities element;

18 (ii) an area of critical State concern element;

19 (iii) a goals and objectives element;

20 (iv) a housing element;

21 (v) a land use element;

22 (vi) a development regulations element;

23 (vii) a sensitive areas element;

24 (viii) a transportation element; and

25 (ix) a water resources element.

26 (2) If current geological information is available, the plan shall include a
27 mineral resources element.
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
HOUSE BILL 243 25

1 (3) The plan for a municipal corporation that exercises zoning authority
2 shall include a municipal growth element.

3 (4) The plan for a county that is located on the tidal waters of the State
4 shall include a fisheries element.

5 (b) (1) The planning commission for a local jurisdiction may include in the plan
6 additional elements to advance the purposes of the plan.

7 (2) The additional elements may include:

8 (i) community renewal elements;

9 (ii) conservation elements;

10 (iii) flood control elements;

11 (iv) natural resources elements;

12 (v) pollution control elements;

13 (vi) the general location and extent of public utilities; and

14 (vii) a priority preservation area element developed in accordance
15 with § 2–518 of the Agriculture Article.]

16 3–102.

17 (A) THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR A LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL
18 INCLUDE IN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE FOLLOWING ELEMENTS:

19 (1) A LAND ELEMENT;

20 (2) A TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT;

21 (3) A HOUSING ELEMENT;

22 (4) AN ECONOMY ELEMENT;

23 (5) AN EQUITY ELEMENT;

24 (6) A RESILIENCE ELEMENT;

25 (7) A PLACE ELEMENT; AND
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
26 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (8) AN ECOLOGY ELEMENT.

2 (B) THE PLAN SHALL PROVIDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, GUIDELINES,
3 STANDARDS, AND STRATEGIES FOR THE ORDERLY AND BALANCED FUTURE
4 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, PHYSICAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, AND FISCAL DEVELOPMENT OF
5 THE LOCAL JURISDICTION.

6 (C) (1) THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR A LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL:

7 (I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
8 DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATE FORMAT AND ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE
9 PLAN, PROVIDED THE ELEMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE ARE
10 ADDRESSED; AND

11 (II) DETERMINE WHETHER TO INCLUDE ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS
12 IN THE PLAN.

13 (2) ELEMENTS MAY BE FORMATTED AS INDIVIDUAL CHAPTERS OR
14 ADDRESSED IN MULTIPLE CHAPTERS.

15 (D) (1) EACH ELEMENT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

16 (I) INCLUDE AND ADDRESS ALL REQUIRED SUBELEMENTS;

17 (II) BE INFORMED BY RELEVANT EXISTING AND ANTICIPATED
18 FUTURE CONDITIONS AND STATE AND LOCAL PLANS; AND

19 (III) IDENTIFY THE NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED AND THE GOALS TO
20 BE ACHIEVED.

21 (2) (I) THE PLAN SHALL INCLUDE A STATEMENT OF GOALS AND
22 OBJECTIVES, PRINCIPLES, POLICIES, AND STANDARDS.

23 (II) THE STATEMENT SHALL:

24 1. SERVE AS A GUIDE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND
25 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL WELL–BEING OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION;

26 2. BE INFORMED BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL
27 COORDINATION WITH THE ADJACENT JURISDICTIONS AND RELEVANT REGULATORY
28 AUTHORITIES; AND
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
HOUSE BILL 243 27

1 3. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
2 IDENTIFY STRATEGIES TO BE IMPLEMENTED, INCLUDING APPROPRIATE
3 RECOMMENDED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS, POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND OTHER
4 MECHANISMS TO ADDRESS THE NEEDS AND GOALS OF THE PLAN.

5 (3) THE DEVELOPMENT REGULATION POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND
6 OTHER MECHANISMS INCLUDED IN THE PLAN SHALL ENCOURAGE:

7 (I) THE USE OF FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS TO
8 PROMOTE INNOVATIVE AND COST–SAVING SITE DESIGN, IMPLEMENT THE PLANNING
9 PRINCIPLES, AND PROTECT THE ENVIRONMENT; AND

10 (II) WITHIN THE AREAS DESIGNATED FOR GROWTH IN THE
11 PLAN:

12 1. PROMOTE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THROUGH THE
13 USE OF INNOVATIVE TECHNIQUES; AND

14 2. PROVIDE FOR THE STREAMLINED REVIEW OF
15 APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING PERMIT REVIEW AND SUBDIVISION
16 PLAT REVIEW.

17 (E) (1) IN PREPARING THE PLAN, THE PLANNING COMMISSION FOR A
18 LOCAL JURISDICTION MAY REQUEST THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING TO
19 FACILITATE STATE AGENCY ASSISTANCE WITH AVAILABLE DATA AND ANALYSIS.

20 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL PROVIDE GUIDELINES
21 ON HOW TO ADDRESS THE ELEMENTS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND
22 IDENTIFY BEST PRACTICES TO BE CONSIDERED.

23 [3–103.

24 (a) The development regulations element shall include the planning commission’s
25 recommendation for land development regulations to implement the plan.

26 (b) The development regulations element shall encourage:

27 (1) the use of flexible development regulations to promote innovative and
28 cost–saving site design and protect the environment; and

29 (2) within the areas designated for growth in the plan:

30 (i) economic development through the use of innovative techniques;
31 and
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
28 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (ii) streamlined review of applications for development, including
2 permit review and subdivision plat review.]

3 3–103.

4 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
5 1–201(B)(1) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

6 (1) THE GENERAL DISTRIBUTION, LOCATION, AND EXTENT OF USES
7 OF THE LAND FOR HOUSING, BUSINESS, INDUSTRY, AGRICULTURE, RECREATION,
8 EDUCATION, PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS, OPEN SPACE, AND OTHER
9 CATEGORIES OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USES OF LAND APPROPRIATE TO THE LOCAL
10 JURISDICTION;

11 (2) DESIRED PATTERNS AND LOCATIONS OF GROWTH CONSIDERING
12 EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT DELIVERY OF COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND PUBLIC
13 SERVICES, AND THE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF VULNERABLE NATURAL
14 AND HISTORICAL RESOURCES;

15 (3) COMMUNITY FACILITIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D)
16 OF THIS SECTION; AND

17 (4) IF APPLICABLE:

18 (I) MUNICIPAL GROWTH IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
19 (E) OF THIS SECTION;

20 (II) MINERAL RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
21 (F) OF THIS SECTION; AND

22 (III) FISHERIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS
23 SECTION.

24 (B) (1) THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING
25 STATE PLANS:

26 (I) THE MARYLAND THE BEAUTIFUL PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN §
27 5–104 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE;

28 (II) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
29 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
HOUSE BILL 243 29

1 (III) THE STATEWIDE HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN, AS
2 REQUIRED UNDER THE NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT.

3 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

4 (I) PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
5 AVAILABLE POPULATION AND DEMOGRAPHIC DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS
6 BUREAU AND STATE–LEVEL LAND USE DATA; AND

7 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
8 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE LAND ELEMENT FROM OTHER STATE
9 AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

10 (C) THE LAND ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

11 (1) DESIGNATION OF EXISTING AND PROPOSED LAND USE PATTERNS
12 USING LAND USE MAPS THAT DEPICT THE TYPES OF USES WITH RANGES OF DENSITY
13 OR INTENSITY;

14 (2) IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS OF FUTURE PLANNED MIXED–USE
15 DEVELOPMENT FOR WHICH SPECIAL REGULATIONS MAY BE NECESSARY TO ENSURE
16 DEVELOPMENT IN ACCORD WITH THE PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS OF THE
17 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN;

18 (3) IDENTIFICATION AND DEPICTION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT
19 BOUNDARIES AND HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT PROPERTIES MERITING
20 PROTECTION;

21 (4) IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS OF RESOURCE PROTECTION AND
22 PRESERVATION; AND

23 (5) THE FOLLOWING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LAND USES:

24 (I) AGRICULTURAL;

25 (II) COMMERCIAL;

26 (III) FORESTRY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–101 OF THE
27 NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE;

28 (IV) INDUSTRIAL;

29 (V) RECREATIONAL; AND
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
30 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (VI) RESIDENTIAL.

2 (D) (1) THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A COMMUNITY FACILITIES
3 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

4 (2) ON A SCHEDULE THAT EXTENDS AS FAR INTO THE FUTURE AS IS
5 REASONABLE, THE COMMUNITY FACILITIES SUBELEMENT SHALL PROPOSE THE
6 MOST APPROPRIATE AND DESIRABLE PATTERNS FOR THE GENERAL LOCATION,
7 CHARACTER, AND EXTENT OF PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC BUILDINGS, LAND, AND
8 FACILITIES.

9 (3) THE COMMUNITY FACILITIES SUBELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

10 (I) PLACES OF WORSHIP;

11 (II) FIRE STATIONS;

12 (III) HOSPITALS;

13 (IV) INSTITUTIONS;

14 (V) JAILS;

15 (VI) LIBRARIES;

16 (VII) PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS;

17 (VIII) POLICE STATIONS;

18 (IX) SCHOOLS AND OTHER EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES;

19 (X) CULTURAL FACILITIES;

20 (XI) SOCIAL WELFARE AND MEDICAL FACILITIES; AND

21 (XII) OTHER PUBLIC OFFICE OR ADMINISTRATIVE FACILITIES.

22 (E) (1) IF THE PLAN COVERS A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, THE LAND
23 ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A MUNICIPAL GROWTH SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE
24 WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

25 (2) THE MUNICIPAL GROWTH SUBELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
HOUSE BILL 243 31

1 (I) THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION’S:

2 1. FUTURE MUNICIPAL GROWTH AREAS OUTSIDE THE
3 EXISTING CORPORATE LIMITS;

4 2. PAST GROWTH PATTERNS; AND

5 3. CAPACITY OF LAND AREAS AVAILABLE FOR
6 DEVELOPMENT, REDEVELOPMENT, AND IN–FILL;

7 (II) THE LAND AREA NEEDED TO SATISFY DEMAND FOR
8 DEVELOPMENT AT DENSITIES CONSISTENT WITH LONG–TERM DEVELOPMENT
9 POLICY;

10 (III) THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE LONG–TERM DEVELOPMENT
11 POLICY TO A VISION OF THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION’S FUTURE CHARACTER;

12 (IV) RURAL BUFFERS AND TRANSITION AREAS;

13 (V) PROTECTION OF SENSITIVE AREAS THAT COULD BE
14 IMPACTED BY DEVELOPMENT PLANNED WITHIN THE PROPOSED MUNICIPAL
15 GROWTH AREA;

16 (VI) POPULATION GROWTH PROJECTIONS;

17 (VII) PUBLIC SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDED TO
18 ACCOMMODATE GROWTH WITHIN THE PROPOSED MUNICIPAL GROWTH AREAS,
19 INCLUDING THOSE NECESSARY FOR:

20 1. LIBRARIES;

21 2. RECREATION;

22 3. WATER AND SEWERAGE FACILITIES;

23 4. PUBLIC SAFETY, INCLUDING EMERGENCY MEDICAL
24 RESPONSE;

25 5. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS SUFFICIENT
26 TO ENSURE WATER QUALITY BOTH INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE PROPOSED MUNICIPAL
27 GROWTH AREA; AND
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
32 HOUSE BILL 243

1 6. PUBLIC SCHOOLS SUFFICIENT TO ACCOMMODATE
2 STUDENT POPULATION CONSISTENT WITH STATE RATED CAPACITY STANDARDS
3 ESTABLISHED BY THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION ON SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION;

4 (VIII) ANY BURDEN ON SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
5 WHICH THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION WOULD BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
6 DEVELOPMENT IN AREAS NEAR TO AND OUTSIDE OF THE PROPOSED MUNICIPAL
7 GROWTH AREA; AND

8 (IX) ANTICIPATED FINANCING MECHANISMS TO SUPPORT
9 NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE.

10 (3) ON REQUEST OF A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, THE DEPARTMENT
11 OF PLANNING SHALL PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE PURPOSES OF
12 DEVELOPING THE MUNICIPAL GROWTH SUBELEMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE
13 PLAN.

14 (F) (1) IF CURRENT GEOLOGICAL INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE, THE
15 LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT IN
16 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

17 (2) THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL IDENTIFY:

18 (I) UNDEVELOPED LAND THAT SHOULD BE KEPT IN ITS
19 UNDEVELOPED STATE UNTIL THE LAND CAN BE USED TO ASSIST IN PROVIDING A
20 CONTINUOUS SUPPLY OF MINERALS, AS DEFINED IN § 15–801 OF THE ENVIRONMENT
21 ARTICLE; AND

22 (II) APPROPRIATE POSTEXCAVATION USES FOR THE LAND THAT
23 ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE COUNTY’S LAND PLANNING PROCESS.

24 (3) THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL INCORPORATE
25 LAND USE POLICIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REGULATIONS TO:

26 (I) BALANCE MINERAL RESOURCE EXTRACTION WITH OTHER
27 LAND USES; AND

28 (II) PREVENT THE PREEMPTION OF MINERAL RESOURCES
29 EXTRACTION BY OTHER USES TO THE EXTENT FEASIBLE.

30 (4) BEFORE THE PLAN IS ADOPTED, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
31 ENVIRONMENT SHALL REVIEW THE MINERAL RESOURCES SUBELEMENT TO
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
HOUSE BILL 243 33

1 DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS
2 AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENT.

3 (G) (1) IF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION IS LOCATED ON THE TIDAL WATERS
4 OF THE STATE, THE LAND ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A FISHERIES SUBELEMENT IN
5 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

6 (2) THE FISHERIES SUBELEMENT SHALL DESIGNATE AREAS ON OR
7 NEAR THE TIDAL WATERS FOR:

8 (I) LOADING, UNLOADING, AND PROCESSING FINFISH AND
9 SHELLFISH; AND

10 (II) DOCKING AND MOORING COMMERCIAL FISHING BOATS AND
11 VESSELS.

12 (3) THE AREAS DESIGNATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
13 SUBSECTION SHALL BE GEOGRAPHICALLY LOCATED TO:

14 (I) FACILITATE THE COMMERCIAL HARVESTING OF FINFISH
15 AND SHELLFISH; AND

16 (II) ENSURE REASONABLE ACCESS TO THE WATERWAYS OF THE
17 STATE BY COMMERCIAL WATERMEN.

18 (H) THE LAND ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE A PRIORITY PRESERVATION AREA
19 SUBELEMENT DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–518 OF THE AGRICULTURE
20 ARTICLE.

21 [3–104.

22 (a) (1) A sensitive areas element shall include the goals, objectives, principles,
23 policies, and standards designed to protect sensitive areas from the adverse effects of
24 development.

25 (2) A local jurisdiction shall consider wildlife movement and habitat
26 connectivity when enacting, adopting, amending, or executing a plan in accordance with §
27 3–101 of this subtitle.

28 (b) (1) Beginning October 1, 2013, the Department of Natural Resources shall
29 provide a statewide forest resource inventory to local jurisdictions at least every 5 years, to
30 be available for the local comprehensive plan review by local jurisdictions required under
31 §§ 1–416(a) and 3–301(a) of this article.
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
34 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (2) The Department of Planning shall coordinate with the Department of
2 Natural Resources and the State Highway Administration to provide each local jurisdiction
3 with updated information on habitat connectivity concerns and current and planned
4 wildlife crossings.

5 (c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment and the
6 Department of Natural Resources shall review the sensitive areas element to determine
7 whether the proposed plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the departments.]

8 3–104.

9 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
10 1–201(B)(2) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

11 (1) A SAFE, BALANCED TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM FOR THE
12 MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE AND GOODS;

13 (2) A RANGE OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION CHOICES FOR
14 FUTURE TRANSPORTATION NEEDS; AND

15 (3) COORDINATION WITH THE LAND ELEMENT TO ENSURE
16 TRANSPORTATION EFFICIENCY FOR EXISTING AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.

17 (B) (1) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
18 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

19 (I) THE MARYLAND TRANSPORTATION PLAN, AS DESCRIBED
20 IN § 2–103.1 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE;

21 (II) THE STATEWIDE 20–YEAR BICYCLE–PEDESTRIAN MASTER
22 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–604 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE; AND

23 (III) THE MARYLAND STATE FREIGHT PLAN, AS REQUIRED
24 UNDER 49 U.S.C. § 70202.

25 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION SHALL:

26 (I) PROVIDE THE LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
27 AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL DATA; AND

28 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
29 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT FROM
30 OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
HOUSE BILL 243 35

1 (C) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE ALL TYPES OF:

2 (1) AIRWAYS;

3 (2) HIGHWAYS OR STREETS;

4 (3) RAILWAYS;

5 (4) WATERWAYS;

6 (5) ROUTINGS FOR MASS TRANSIT; AND

7 (6) TERMINALS FOR INDIVIDUALS, GOODS, AND VEHICLES RELATED
8 TO AIRWAYS, HIGHWAYS, RAILWAYS, AND WATERWAYS.

9 (D) THE TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT SHALL:

10 (1) PROPOSE, ON A SCHEDULE THAT EXTENDS AS FAR INTO THE
11 FUTURE AS IS REASONABLE, THE MOST APPROPRIATE AND DESIRABLE PATTERNS
12 FOR:

13 (I) THE GENERAL LOCATION, CHARACTER, AND EXTENT OF
14 CHANNELS, ROUTES, AND TERMINALS FOR TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES; AND

15 (II) THE CIRCULATION OF INDIVIDUALS AND GOODS;

16 (2) PROVIDE FOR BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND
17 TRAVELWAYS; AND

18 (3) INCLUDE AN ESTIMATE OF THE USE OF ANY PROPOSED
19 IMPROVEMENT.

20 [3–105.

21 (a) The transportation element may include all types of:

22 (1) airways;

23 (2) highways or streets;

24 (3) railways;

25 (4) waterways;
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
36 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (5) routings for mass transit; and

2 (6) terminals for individuals, goods, and vehicles related to airways,
3 highways, railways, and waterways.

4 (b) The transportation element shall:

5 (1) propose, on a schedule that extends as far into the future as is
6 reasonable, the most appropriate and desirable patterns for:

7 (i) the general location, character, and extent of channels, routes,
8 and terminals for transportation facilities; and

9 (ii) the circulation of individuals and goods;

10 (2) provide for bicycle and pedestrian access and travelways; and

11 (3) include an estimate of the use of any proposed improvement.]

12 3–105.

13 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
14 INDICATED.

15 (2) “AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING
16 STATED IN § 2–401 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

17 (3) “AREA MEDIAN INCOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–1801
18 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

19 (4) “LOW–INCOME HOUSING” MEANS HOUSING THAT IS AFFORDABLE
20 FOR A HOUSEHOLD WITH AN AGGREGATE ANNUAL INCOME THAT IS BELOW 60% OF
21 THE AREA MEDIAN INCOME.

22 (5) “WORKFORCE HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–1801
23 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

24 (B) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
25 1–201(B)(3) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

26 (1) THE PROVISION OF AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF HOUSING TO
27 ACCOMMODATE ALL CURRENT AND ANTICIPATED FUTURE RESIDENTS OF THE
28 LOCAL JURISDICTION;
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
HOUSE BILL 243 37

1 (2) THE AGE, STRUCTURAL TYPE, VALUE, AND OCCUPANCY
2 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S HOUSING STOCK;

3 (3) THE ELIMINATION OF SUBSTANDARD DWELLING CONDITIONS;
4 AND

5 (4) THE PROVISION OF ADEQUATE SITES FOR FUTURE HOUSING,
6 INCLUDING AFFORDABLE HOUSING.

7 (C) (1) THE HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE MARYLAND
8 HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT & 10–YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN.

9 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

10 1. PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
11 AVAILABLE HOUSING DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU; AND

12 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
13 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
14 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

15 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
16 DEVELOPMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
17 AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL HOUSING DATA.

18 (D) A HOUSING ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, POLICIES,
19 PLANS, AND STANDARDS.

20 (E) A HOUSING ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS THE NEED FOR AFFORDABLE
21 HOUSING WITHIN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION, INCLUDING:

22 (1) WORKFORCE HOUSING; AND

23 (2) LOW–INCOME HOUSING.

24 (F) (1) A LOCAL JURISDICTION HAS A DUTY TO AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER
25 FAIR HOUSING THROUGH THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S HOUSING AND URBAN
26 DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.

27 (2) THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT IS
28 ENACTED OR AMENDED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2023, SHALL INCLUDE AN
29 ASSESSMENT OF FAIR HOUSING TO ENSURE THAT THE LOCAL JURISDICTION IS
30 AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING.
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
38 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (3) ON REQUEST OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION, THE DEPARTMENT OF
2 PLANNING, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
3 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, SHALL PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE
4 PURPOSE OF DEVELOPING THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

5 (4) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT REQUIRE A LOCAL JURISDICTION TO
6 TAKE, OR PROHIBIT A LOCAL JURISDICTION FROM TAKING, A SPECIFIC ACTION TO
7 AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR HOUSING.

8 [3–106.

9 (a) Considering available data provided by the Department of the Environment,
10 the water resources element shall identify:

11 (1) drinking water and other water resources that will be adequate for the
12 needs of existing and future development proposed in the land use element of the plan; and

13 (2) suitable receiving waters and land areas to meet stormwater
14 management and wastewater treatment and disposal needs of existing and future
15 development proposed in the land use element of the plan.

16 (b) The Department of the Environment shall:

17 (1) provide, on request of a local jurisdiction, technical assistance on the
18 development of the water resources element; and

19 (2) review the water resources element to determine whether the proposed
20 plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the Department reflected in the general
21 water resources program required under § 5–203 of the Environment Article.]

22 3–106.

23 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
24 1–201(B)(4) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE ECONOMY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

25 (1) THE ECONOMIC BASE, LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS, AND
26 LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND RESOURCES OF THE LOCAL
27 JURISDICTION;

28 (2) THE CATEGORIES OR TYPES OF BUSINESSES AND INDUSTRIES
29 DESIRED IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION; AND

30 (3) THE COORDINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT POPULATION
31 TRENDS AND CHARACTERISTICS, NATURAL RESOURCES, COMMUNITY FACILITIES
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
HOUSE BILL 243 39

1 AND SERVICES, TRANSPORTATION, HOUSING, AND LAND USE SO THAT A STRATEGY
2 FOR THE ECONOMIC WELL–BEING OF THE LOCAL JURISDICTION CAN BE
3 DEVELOPED.

4 (B) (1) THE ECONOMY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
5 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

6 (I) THE STATE WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, AS
7 REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL WORKFORCE INNOVATION AND OPPORTUNITY
8 ACT FOR A 4–YEAR COMBINED STATE PLAN; AND

9 (II) THE MARYLAND STATE PLAN FOR POSTSECONDARY
10 EDUCATION, AS DESCRIBED IN § 11–105 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

11 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

12 1. PROVIDE THE LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
13 AVAILABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU; AND

14 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
15 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ECONOMIC ELEMENT
16 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

17 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE SHALL PROVIDE A
18 LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL DATA ON
19 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.

20 (III) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR SHALL PROVIDE
21 A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST AVAILABLE STATE–LEVEL DATA ON THE
22 LABOR FORCE.

23 (C) THE ECONOMY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

24 (1) AN ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMIC SECTORS TO DETERMINE
25 WHETHER AVAILABLE JOBS ALIGN WITH LOCAL LABOR FORCE CHARACTERISTICS,
26 COMMUTING PATTERNS, AND WAGES PAID, AND WHAT STRATEGIES COULD IMPROVE
27 THE EXISTING ECONOMIC SITUATION;

28 (2) AN ANALYSIS OF EXISTING LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
29 PROGRAMS AND TOOLS AND WHAT STRATEGIES ARE NEEDED TO FOSTER ECONOMIC
30 DEVELOPMENT;
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
40 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (3) AN ASSESSMENT OF ECONOMIC ASSETS, PROBLEMS, AND
2 OPPORTUNITIES OF THE LOCAL ECONOMY IN A REGIONAL CONTEXT AND WHAT
3 STRATEGIES ARE NEEDED TO POSITION THE LOCAL ECONOMY IN THE LARGER
4 REGIONAL CONTEXT; AND

5 (4) AN ASSESSMENT OF COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT
6 OPPORTUNITIES AND WHAT STRATEGIES AND PROGRAMS SHOULD BE PURSUED.

7 [3–107.

8 (a) The mineral resources element shall identify:

9 (1) undeveloped land that should be kept in its undeveloped state until the
10 land can be used to assist in providing a continuous supply of minerals, as defined in §
11 15–801(i) of the Environment Article; and

12 (2) appropriate postexcavation uses for the land that are consistent with
13 the county’s land planning process.

14 (b) A mineral resources element shall incorporate land use policies and
15 recommendations for regulations:

16 (1) to balance mineral resource extraction with other land uses; and

17 (2) to the extent feasible, to prevent the preemption of mineral resources
18 extraction by other uses.

19 (c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment shall review
20 the mineral resources element to determine whether the proposed plan is consistent with
21 the programs and goals of the Department.]

22 3–107.

23 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
24 INDICATED.

25 (2) “ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
26 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

27 (3) “OVERBURDENED COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
28 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

29 (4) “UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
30 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
HOUSE BILL 243 41

1 (B) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
2 1–201(B)(5) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE EQUITY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

3 (1) THE NEEDS OF OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED
4 COMMUNITIES IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION; AND

5 (2) POPULATIONS IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION THAT TYPICALLY
6 HAVE NOT PARTICIPATED IN THE PLANNING PROCESS.

7 (C) (1) THE EQUITY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE ANNUAL
8 REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND SUSTAINABLE
9 COMMUNITIES, AS DESCRIBED IN § 1–701 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

10 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

11 1. PROVIDE THE LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
12 AVAILABLE POPULATION AND DEMOGRAPHIC DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS
13 BUREAU; AND

14 2. FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE
15 PROVISION OF DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE EQUITY ELEMENT
16 FROM OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

17 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT SHALL PROVIDE
18 A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH DATA ON ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE.

19 (D) THE EQUITY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE POTENTIAL STRATEGIES TO:

20 (1) PROMOTE BROADER CIVIC ENGAGEMENT IN THE PUBLIC
21 DECISION–MAKING PROCESS;

22 (2) REDUCE THE UNIQUE OR COMPOUNDED HEALTH RISKS IN
23 OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES; AND

24 (3) PRIORITIZE IMPROVEMENTS AND PROGRAMS THAT ADDRESS THE
25 NEEDS OF OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

26 [3–108.

27 (a) On a schedule that extends as far into the future as is reasonable, a
28 community facilities element shall propose the most appropriate and desirable patterns for
29 the general location, character, and extent of public and semipublic buildings, land, and
30 facilities.
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
42 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (b) A community facilities element may include:

2 (1) places of worship;

3 (2) fire stations;

4 (3) hospitals;

5 (4) institutions;

6 (5) jails;

7 (6) libraries;

8 (7) parks and recreation areas;

9 (8) police stations;

10 (9) schools and other educational facilities;

11 (10) cultural facilities;

12 (11) social welfare and medical facilities; and

13 (12) other public office or administrative facilities.]

14 3–108.

15 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
16 1–201(B)(6) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

17 (1) THE COORDINATION OF LOCAL PREPAREDNESS EFFORTS TO
18 IDENTIFY POTENTIAL THREATS FACING THE LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE
19 LONG–TERM STRATEGIES TO AVOID, REDUCE, AND RECOVER FROM CHANGING
20 CONDITIONS AND ASSOCIATED DISASTERS; AND

21 (2) THE MUTUAL ASSISTANCE NEEDED AMONG STATE AND LOCAL
22 PARTNERS TO RESPOND TO THE CHALLENGES OF CHANGING CONDITIONS AND
23 DISASTERS, INCLUDING HUMAN–CAUSED AND NATURAL HAZARDS, AND TO BUILD,
24 ADVANCE, AND MAINTAIN CAPACITIES RELATED TO QUALITY OF LIFE, HEALTH AND
25 WELL–BEING, DURABLE SYSTEMS, ECONOMIC VITALITY, HUMAN–MADE AND
26 NATURE–BASED INFRASTRUCTURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS.

27 (B) (1) THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
28 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
HOUSE BILL 243 43

1 (I) THE STATE RESILIENCE STRATEGY, AS DESCRIBED IN §
2 14–1202 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE; AND

3 (II) THE STATE OF MARYLAND HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN, AS
4 REQUIRED UNDER 44 C.F.R. PART 201.

5 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

6 (I) PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
7 AVAILABLE POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING
8 DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

9 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
10 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT FROM OTHER
11 STATE AGENCIES.

12 (C) THE RESILIENCE ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

13 (1) AN INVENTORY OF AREAS SUSCEPTIBLE TO A NATURAL OR
14 HUMAN–CAUSED HAZARD, SUCH AS FLOODING, INCLUDING RIVERINE AND COASTAL
15 FLOODING, SEA–LEVEL RISE, AND COASTAL STORM SURGE, WHICH INVENTORY MAY
16 CONSIDER THE POTENTIAL DISASTER IMPACTS ON INDIVIDUALS, COMMUNITIES,
17 INSTITUTIONS, BUSINESSES, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
18 AND FACILITIES, AND PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE;

19 (2) AN INVENTORY OF EXISTING RESILIENCE CONDITIONS THAT
20 PROMOTE RESILIENT PLANNING, DESIGN, AND DEVELOPMENT, AND THAT MAY BE
21 COORDINATED WITH OTHER JURISDICTIONS AND STATE AGENCIES; AND

22 (3) RECOMMENDED STRATEGIES AND POLICIES:

23 (I) TO PROTECT SUSCEPTIBLE AREAS AND RESOURCES AND
24 MITIGATE RISKS TO PUBLIC SAFETY, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, HISTORIC
25 STRUCTURES, PUBLIC INVESTMENTS, AND OTHER COMMUNITY RESOURCES; AND

26 (II) THAT ARE INTENDED TO:

27 1. REDUCE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH IDENTIFIED
28 HAZARDS;

29 2. ADAPT TO CHANGING CONDITIONS; AND
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
44 HOUSE BILL 243

1 3. PROMOTE QUICKER RECOVERY AFTER A DISASTER.

2 [3–109.

3 The areas of critical State concern element shall include the planning commission’s
4 recommendations for the determination, identification, and designation of areas within the
5 local jurisdiction that are of critical State concern.]

6 3–109.

7 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
8 1–201(B)(7) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE PLACE ELEMENT SHALL:

9 (1) PLAN, DESIGN, AND PROGRAM NEW OR REVITALIZED PUBLIC
10 SPACES TO STRENGTHEN COMMUNITY COHESION WHILE CONTRIBUTING TO PUBLIC
11 HEALTH, CONNECTING PEOPLE WITH CULTURAL HERITAGES, CONSERVING
12 NATURAL RESOURCES, IMPROVING RESILIENCE, AND STRENGTHENING THE LOCAL
13 ECONOMY; AND

14 (2) PROMOTE THE ACTIVE CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC
15 SPACES BY THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND WORK THERE, SUPPORTING THE
16 CONTINUATION OF LOCAL WAYS OF LIFE AND CULTURAL MEMORIES.

17 (B) (1) THE PLACE ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE FOLLOWING
18 STATE PLANS:

19 (I) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
20 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND

21 (II) THE STATEWIDE HISTORIC PRESERVATION PLAN, AS
22 REQUIRED UNDER THE NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT.

23 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

24 (I) PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
25 AVAILABLE POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING
26 DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

27 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
28 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE PLACE ELEMENT FROM OTHER
29 STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

30 (C) THE PLACE ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
HOUSE BILL 243 45

1 (1) AN INVENTORY OF GATHERING PLACES FOR SOCIAL
2 INTERACTIONS AND CENTERS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY;

3 (2) AN ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC SPACES TO IDENTIFY THOSE OF UNIQUE
4 CULTURAL AND HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE; AND

5 (3) RECOMMENDED STRATEGIES, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS TO
6 BUILD SOCIAL COHESION AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT.

7 [3–110.

8 (a) The goals and objectives element shall include a statement of goals and
9 objectives, principles, policies, and standards.

10 (b) The statement shall serve as a guide for the development and economic and
11 social well–being of the local jurisdiction.]

12 3–110.

13 (A) IN ADDITION TO IMPLEMENTING THE PLANNING PRINCIPLE IN §
14 1–201(B)(8) OF THIS ARTICLE, THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL ADDRESS:

15 (1) THE PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL
16 RESOURCES, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES, MINERAL RESOURCES, AND
17 WATER AND AIR QUALITY;

18 (2) THE PROTECTION OF SIGNIFICANT ARCHITECTURAL, SCENIC,
19 CULTURAL, HISTORICAL, OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES;

20 (3) THE CONSERVATION, USE, AND PROTECTION OF NATURAL
21 RESOURCES;

22 (4) THE PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF PRIME
23 AGRICULTURAL LAND AND STRATEGIES TO ENCOURAGE THE COMPATIBILITY OF
24 LAND USE WITH AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS;

25 (5) THE PROTECTION OF A RELIABLE SUPPLY OF WATER AND ITS USES
26 AND LIMITATIONS;

27 (6) PREVENTING THE DEGRADATION OF THE ABOVE RESOURCES DUE
28 TO FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT;
END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
46 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (7) GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM ANY ADDITIONAL VEHICLE
2 MILES TRAVELED LIKELY TO RESULT FROM FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS
3 PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT;

4 (8) SENSITIVE AREAS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
5 SECTION; AND

6 (9) WATER RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E) OF
7 THIS SECTION.

8 (B) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL BE INFORMED BY THE
9 FOLLOWING STATE PLANS:

10 (I) MARYLAND’S CLIMATE POLLUTION REDUCTION PLAN, AS
11 DESCRIBED IN § 2–1205 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

12 (II) THE MARYLAND LAND PRESERVATION AND RECREATION
13 PLAN, AS DESCRIBED IN § 5–906 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE; AND

14 (III) THE STATEWIDE COMPREHENSIVE OUTDOOR RECREATION
15 PLAN, AS REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION
16 FUND ACT OF 1965.

17 (2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL:

18 (I) PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH THE BEST
19 AVAILABLE POPULATION, DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND HOUSING
20 DATA FROM THE U.S. CENSUS BUREAU AND OTHER STANDARD SOURCES; AND

21 (II) FACILITATE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE PROVISION OF
22 DATA RELEVANT TO THE PREPARATION OF THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT FROM OTHER
23 STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES.

24 (C) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT MAY INCLUDE:

25 (1) AN INVENTORY OF NATURAL, HISTORICAL, AND
26 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE RESOURCES;

27 (2) AN EVALUATION OF THE ISSUES, PROBLEMS, AND OPPORTUNITIES
28 ASSOCIATED WITH THE RESOURCES; AND
END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
HOUSE BILL 243 47

1 (3) STRATEGIES AND POLICIES FOR THE APPROPRIATE USE,
2 PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF THESE RESOURCES THAT ARE CONSISTENT
3 WITH THE STRATEGIES AND POLICIES ESTABLISHED FOR OTHER PLAN ELEMENTS.

4 (D) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A SENSITIVE AREAS
5 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

6 (2) THE SENSITIVE AREAS SUBELEMENT SHALL:

7 (I) INCLUDE GOALS, OBJECTIVES, PRINCIPLES, POLICIES, AND
8 STANDARDS DESIGNED TO PROTECT SENSITIVE AREAS FROM THE ADVERSE
9 EFFECTS OF DEVELOPMENT;

10 (II) BE INFORMED BY CURRENT STATE AND FEDERAL
11 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING THE PROTECTION OF SENSITIVE AREAS; AND

12 (III) INDICATE WHAT ADDITIONAL MEASURES, IF ANY, THE
13 LOCAL JURISDICTION PROPOSES TO IMPLEMENT BEYOND THE REQUIREMENTS
14 DESCRIBED IN ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

15 (3) A LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL CONSIDER WILDLIFE MOVEMENT
16 AND HABITAT CONNECTIVITY WHEN ENACTING, ADOPTING, AMENDING, OR
17 EXECUTING A PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–101 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

18 (4) (I) THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES SHALL
19 PROVIDE A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH A STATEWIDE FOREST RESOURCE
20 INVENTORY AT LEAST EVERY 5 YEARS, TO BE AVAILABLE FOR THE LOCAL
21 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN REVIEW BY LOCAL JURISDICTIONS REQUIRED UNDER §
22 3–301(A) OF THIS TITLE.

23 (II) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL COORDINATE
24 WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE HIGHWAY
25 ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE EACH LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH UPDATED
26 INFORMATION ON HABITAT CONNECTIVITY CONCERNS AND CURRENT AND PLANNED
27 WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

28 (5) BEFORE THE PLAN IS ADOPTED, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
29 ENVIRONMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES SHALL REVIEW
30 THE SENSITIVE AREAS SUBELEMENT TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED
31 PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENTS.

32 (E) (1) THE ECOLOGY ELEMENT SHALL INCLUDE A WATER RESOURCES
33 SUBELEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.
END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
48 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (2) CONSIDERING AVAILABLE DATA PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT
2 OF THE ENVIRONMENT, THE WATER RESOURCES SUBELEMENT SHALL IDENTIFY:

3 (I) DRINKING WATER AND OTHER WATER RESOURCES THAT
4 WILL BE ADEQUATE FOR THE NEEDS OF EXISTING AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
5 PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT OF THE PLAN; AND

6 (II) SUITABLE RECEIVING WATERS AND LAND AREAS TO MEET
7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL NEEDS
8 OF EXISTING AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT PROPOSED IN THE LAND ELEMENT OF THE
9 PLAN.

10 (3) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT SHALL:

11 (I) PROVIDE, ON REQUEST OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION,
12 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE WATER RESOURCES
13 SUBELEMENT; AND

14 (II) REVIEW THE WATER RESOURCES SUBELEMENT TO
15 DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSED PLAN IS CONSISTENT WITH THE PROGRAMS
16 AND GOALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT REFLECTED IN THE
17 GENERAL WATER RESOURCES PROGRAM REQUIRED UNDER § 5–203 OF THE
18 ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

19 [3–111.

20 (a) On a schedule that extends as far into the future as is reasonable, the land
21 use element shall propose the most appropriate and desirable patterns for the general
22 location, character, extent, and interrelationship of the uses of public and private land.

23 (b) The land use element may include the following public and private land uses:

24 (1) agricultural;

25 (2) commercial;

26 (3) forestry, in accordance with § 5–101 of the Natural Resources Article;

27 (4) industrial;

28 (5) recreational; and

29 (6) residential.]
END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
HOUSE BILL 243 49

1 [3–112.

2 (a) The municipal growth element shall include:

3 (1) the municipal corporation’s:

4 (i) future municipal growth areas outside the existing corporate
5 limits;

6 (ii) past growth patterns;

7 (iii) capacity of land areas available for development, redevelopment,
8 and in–fill;

9 (2) the land area needed to satisfy demand for development at densities
10 consistent with long–term development policy;

11 (3) the relationship of the long–term development policy to a vision of the
12 municipal corporation’s future character;

13 (4) rural buffers and transition areas;

14 (5) protection of sensitive areas that could be impacted by development
15 planned within the proposed municipal growth area;

16 (6) population growth projections;

17 (7) public services and infrastructure needed to accommodate growth
18 within the proposed municipal growth areas, including those necessary for:

19 (i) libraries;

20 (ii) recreation;

21 (iii) water and sewerage facilities;

22 (iv) public safety, including emergency medical response;

23 (v) stormwater management systems sufficient to ensure water
24 quality both inside and outside the proposed municipal growth area; and

25 (vi) public schools sufficient to accommodate student population
26 consistent with State rated capacity standards established by the Interagency Commission
27 on School Construction;
END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
50 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (8) any burden on services and infrastructure for which the municipal
2 corporation would be responsible for development in areas near to and outside of the
3 proposed municipal growth area; and

4 (9) anticipated financing mechanisms to support necessary public services
5 and infrastructure.

6 (b) On request of a municipal corporation, the Department of Planning shall
7 provide technical assistance for the purposes of developing the municipal growth element
8 of the comprehensive plan.]

9 [3–113.

10 (a) The planning commission of a county that is located on the tidal waters of the
11 State shall designate in the comprehensive plan areas on or near the tidal waters for:

12 (1) loading, unloading, and processing finfish and shellfish; and

13 (2) docking and mooring commercial fishing boats and vessels.

14 (b) The areas designated under subsection (a) of this section shall be
15 geographically located to:

16 (1) facilitate the commercial harvesting of finfish and shellfish; and

17 (2) ensure reasonable access to the waterways of the State by commercial
18 watermen.]

19 [3–114.

20 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (2) “Affirmatively further fair housing” has the meaning stated in § 2–401
22 of the Housing and Community Development Article.

23 (3) “Area median income” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the
24 Housing and Community Development Article.

25 (4) “Low–income housing” means housing that is affordable for a household
26 with an aggregate annual income that is below 60% of the area median income.

27 (5) “Workforce housing” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the Housing
28 and Community Development Article.

29 (b) A housing element may include goals, objectives, policies, plans, and
30 standards.
END OF PAGE 50

START OF PAGE 51
HOUSE BILL 243 51

1 (c) A housing element shall address the need for affordable housing within the
2 local jurisdiction, including:

3 (1) workforce housing; and

4 (2) low–income housing.

5 (d) (1) Local jurisdictions have a duty to affirmatively further fair housing
6 through their housing and urban development programs.

7 (2) The housing element of a comprehensive plan that is enacted or
8 amended on or after January 1, 2023, shall include an assessment of fair housing to ensure
9 that the local jurisdiction is affirmatively furthering fair housing.

10 (3) On request of a local jurisdiction, the Department of Planning, in
11 consultation with the Department of Housing and Community Development, shall provide
12 technical assistance for the purpose of developing the housing element of the
13 comprehensive plan.

14 (4) This subsection does not require a local jurisdiction to take, or prohibit
15 a local jurisdiction from taking, a specific action to affirmatively further fair housing.]

16 3–206.

17 (a) (1) When developing a municipal growth [element] SUBELEMENT of the
18 comprehensive plan, a municipal corporation shall consult with the counties in which the
19 municipal corporation is located.

20 (2) A municipal corporation shall provide a copy of a municipal growth
21 [element] SUBELEMENT to the counties in which the municipal corporation is located
22 before approval of the element.

23 (b) (1) The municipal corporation shall accept comments from the counties for
24 30 days after providing a copy of the municipal growth [element] SUBELEMENT to the
25 counties in which the municipal corporation is located.

26 (2) Within 30 days following the close of the comment period under
27 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the counties and the municipal corporation shall meet and
28 confer regarding the municipal growth [element] SUBELEMENT.

29 (3) On request of either party, the county and the municipal corporation
30 shall employ an appropriate mediation and conflict resolution service to facilitate the
31 meeting and conferral under this subsection.
END OF PAGE 51

START OF PAGE 52
52 HOUSE BILL 243

1 (c) (1) A municipal corporation and the counties in which the municipal
2 corporation is located may enter into a joint planning agreement in order to coordinate
3 implementation of a municipal growth [element] SUBELEMENT.

4 (2) A joint planning agreement shall consider the municipal growth
5 [element] SUBELEMENT required under Subtitle 1 of this title.

6 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
7 Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
8 Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
9 General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
10 publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
11 the section affected.

12 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 52