START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 229 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 229 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority - Revenue Bond Limit - Increase 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the debt capacity of the Maryland Transportation 
Authority (MDTA) from $4.0 billion to $5.0 billion, subject to existing bond issuance 
requirements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDTA nonbudgeted revenues increase significantly, potentially beginning 
as early as FY 2029, to the extent MDTA issues additional bonds, as discussed below; 
MDTA nonbudgeted expenditures increase for related debt service. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Since 1971, MDTA has been responsible for constructing, managing, 
operating, and improving the State’s toll facilities (for example, the Chesapeake Bay 
Bridge and the Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial/Senator Thomas “Mac” Middleton 
Bridge) and for financing new revenue-producing transportation projects. MDTA is a 
nonbudgeted State agency, meaning that its budget is not subject to the General Assembly’s 
appropriation process. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 229/ Page 2 
Revenue bonds may be issued by MDTA without obtaining the consent of any 
instrumentality, agency, or unit of State government and without any proceedings or the 
happening of any conditions or things other than those specifically required by State law. 
Revenue bonds secured by toll revenue may be issued in any amount as long as the 
aggregate outstanding and unpaid principal balance of the revenue bonds secured by toll 
revenue and revenue bonds of prior issues does not exceed $4.0 billion on June 30 of any 
year. 
 
The maximum aggregate amount of revenue bonds that may be outstanding and unpaid 
must be reduced by the amount of (1) any loan extended to the State under the federal 
Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act and (2) any line of credit 
extended to the State under the same Act, to the extent the State draws on the line of credit. 
Generally, MDTA may issue bonds to refinance all or any part of the cost of a 
transportation facility project for which MDTA previously issued bonds without the 
approval of the General Assembly. 
 
Background:  MDTA’s debt capacity limit was last increased from $3.0 billion to 
$4.0 billion by the PORT Act (Chapters 2 and 3 of 2024) in response to the collapse of the 
Francis Scott Key Bridge. MDOT advises that a further increase in MDTA’s debt capacity 
limit is needed because there is significant uncertainty in the timing of federal 
reimbursements for costs associated with the reconstruction of the bridge. While the federal 
government has agreed to pay 100% of the necessary costs related to the reconstruction of 
the bridge, the State must initially pay the costs and then later be reimbursed. MDOT 
advises that the timing of federal reimbursements is difficult to predict because the funding 
is derived from federal emergency response funds and may be affected by, among other 
issues, disaster response needs across the country. 
 
In addition to supporting the reconstruction efforts of the Francis Scott Key Bridge, MDOT 
further advises that the bill also supports completion of MDTA’s other capital projects, 
primarily associated with preservation activities. MDOT advises that, in the absence of the 
bill, MDTA may be required to increase tolls to fund its capital program without issuing 
debt beyond the existing debt capacity limit. 
 
MDTA’s current financial plan assumes federal reimbursements related to the 
Francis Scott Key Bridge reconstruction project will take place about one year after costs 
are paid. As shown in Exhibit 1, MDTA’s planned bond issuances will exceed the current 
$4.0 billion limit beginning in fiscal 2029. However, MDOT advises that the timing of 
MDTA’s planned bond issuances is subject to change based on the pace of construction of 
the reconstruction project and the timing of federal reimbursements. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 229/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland Transportation Authority Planned Bond Issuances and Debt Outstanding 
Fiscal 2026 through 2031 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Bond 
Issuances 
$566.3 
$253.7 
$822.0 
$785.1 
$536.7 
$411.4 
Debt 
Outstanding 
$2,580.9 
$2,744.1 
$3,514.6 
$4,243.1 
$4,694.8 
$4,395.1 
 
Source:  Maryland Transportation Authority  
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues increase significantly, potentially beginning 
as early as fiscal 2029, to the extent MDTA issues additional bonds as a result of the bill. 
As noted above, MDTA’s current financial plan assumes bond issuances in excess of the 
existing $4.0 billion limit beginning in fiscal 2029; however, the ultimate amount and 
timing of its bond issuances may vary depending on the pace and costs of the bridge 
reconstruction project and the timing of related federal reimbursements. 
 
Nonbudgeted expenditures increase to pay debt service on any additional bonds issued 
under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been considered within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 188 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State 
Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 229/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Transportation Authority - Revenue Bond Limit - Increase 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 229 
 
PREPARED BY:  Maryland Transportation Authority 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
 X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4