START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 218 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 218 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Office of the Attorney General) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Office of the Attorney General - Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes 
Unit - Reporting Requirement 
 
 
This bill alters, from November 30 to October 1, the date by which the Attorney General 
must submit an annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly on (1) the 
activities of the Environmental and Natural Resources Crimes Unit and (2) any actions 
taken by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) or the Department of 
Natural Resources in response to findings and recommendations of the unit. The bill also 
specifies that the report must cover the activities of the unit during the previous fiscal year. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances.    
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapters 689 and 690 of 2023 established the Environmental 
and Natural Resources Crimes Unit of the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to 
investigate and prosecute violations of State criminal environmental and natural resources 
laws.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 218/ Page 2 
OAG advises that the bill’s changes align the annual report date and reporting period to 
that of MDE’s annual report covering enforcement activities and compliance data. The 
change is intended to streamline reporting obligations, reduce administrative burden, and 
ensure consistency in reporting.  
 
OAG’s second annual report covers the activities of the unit (and related actions) from 
October 1, 2024, through September 30, 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2