START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 234

E4 6lr0002
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 74

By: Chair, Appropriations Committee (By Request – Departmental – State Police)
Requested: September 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Police Employees and Deputy State Fire Marshals – Repeal of
3 Pay Rate Restriction on Promotion

4 FOR the purpose of repealing a requirement that a certain police employee or deputy State
5 fire marshal is entitled to a certain pay rate on promotion to a higher rank if a certain
6 other police employee or deputy State fire marshal in the same rank is at a lower
7 pay rate; and generally relating to the pay rates of police employees and deputy State
8 fire marshals.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Public Safety
11 Section 2–405
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Public Safety

17 2–405.

18 (a) (1) The Secretary shall develop a pay plan for police employees, State
19 Police communications operators, and State Police communications supervisors that
20 includes the ranks and the grades within ranks that the Secretary considers appropriate.

21 (2) The pay plan under this subsection:

22 (i) is subject to approval by the Secretary of Budget and
23 Management; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0234*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 234

1 (ii) is effective on approval by the Governor only to the extent that
2 sufficient money is included in the State budget.

3 (b) Each police employee, State Police communications operator, and State Police
4 communications supervisor is entitled to receive the pay rate, including any increment
5 based on length of service, set forth in the pay plan established under subsection (a) of this
6 section.

7 (c) (1) Each police employee is entitled to the pay rate for the next highest step
8 within the police employee’s rank on:

9 (i) each July 1, if the police employee was a police employee on July
10 1, 1967; or

11 (ii) each anniversary of the date of employment, for all other police
12 employees.

13 (2) [(i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, on]
14 ON promotion a police employee or a deputy State fire marshal is entitled to the pay
15 specified for the new rank in the same step that the police employee or deputy State fire
16 marshal occupied before promotion.

17 [(ii) If the step that the police employee or deputy State fire marshal
18 occupied before promotion is higher than that held by a police employee or deputy State
19 fire marshal who is already in the rank and has equal or higher total service time, on
20 promotion the police employee or deputy State fire marshal is entitled only to the pay
21 specified for the new rank in the next lower step than the police employee or deputy State
22 fire marshal occupied before promotion.]

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
24 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2