START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 214

F2 6lr1679
HB 205/19 – APP (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Healey
Requested: November 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Academic Forgiveness Policy – Established

3 FOR the purpose of requiring certain institutions of higher education to develop and
4 implement an academic forgiveness policy on or before a certain date that applies to
5 certain applicants under certain circumstances; and generally relating to an
6 academic forgiveness policy at institutions of higher education.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Education
9 Section 15–141 to be under the amended title “Title 15. Institutions of Higher
10 Education”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 Preamble

14 WHEREAS, Too often, students enrolled in institutions of higher education do not
15 appreciate the value of their higher education experiences and, following a brief history of
16 poor and failing grades, such students decide to pursue interests outside the academic
17 world; and

18 WHEREAS, Following a considerable passage of time, former students have a
19 greater appreciation of higher educational opportunities and may seek to return to the
20 institution only to find that the grades they acquired during their earlier experience act as
21 a barrier and hindrance to their academic progress; and

22 WHEREAS, The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for institutions of
23 higher education to disregard the records of such students that prevent or impede their
24 academic success; now, therefore,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0214*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 214

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 Title 15. [Public] Institutions of Higher Education.

5 15–141.

6 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
7 INDICATED.

8 (2) “ACADEMIC FORGIVENESS POLICY” MEANS A POLICY THAT
9 DISREGARDS DURING AN ADMISSIONS PROCESS AN APPLICANT’S UNSATISFACTORY
10 OR FAILING GRADES EARNED AT A PRIOR INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

11 (3) “ADMISSIONS PROCESS” MEANS THE PROCESS BY WHICH
12 INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION SELECT STUDENTS FOR ENROLLMENT.

13 (B) (1) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1, 2026, EACH INSTITUTION OF HIGHER
14 EDUCATION THAT RECEIVES STATE FUNDS SHALL DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT AN
15 ACADEMIC FORGIVENESS POLICY.

16 (2) THE POLICY DEVELOPED AND IMPLEMENTED UNDER PARAGRAPH
17 (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL APPLY TO AN APPLICANT IF:

18 (I) THE APPLICANT’S GRADES WERE EARNED 7 OR MORE
19 YEARS BEFORE THE APPLICANT’S APPLICATION SUBMISSION; AND

20 (II) THE APPLICANT ELECTS TO PARTICIPATE IN THE
21 ACADEMIC FORGIVENESS POLICY.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2