START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 224 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 224 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Human Services) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Reentry and Reintegration Support Program - Establishment 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Department of Human Services (DHS), the Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), and the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) to jointly establish and administer the Maryland Reentry and Reintegration 
Support Program (MRRSP). The program must provide coordinated prerelease “covered 
benefits” application assistance to “returning citizens” who choose to participate in the 
program. The departments must jointly develop a process to provide a returning citizen 
with the opportunity to apply for covered benefits before their scheduled release date. 
By April 1, 2027, the departments must jointly develop and enter into a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) to implement the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and federal fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase correspondingly 
to any increase in federal fund expenditures, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 224/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Defined Terms:  “Covered benefits” means (1) the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP); (2) Temporary Cash Assistance; and (3) the Maryland Medical 
Assistance Program. “Releasing institution” means a State correctional facility operated by 
or under the authority of DPSCS. “Returning citizen” means an individual confined in a 
State correctional facility who is expected to be released within 90 days. 
 
Program Requirements:  MRRSP must include a voluntary and standardized prerelease 
application process for covered benefits. DPSCS must assist each participating returning 
citizen in applying for covered benefits and obtaining required verifications at no cost to 
the individual. 
 
Program staff within the “releasing institution” must assist a participating returning citizen 
in completing and submitting all necessary applications and documentation for covered 
benefits. Required verifications include a certified copy of the returning citizen’s birth 
certificate, a copy of the returning citizen’s Social Security card, proof of the returning 
citizen’s income and assets; proof of the returning citizen’s shelter costs, and other 
information necessary to establish eligibility for benefits. This assistance must be provided 
in a timely manner to ensure, to the extent practicable, that the returning citizen possesses 
the required verification on release from a State correctional facility. 
 
Memorandum of Understanding:  The MOU must establish a secure data sharing process 
to (1) facilitate the timely processing of applications for covered benefits; (2) verify a 
returning citizen’s identity and eligibility; and (3) ensure that, to the extent practicable, 
covered benefits are active and accessible to the returning citizen immediately on release. 
Data shared between the departments must be used solely for the purposes of administering 
the program and must be subject to all applicable State and federal laws. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Required Documents 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must issue an identification (ID) card to an incarcerated 
individual before release from confinement in a State correctional facility. The ID card 
must meet the requirements for secondary identification for the purpose of an ID card 
issued by the Motor Vehicle Administration under § 12-301 of the Transportation Article. 
In addition, pursuant to Chapter 514 of 2020, the Commissioner of Correction must obtain 
an incarcerated individual’s birth certificate and Social Security card after taking custody 
of an incarcerated individual (unless the incarcerated individual does not consent). 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 224/ Page 3 
Release from Division of Correction 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning issuance of an ID card to incarcerated individuals 
on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Current regulations specify that, when feasible, a parole release plan must be completed 
before a parole hearing. A release plan must include the name of the parolee’s employer or 
evidence of other legitimate means of financial support, the location at which the parolee 
will reside, and the nature of any community services necessary to meet the special needs 
of the parolee. 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry 
Services 
 
Chapters 936 and 937 of 2024 established the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of 
Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by DPSCS. The task force must 
(1) identify and assess the reentry services that exist in the State; (2) identify gaps in reentry 
services; (3) assess the markers of successful reentry; (4) ensure that the recommendations 
of the task force equally consider returning citizens regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan 
to establish a Division of Returning Citizens within DPSCS for specified purposes; and 
(6) develop a plan to expand specified services for individuals after release from 
incarceration. 
 
Chapters 112 and 113 of 2025 extended the termination date of the task force to 
June 30, 2027, and the deadline for submission of the task force’s required report to 
October 31, 2026. 
 
Background:  DHS advises that the bill is intended to build on the work of the Task Force 
on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services and to 
address challenges in obtaining benefits for returning citizens. The intent is to create a 
coordinated pre-release benefits application process and to alter existing procedures for 
benefit eligibility determination and release planning within the affected agencies. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in fiscal 2027 for staff and programming costs for DHS, DPSCS, and MDH to 
implement the bill. However, without actual experience under the bill, DLS is unable to 
verify the extent to which additional programming and staff are required.  
 
Although DPSCS estimates that approximately 1,900 individuals are released to the 
community from State correctional facilities annually across all jurisdictions, the number 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 224/ Page 4 
of returning citizens that will choose to participate in MRRSP or who are eligible to receive 
covered benefits cannot be reliably estimated, nor can the amount of staff needed to process 
any increase in applications.  
 
Based on information provided by DHS, the department likely incurs one‐time 
programming costs of $250,000 to create a system for coordinated processing of 
applications and secure data sharing. However, until all agencies enter the required MOU, 
requirements for the system cannot be determined. In addition, although DPSCS currently 
assists returning citizens to obtain birth certificates and Social Security cards, it is unclear 
to what extent additional staff may be needed to obtain any additional information needed 
to establish eligibility for covered benefits and to facilitate the timely processing of 
applications for covered benefits. While MDH and DPSCS have an established agreement 
and process in place for data sharing, it is unclear if updates are needed to meet MRRSP 
requirements. Further, it is unclear to what extent additional staff are needed to process 
applications for covered benefits within MDH and DHS. 
 
To the extent that new staff are needed in MDH and DHS to process additional applications 
for federal covered benefits, the State may be able to recover approximately 50% of the 
costs from federal funds. Thus, any increase in participation in covered benefits likely 
results in an increase in federal fund revenues. By ensuring eligible individuals are enrolled 
in Medicaid and SNAP upon release, the State can maximize federal financial participation 
for allowable administrative costs associated with the enrollment increase.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 97 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Human Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 224/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Reentry and Reintegration Support Program - Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 224 
 
PREPARED BY: Graham O’Neil 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_____  WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal is not expected to have a direct economic impact on for-profit small businesses in 
Maryland. The legislation does not impose any new reporting, record-keeping, or other 
administrative requirements on small businesses. 
 
However, the bill is expected to have a positive indirect impact on the non-profit sector. 
Community-based non-profit organizations that provide reentry services are crucial partners. 
This legislation will better equip these non-profits to provide more effective wrap-around 
services, which may lead to increased demand and strengthen their role within the community. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5