START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 220 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 220 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Water - Individual Unit Meters 
 
  
This bill authorizes owners, operators, or managers (or contractors hired by owners, 
operators, or managers) to install individual unit water meters for apartments and dwelling 
units. An owner (or agent) that uses the installed meters to provide bulk water service is 
prohibited from imposing any water or sewerage cost on a unit other than the actual charges 
imposed by the water service provider. Among other provisions, the bill also (1) requires 
an owner (or agent) to maintain certain records and (2) prohibits any unpaid water bills 
from being considered as unpaid rent in an eviction proceeding. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Apartment house” means one or more buildings that each contain more than  
two dwelling units and in which all the dwelling units are occupied primarily for 
nontransient use with rent paid at intervals of one week or longer. This includes a 
residential condominium or cooperative, whether the units are rented or owner occupied. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 220/ Page 2 
“Individual unit meter” means equipment used to determine the actual use of water for each 
residential unit in an apartment house. 
 
“Adequate records” includes:   
 
 
a copy of all charges that the water service provider imposed on the owner, operator, 
or manager of an apartment house in the preceding two years;  
 
the total utility cost imposed on all units in the facility each month for the current 
calendar year and previous calendar year; 
 
the total revenue collected from occupants to pay the charges imposed on the owner, 
operator, or manager by the water service provider each month for the current 
calendar year and previous calendar year; 
 
an explanation of the formula used to allocate the cost of each unit’s water 
consumption; and 
 
any other information necessary for a tenant to verify a water utility bill. 
 
Water Meter Installation, Billing, and Administrative Fees  
 
The bill authorizes local housing authorities to install individual unit meters for apartment 
houses or dwelling units, provided they have approval from the Department of Housing 
and Community Development (DHCD). In addition, the bill authorizes owners or their 
agents to install individual meters within each unit that is not individually metered for water 
to allocate fairly the cost of each unit’s water consumption. 
 
During the use of individual meters for bulk-metered service, the owner (or agent) is 
prohibited from charging a unit more than the actual costs imposed by the water service 
provider. The imposed charges must be allocated among units in proportion to their actual 
usage. An owner (or agent) is also prohibited from charging a unit for (1) costs resulting 
from leaks or poor maintenance that are the responsibility of the owner (or agent) and 
(2) water used in common areas. 
 
The bill also prohibits an owner or agent from charging more than $1 per unit per month 
to cover billing or other administrative fees.  
 
Meter Standards 
 
The bill requires that meters installed under the bill are subject to certain regulations 
adopted by the Maryland Department of the Environment in consultation with DHCD. The 
regulations must be at least as stringent as the standards applied to meters installed by water 
service providers. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 220/ Page 3 
The bill also requires that (1) each individual unit meter must include a leak detection 
monitor and (2) owners or their agents must allow occupants to periodically inspect the 
leak detection monitor. 
 
Recordkeeping and Complaint Procedures 
 
Owners or their agents must maintain adequate records for individual meters and allow 
occupants to inspect these records during reasonable business hours.  
 
Occupants may file complaints against owners (or agents) in the county or municipality 
where the apartment house is located. The bill also authorizes complaints to be handled by 
local landlord‐tenant commissions or, if no local commission exists (or has appropriate 
jurisdiction), by the local consumer protection agency. If neither local option is available, 
the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the Attorney General may handle the 
complaint. 
 
Current Law:  Section 7‐303 of the Public Utilities Article includes similar provisions 
regarding the use of “submetering,” which is the installation of equipment to determine the 
actual use of gas or electricity for each residential unit in an apartment house or commercial 
rental unit in an office building or shopping center.  
 
The Real Property Article includes certain requirements related to notice and disclosure 
when landlords use a “ratio utility billing system,” which means the allocation of one or 
more of a landlord’s utility charges, collected via a master meter, among the tenants by any 
method that does not measure actual per‐tenant usage for the utility (including electricity 
and water usage, among others). 
 
For example, a landlord using a ratio utility billing system is required to provide 
prospective tenants with a written disclosure that contains specified information, including 
the following:   
 
 
a statement of which utilities will be billed via allocation; 
 
copies of the landlord’s last two utility bills and the average monthly bill for all units 
from the previous calendar year, by utility; 
 
a description of the method that will be used to calculate the tenant’s share; 
 
information on any administrative or service fees associated with the billing system; 
and 
 
a statement explaining that the tenant may inspect the landlord’s utility records and 
that all billing disputes are to be resolved between the landlord and the tenant. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 220/ Page 4 
If a landlord fails to provide the required written disclosures, any provision in the lease 
requiring the tenant to pay those utility charges is unenforceable. 
 
In general, the landlord of a building with six or more residential dwelling units that 
requires a tenant to make payments for water, sewer, gas, or electric utility services to the 
landlord (and not directly to the service provider) must (1) use a written lease that provides 
notice that the tenant is responsible for making payments for those utility services to the 
landlord and (2) provide a copy of the water, sewer, gas, or electric bill to the tenant or a 
written report at the beginning of each lease term indicating the total cost for each utility 
type billed to the landlord during the previous year. These requirements, however, are not 
applicable if a landlord uses a ratio utility billing system. 
 
A landlord of a building that contains five or fewer residential dwelling units (and who 
requires a tenant to make payments for water, sewer, gas, or electric utility services to the 
landlord and not directly to the service provider) must (1) use a written lease that provides 
notice that the tenant is responsible for making payments for water, sewer, gas, or electric 
utility services to the landlord and (2) provide a copy of the water, sewer, gas, or electric 
utility bill to the tenant.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 130 (Senator Henson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4