START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 287 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 287 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Lifetime Sexual Offender Supervision - Conditions, 
Violations, and Petitions for Discharge 
 
   
This departmental bill makes numerous changes to statutory language regarding lifetime 
sexual offender supervision, including that related to (1) required conditions of lifetime 
sexual offender supervision; (2) the process by which the Division of Parole and Probation 
(DPP) within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) may 
charge a person for a violation of a condition of the lifetime supervision; and (3) the process 
by which a person subject to lifetime sexual offender supervision may petition for 
discharge from lifetime supervision.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  DPSCS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, except where a term of natural life 
without the possibility of parole is imposed, a sentence must include a term of lifetime 
sexual offender supervision for the following: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 287/ Page 2 
 
a sexually violent predator;  
 
a person convicted of first- or second-degree rape, or first- or second-degree sexual 
offense as the offenses existed before October 1, 2017, if the person was an adult at 
the time of the offense;  
 
a person convicted of attempted first- or second-degree rape, attempted first-degree 
sexual offense as the offense existed before October 1, 2017, or if the person was 
an adult at the time of the offense, attempted second-degree sexual offense as the 
offense existed before October 1, 2017;  
 
a person convicted of sexual abuse of a minor that was committed when the person 
was an adult against a child younger than age 13 or that was committed when the 
person was at least age 21 against a child younger than age 16;  
 
a person required to register with the person’s supervising authority because the 
person was at least age 13 but not older than age 18 at the time of the act; and 
 
a person convicted more than once arising out of separate incidents of a crime that 
requires registration.  
 
Under current law, the sentencing court or juvenile court must impose special conditions 
of lifetime sexual offender supervision at the time of sentencing or imposition of the 
registration requirement in juvenile court and advise the person of the length, conditions, 
and consecutive nature of that supervision. Among others, special conditions may include 
global positioning satellite tracking or equivalent technology and participation in a sexual 
offender treatment program. The sentencing court may adjust the special conditions of such 
lifetime supervision in consultation with the person’s sexual offender management team.  
 
The bill requires conditions of lifetime sexual offender supervision to include all standard 
and special conditions of supervision imposed by (1) the sentencing court at the time of 
sentencing and (2) the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) at the time of release from 
custody. 
 
A person subject to lifetime supervision is prohibited from knowingly or willfully violating 
the conditions of the supervision and subject to penalties as specified in statute. Such 
penalties are unchanged by the bill, but the bill also establishes that if a person violates a 
condition of lifetime sexual offender supervision, the sexual offender management team 
must report the violation to the office of the State’s Attorney for the jurisdiction in which 
the violation occurred.  
 
Under current law, a person may petition for discharge from lifetime sexual offender 
supervision after serving at least five years of the extended sexual offender supervision. A 
petition for discharge must include a risk assessment of the person conducted by a sexual 
offender treatment provider within three months before the date of the filing of the petition 
and a recommendation regarding the discharge of the person from the sexual offender 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 287/ Page 3 
management team. The bill alters these provisions to instead require a petition for discharge 
to include a report from the sexual offender management team that includes (1) a risk 
assessment of the person conducted by a sexual offender treatment provider approved by 
DPSCS; (2) a polygraph examination of the person conducted by a polygraph examiner 
approved by DPSCS; and (3) a recommendation from the sexual offender management 
team regarding the discharge of the person from lifetime sexual offender supervision. 
 
Under current law (and unchanged by the bill) the sentencing court (1) may not deny a 
petition for discharge without a hearing and (2) may not discharge a person unless the court 
makes a finding on the record that the petitioner is no longer a danger to others.  
 
The bill establishes that if, based on a review of the petition for discharge and any 
accompanying documents, and without a hearing, the court determines that the petitioner 
qualifies for discharge from lifetime sexual offender supervision, the court must notify the 
State’s Attorney. If, after a notification from the court, the State’s Attorney requests a 
hearing on the matter, the court must hold a hearing. Under current law and subject to 
specified exceptions, the judge who originally imposed the lifetime sexual offender 
supervision must hear a petition for discharge; the bill instead requires this judge to 
adjudicate the petition for discharge. 
 
If a petition for discharge is denied, current law prohibits a person from renewing the 
petition for a minimum of one year. The bill alters this to a minimum of two years. 
 
Finally, the bill establishes that a victim or victim’s representative who has requested notice 
must be notified of the petition for discharge and of the final decision of the judge in 
granting or denying the petition.  
 
Sexual Offender Management Teams 
 
Under current law, under the supervision of DPP, a sexual offender management team must 
conduct lifetime sexual offender supervision and the supervision of probation, parole, or 
mandatory release of a person subject to lifetime sexual offender supervision. A sexual 
offender management team must submit a progress report on each person under supervision 
to the sentencing court or juvenile court once every six months. Unless disclosure of a 
report would be in violation of laws regarding confidentiality of treatment records, a sexual 
offender management team must also provide copies of each progress report to local law 
enforcement units of the county in which the offender resides. 
 
DPSCS is required to adopt regulations necessary to carry out the duties of the department 
relating to lifetime offender supervision.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 287/ Page 4 
The Sexual Offender Advisory Board  
 
Under current law, the Sexual Offender Advisory Board must: 
 
 
in collaboration with DPP, develop criteria for measuring a person’s risk of 
reoffending to assist the court in determining whether a person may be appropriately 
released from lifetime sexual offender supervision; 
 
review the effectiveness of the State’s laws and practices concerning sexual 
offenders, as specified;  
 
review the laws and practices of other states and jurisdictions concerning sexual 
offenders; 
 
review practices of MPC and DPP concerning supervision and monitoring of sexual 
offenders; 
 
review developments and make recommendations for the treatment, management, 
and assessment of sexual offenders, as specified; 
 
develop standards for the certification of sexual offender treatment providers based 
on current and evolving evidence-based practices and make recommendations for a 
statewide certification process; 
 
make recommendations to DPP for training sexual offender management teams; and 
 
consider ways to increase cooperation among states with regard to sexual offender 
registration and monitoring. 
 
The board must annually report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly.  
 
Background:  As of August 2025, DPSCS reported that DPP had 260 lifetime sexual 
offenders under supervision. According to the department, the bill is intended to address 
operational challenges in the enforcement, monitoring, and discharge processes related to 
individuals under such supervision. For instance, DPSCS notes that sexual offender 
management teams operate under inconsistent standards across jurisdictions. Among other 
provisions, the bill mandates that all sentencing courts and MPC impose the same set of 
mandatory and special conditions on offenders, thereby subjecting offenders to uniform, 
enforceable expectations and allowing the department to improve oversight and 
compliance tracking.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 287/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 220 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 287/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Criminal Procedure – Lifetime Sexual Offender Supervision – 
Conditions, Violations, and Petitions for Discharge  
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 287 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jason Davidson,Director, Government and Legislative Affairs 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 6