START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 248 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 248 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration - Identification Cards, Licenses, and Permits - 
Repeal of Color Photograph Requirement 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that the photograph included on an 
identification card, a driver’s license, or a moped operator’s permit issued by the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA) be in color.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures decrease by approximately 
$114,000 in FY 2027 and $152,000 annually thereafter due to reduced printing costs. 
Revenues are not affected.      
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
(114,000) 
(152,000) 
(152,000) 
(152,000) 
(152,000) 
Net Effect 
$114,000 
$152,000 
$152,000 
$152,000 
$152,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  As part of its duties to supply motor vehicle services to the citizens of 
Maryland, MVA issues driver’s licenses to individuals for various classifications of motor 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 248/ Page 2 
vehicles. MVA is also responsible for issuing identification cards to Maryland residents 
when they do not have a driver’s license and meet other specified requirements. Among 
other requirements, an identification card, driver’s license, or a moped operator’s permit 
issued by MVA must contain a color photograph of the applicant. 
 
Background:  According to MVA, when it redesigned its driver’s licenses and 
identification cards to meet federal REAL ID standards, the color photograph was moved 
to the back of the product and was shrunk to be a smaller image. MVA advises that, since 
that change took place, it has realized that a color photograph does not need to be included 
as modern design standards and scanner technology have rendered a color photograph 
obsolete. Further, as security features built into the document to counter fraud have made 
it more expensive to include a color photograph, MVA notes that the removal of that 
requirement is expected to reduce unnecessary production costs. 
 
State Expenditures:  MVA advises the elimination of the requirement for a color 
photograph on an identification card, driver’s license, and a moped operator’s permit 
reduces its costs for certain materials (e.g., color cartridges) by an estimated 
$152,000 annually. Accordingly, TTF expenditures decrease by approximately 
$114,000 in fiscal 2027, due to the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and 
$152,000 annually thereafter. Other programming changes or alterations to printing 
systems necessary to implement the bill can be handled with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 87 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 248/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration - Identification Cards, 
Licenses, and Permits - Repeal of Color Photograph Requirement 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 248 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jessica Mettle 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
Small businesses do not manufacture, design, or regulate these cards, nor do they 
typically have contracts for their production (those are usually held by large national 
vendors like Thales, IDEMIA, etc.). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3