START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 280 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 280 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders - Codification of 
Federal Requirements 
 
 
This departmental bill codifies portions of the 2024 federal Mental Health Parity Rule to 
strengthen enforcement of parity requirements for the treatment of mental health and 
substance use disorders (MH/SUDs). Provisions include a prohibition on the use of 
discriminatory factors and evidentiary standards in the design of nonquantitative treatment 
limitations (NQTLs); requirements for carriers to collect, evaluate, and act on relevant 
outcomes data for NQTLs; and a requirement that carriers offer meaningful benefits for 
MH/SUDs on par with benefits for medical/surgical services. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) can promulgate regulations 
to enforce the bill using existing budgeted resources. No impact on the State Employee and 
Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 280/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Core treatment” means a standard treatment or course of treatment, therapy, service, or 
intervention indicated by generally recognized independent standards of current medical 
practice. 
 
“Mental health benefits” means benefits with respect to items or services for mental health 
conditions that are defined under the terms of a health benefit plan and in accordance with 
applicable federal and State law. “Mental health benefits” does not include 
medical/surgical benefits or substance use disorder (SUD) benefits. 
 
“Substance use disorder benefits” means benefits with respect to items or services for 
SUDs that are defined under the terms of a health benefit plan in accordance with 
applicable federal and State law. “Substance use disorder benefits” does not include 
medical/surgical benefits or mental health benefits. 
 
Nonquantitative Treatment Limitations 
 
The bill specifies how each carrier must identify NQTLs. Identification must be done in 
accordance with any State regulations (in addition to being done in accordance with federal 
law). Each carrier must (1) collect and evaluate relevant data in a manner reasonably 
designed to assess the impact of each NQTL on relevant outcomes related to access to 
MH/SUD benefits and medical/surgical benefits, and (2) with respect to NQTLs related to 
network composition, collect and evaluate relevant data in a manner reasonably designed 
to assess the aggregate impact of all the NQTLs on access to MH/SUD benefits and 
medical/surgical benefits. The evaluation of relevant data must be provided (along with the 
comparative analysis) to the Insurance Commissioner. 
 
If the relevant data indicates that the NQTL contributes to material differences in access to 
MH/SUD benefits as compared to medical/surgical benefits in a Parity Act classification, 
the differences must be considered a strong indicator of noncompliance and may subject 
the carrier to existing penalties. A carrier must submit to the Commissioner documentation 
of reasonable actions that have been or are being taken to address the material differences 
to ensure compliance within 15 working days of a request from the Commissioner. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 280/ Page 3 
Comparative Analysis 
 
A comparative analysis of NQTLs (already required under current law) must also 
(1) demonstrate that none of the information, evidence, sources, or standards on which a 
factor or evidentiary standard is based is biased or not objective in a manner that 
discriminates against MH/SUD benefits as compared to medical/surgical benefits and 
(2) demonstrate that the health benefit plan provides meaningful benefits for each covered 
mental health condition and SUD in every Parity Act classification in which 
medical/surgical benefits are provided. 
 
The benefits provided for the mental health condition or SUD must be compared to the 
benefits provided for medical conditions and surgical procedures in each classification to 
determine which benefits are meaningful. Benefits are not meaningful unless coverage is 
provided for a core treatment for the mental health condition or SUD in each classification 
in which coverage is provided for a core treatment for one or more medical conditions or 
surgical procedures. If there is no core treatment for a covered mental health condition or 
SUD, the health benefit plan is not required to provide benefits for a core treatment but is 
required to provide benefits for the covered mental health condition or SUD in every Parity 
Act classification in which medical/surgical benefits are provided. 
  
Current Law:  Maryland’s mental health parity law (§ 15-802 of the Insurance Article) 
prohibits discrimination against an individual with a mental illness, emotional disorder, or 
SUD by failing to provide benefits for the diagnosis and treatment of these illnesses under 
the same terms and conditions that apply for the diagnosis and treatment of physical 
illnesses. Carriers must submit a demonstration of mental health parity compliance when 
they submit their form filings in the individual, small group, or large group fully insured 
markets. Self-insured plans are not required to submit documentation to MIA but rather are 
subject to federal fines and penalties for failure to comply. 
 
The federal Parity Act requires group health plans of large employers, as well as qualified 
health plans sold in health insurance exchanges and in the small group and individual 
markets, to equalize health benefits for addiction and mental health care and medical and 
surgical services in many fundamental ways. Group health plans may not impose separate 
or more restrictive financial requirements or treatment limitations on MH/SUD benefits 
than those imposed on other general medical benefits. The Parity Act also imposes 
nondiscrimination standards on medical necessity determinations. 
 
Under Maryland law, carriers must demonstrate compliance with the Parity Act (including 
any related regulations) through submission of a biennial compliance report to the 
Commissioner that includes specified information, including information on select 
NQTLs, and results from a comparative analysis conducted by the carrier. In any review 
conducted by the Commissioner or in any complaint investigation or market conduct action 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 280/ Page 4 
undertaken that involves the application of the Parity Act, a carrier has the burden of 
persuasion in demonstrating that its design and application of an NQTL complies with the 
Parity Act. Failure of a carrier to submit complete Parity Act compliance information 
constitutes noncompliance with the Parity Act. 
 
Background:  On May 15, 2025, the U.S. Departments of Labor, Health and Human 
Services, and Treasury announced that they would no longer enforce the September 2024 
Requirements Related to the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act Final Rule 
(2024 Final Rule) or pursue enforcement actions based on a failure to comply with the rule. 
MIA advises that the federal government is considering either revising or rescinding the 
2024 Final Rule in response to a lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court (ERISA Industry 
Committee v. Department of Health and Human Services, et al.). MIA has authority under 
§ 15-144 of the Insurance Article to continue to enforce the requirements of the  
2024 Final Rule under Maryland law until and unless the rule is formally rescinded. 
 
Many of the provisions of the 2024 Final Rule are consistent with how MIA had been 
interpreting and enforcing the Parity Act prior to the publication of the 2024 Final Rule. 
MIA plans to continue to enforce those requirements even if the 2024 Final Rule is 
rescinded. However, there are certain requirements under the 2024 Final Rule that had not 
previously been required by MIA. Codifying them in State law allows MIA to enforce 
those provisions regardless of whether the 2024 Final Rule is revised or rescinded. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 205 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 280/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   
Health Insurance – Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders – 
Codification of Federal Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 280  
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jamie N. Sexton 
 
 
 
Associate Commissioner of External Affairs and Policy Initiatives 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) estimates that the proposed bill will have no 
meaningful impact on Maryland small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5