START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 245 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 245 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Maryland Energy 
Administration) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Energy Administration - Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program 
and Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
 
This departmental bill transfers the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program from the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) to the Maryland Clean Energy Center (MCEC). 
Additionally, it alters MEA’s annual reporting requirements for the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund (SEIF). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures from the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund 
increase by $131,300 in FY 2027. Future years reflect ongoing net costs and inflation. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
131,300 
139,100 
147,400 
156,000 
165,100 
Net Effect 
($131,300) 
($139,100) 
($147,400) 
($156,000) 
($165,100) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MEA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 245/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Transfer of the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program 
 
The bill transfers the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program from MEA to MCEC, 
including the responsibility for managing, supervising, and administering the program, and 
administering the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund that supports the program. 
 
Annual Report on the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
The bill modifies a requirement that MEA annually report on the uses and expenditures of 
SEIF from the prior fiscal year, to only require a detailed accounting of all amounts 
in excess of $10,000 received by and disbursed from the fund, including the amount and 
recipient of each grant awarded by MEA (existing law requires a detailed accounting of 
all amounts received by and disbursed from SEIF). Additionally, the bill eliminates the 
requirement that the report identify any instances of multiple grants being awarded to the 
same person or same address. 
 
The bill also modifies a requirement that the report include an estimate of electricity 
savings from the programs, projects, activities, and investments implemented under SEIF, 
so that it instead requires an estimate of greenhouse gas emissions reductions from the 
programs, projects, activities, and investments. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program 
 
The Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program, managed, supervised, and administered 
by MEA, was established under Chapters 466 and 467 of 2008. The program’s stated 
purpose is to provide financial assistance in the form of low-interest and zero-interest loans 
to nonprofit organizations, local jurisdictions, State agencies, and eligible businesses for 
projects to (1) promote energy conservation; (2) reduce consumption of fossil fuels; 
(3) improve energy efficiency; (4) enhance energy-related economic development and 
stability in the nonprofit, commercial, and industrial sectors; and (5) reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. Funding for the program is available through the Jane E. Lawton 
Conservation Fund. 
 
The statutory provisions governing the program address, among other things, (1) MEA’s 
duties in administering the program; (2) borrower requirements; and (3) allowable uses of 
loan funding. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 245/ Page 3 
“Local jurisdiction” means any county or municipality in the State. “Nonprofit 
organization” means a corporation, foundation, school, hospital, or other legal entity, 
no part of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or 
individual holding an interest in the entity. “Eligible business” means a commercial 
enterprise or business that is in good standing with the State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation and is either incorporated in the State or registered to do business in the State. 
 
Maryland Clean Energy Center 
 
MCEC was established by Chapter 137 of 2008 as a body politic and corporate and an 
instrumentality of the State. The purpose of MCEC is to (1) promote economic 
development and jobs in the clean energy industry sector; (2) promote the deployment of 
clean energy technology; (3) serve as an incubator for the development of the clean energy 
industry; (4) in collaboration with MEA, collect, analyze, and disseminate industry data; 
(5) provide outreach and technical support to further the clean energy industry; and 
(6) work as a green bank and in conjunction with local and private green banks. MCEC 
may make grants or provide equity investment financing to clean energy technology-based 
businesses and may borrow money and issue bonds consistent with its purpose. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
 
In General 
 
MEA administers SEIF, which, among other revenue sources, receives funds from the sale 
of carbon dioxide emissions allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative 
(RGGI) and alternative compliance payment revenues through the State’s renewable 
energy portfolio standard. Additionally, SEIF will receive a portion of corporate income 
tax revenues from qualified data centers that are operational on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
MEA is required to use SEIF for specified uses, including investing in the promotion, 
development, and implementation of (1) cost-effective energy efficiency and conservation 
programs, projects, or activities; (2) renewable and clean energy resources; (3) climate 
change programs directly related to reducing or mitigating the effects of climate change; 
and (4) demand response programs that are designed to promote changes in electric usage 
by customers. SEIF must also be used to provide targeted programs, projects, activities, 
and investments to reduce electricity consumption by customers in low-income and 
moderate-income residential sectors, and to provide supplemental funds for low-income 
energy assistance administered by the Department of Human Services. 
 
Annual Reporting Requirements 
 
By January 1 of each year, MEA must report to the Governor, the Strategic Energy 
Investment Advisory Board, the General Assembly, the Senate Finance Committee, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 245/ Page 4 
the House Economic Matters Committee specified information relating to the uses and 
expenditures of SEIF from the prior fiscal year, including: 
 
 
a detailed accounting of all amounts received by and disbursed from SEIF, including 
the amount and recipient of each grant awarded by MEA, and identifying multiple 
grants awarded to the same person or the same address; 
 
all amounts used by MEA for administrative purposes; 
 
programs, projects, and activities included in specified statutory categories of 
expenditures of proceeds from the sale of allowances under RGGI (a significant 
revenue source of SEIF); 
 
the status of programs, projects, activities, and investments implemented with funds 
from SEIF; 
 
an estimate of electricity savings from the programs, projects, activities, and 
investments; 
 
the number of allowances sold in each RGGI auction, the average allowance price 
from each auction, and an estimate of revenue from future auctions; 
 
an accounting of all amounts received or disbursed by SEIF from all other sources; 
 
recommendations for changes to the allocation of funds under the statutory 
categories of expenditures of RGGI auction proceeds; 
 
the status of programs and expenditures in the current fiscal year; and 
 
possible or expected program initiatives and changes in later years. 
 
Background: 
 
Transfer of the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program 
 
MEA indicates that MCEC is better suited to manage, supervise, and administer the  
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program, as it serves as the State’s designated 
green bank and already operates several loan programs. By contrast, MEA is largely 
focused on distributing grants and rebates that help deploy energy efficiency efforts and 
renewable energy projects in order to reach the State’s energy and environmental goals, 
and the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program is currently its only loan program. 
MEA will benefit from operational efficiency resulting from the transfer of the program. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2025, the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund had a closing balance of 
$13.0 million and the fund’s fiscal 2025 revenues and expenditures were $969,500 and 
$1.7 million, respectively. The fiscal 2026 budget, and the fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced, authorize $5.0 million of expenditures under the program in each fiscal year. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 245/ Page 5 
Annual Report on the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
MEA indicates that the bill reduces the operational burden associated with its annual 
reporting requirements for SEIF by, among other things, limiting detailed accounting of 
amounts received by and disbursed from SEIF to sums exceeding $10,000. MEA notes that 
the appendices to the annual reports consistently exceed 150 pages and advises that this 
degree of detail detracts from the broader purpose and focus of the reports. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures from the Jane E. Lawton Conservation 
Fund increase by approximately $131,300 in fiscal 2027, reflecting the net increase in 
money from the fund used for costs of administering the Jane E. Lawton Conservation 
Loan Program (and the fund) as a result of the transfer of the program and fund from MEA 
to MCEC. This estimate assumes: 
 
 
MCEC hires an additional employee to maintain and manage the program and fund, 
at a cost of approximately $156,600 in fiscal 2027, accounting for a salary and fringe 
benefits; 
 
MEA no longer spends the small portion of program funds it currently allocates 
annually toward the agency’s administrative costs ($25,281 in the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced); and 
 
revenues and expenditures of the fund are not otherwise directly affected by the 
transfer of the program and fund from MEA to MCEC. 
 
Future years reflect an assumed 5% annual increase in MCEC personnel costs and ongoing 
reductions in MEA administrative costs (equal to the magnitude of the administrative costs 
included in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced). 
 
Additional Comments:  This analysis assumes that revenues and expenditures of the  
Jane E. Lawton Conservation Fund remain State special fund revenues and expenditures, 
and assumes expenditures from the fund need to be made through appropriations in the 
State budget (as money that is a part of the State Treasury), despite the fund being 
administered by MCEC (a nonbudgeted entity). Despite MCEC’s administration of the 
program and fund under the bill, the fund continues to be held by the State Treasurer and 
accounted for by the Comptroller, and requires the State Treasurer to invest and reinvest 
the money of the fund in the same manner as other State money is invested. 
 
While MCEC is established in State law and receives State funding, its finances are 
managed independent of the State budget, with its annual budget instead approved by its 
board of directors. Other existing funds established in State law and administered by 
MCEC – the Climate Catalytic Capital Fund and Climate Technology Founder’s Fund – 
are not held by the State Treasurer and are instead overseen by a fund oversight committee. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 245/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 223 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland Energy Administration) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Clean Energy 
Center; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 245/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Maryland Energy Administration - Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan 
Program and Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 245  
 
PREPARED BY: Landon Fahrig 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill, though it alters which entity administers the Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan 
Program, does not materially alter the program otherwise. 
 

END OF PAGE 7