START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 201

Q3 6lr1549
HB 1005/25 – W&M (PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Fisher, Arikan, Chisholm, Grammer, M. Morgan, Nawrocki, and
Szeliga
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Income Tax – Tips or Gratuities – Subtraction Modification
3 (No Income Taxes on Tips Act)

4 FOR the purpose of providing a subtraction modification under the Maryland income tax
5 for compensation received in the form of a tip or gratuity for the performance of
6 certain work; and generally relating to a subtraction modification under the
7 Maryland income tax for compensation received in the form of a tip or gratuity.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Tax – General
10 Section 10–207(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Tax – General
15 Section 10–207(rr)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Tax – General

21 10–207.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0201*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 201

1 (a) To the extent included in federal adjusted gross income, the amounts under
2 this section are subtracted from the federal adjusted gross income of a resident to determine
3 Maryland adjusted gross income.

4 (RR) (1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
5 MEANINGS INDICATED.

6 (II) “FOOD SERVICE FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7 21–301 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

8 (III) “HOTEL” MEANS AN ESTABLISHMENT THAT OFFERS
9 SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS FOR COMPENSATION.

10 (IV) “PROVIDING PASSENGER–FOR–HIRE SERVICES” MEANS
11 PROVIDING LIMOUSINE SERVICES, SEDAN SERVICES, OR TRANSPORTATION
12 NETWORK SERVICES IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 10 OF THE PUBLIC UTILITIES
13 ARTICLE.

14 (V) “PROVIDING TAXICAB SERVICES” MEANS PROVIDING
15 TAXICAB SERVICES IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 10 OF THE PUBLIC UTILITIES
16 ARTICLE.

17 (2) THE SUBTRACTION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
18 INCLUDES ANY COMPENSATION RECEIVED IN THE FORM OF A TIP OR GRATUITY FOR:

19 (I) EMPLOYMENT IN A FOOD SERVICE FACILITY;

20 (II) EMPLOYMENT IN A BUSINESS LICENSED FOR ON–SALE
21 CONSUMPTION OF AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
22 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE;

23 (III) EMPLOYMENT IN A HOTEL;

24 (IV) PROVIDING PASSENGER–FOR–HIRE SERVICES; OR

25 (V) PROVIDING TAXICAB SERVICES.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
27 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 2