START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 263

G1 6lr0082
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 100

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – State Board of Elections)
Requested: September 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Election Law – Early Voting Centers – Bus Stops

3 FOR the purpose of requiring buses operating on certain fixed local routes to allow
4 passengers to embark and disembark at the entrance of early voting centers located
5 within a certain distance of the route; and generally relating to early voting.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Election Law
8 Section 10–301.1(c)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Election Law
13 Section 10–301.1(e)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Election Law
18 Section 10–301.1(e), (f), and (g)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Election Law

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0263*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 263

1 10–301.1.

2 (c) Each early voting center shall be open for voting as follows:

3 (1) beginning the second Thursday before a primary or general election
4 through the Thursday before the election; and

5 (2) during the hours between 7 a.m. and 8 p.m. each early voting day.

6 (E) (1) (I) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY WITH RESPECT TO A
7 FIXED LOCAL BUS ROUTE FUNDED BY A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION AND
8 OPERATED BY THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OR A CONTRACTOR FOR
9 THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.

10 (II) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

11 1. AN EXPRESS OR A COMMUTER BUS ROUTE THAT HAS
12 LIMITED STOPS BETWEEN ITS ORIGIN AND DESTINATION;

13 2. A BUS ROUTE OPERATED BY THE MARYLAND TRANSIT
14 ADMINISTRATION; OR

15 3. A BUS ROUTE OPERATED BY THE WASHINGTON
16 METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY.

17 (2) IF AN EARLY VOTING CENTER IS LOCATED WITHIN ONE–HALF
18 MILE OF A FIXED LOCAL BUS ROUTE, EACH BUS OPERATING ON THAT ROUTE SHALL,
19 TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND CONSISTENT WITH ACCESSIBILITY
20 REQUIREMENTS, ALLOW PASSENGERS TO EMBARK AND DISEMBARK AT THE
21 ENTRANCE OF THE EARLY VOTING CENTER ON THE DAYS THE CENTER IS OPEN FOR
22 VOTING UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

23 [(e)] (F) Beginning 30 days prior to each early voting period the State Board and
24 each local board shall undertake steps to inform the public about early voting and the
25 location of early voting centers in each county, including:

26 (1) a series of public service media announcements;

27 (2) mailings to all registered voters in each county; and

28 (3) other measures as appropriate.

29 [(f)] (G) Except as expressly provided in this section, any provision of this article
30 that applies to voting on election day also applies to early voting.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 263 3

1 [(g)] (H) The State Board shall adopt regulations and guidelines in accordance
2 with the requirements of this section for the conduct of early voting.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 3