START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 241 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 241 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Occupations and Professions - State Boards and Commissions - Sunset 
Extensions 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for several occupational and 
professional licensing boards and commissions within the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor) through July 1, 2032. Specifically, the extension applies to the following 
entities:  (1) the State Board of Barbers; (2) the State Board of Cosmetologists; (3) the State 
Board for Professional Land Surveyors; (4) the State Commission of Real Estate 
Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors; and (5) the State 
Board of Individual Tax Preparers. By July 1, 2030, MD Labor must submit a report to the 
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) with information regarding the boards and 
commissions (as determined by JAEC). The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures are maintained through FY 2032. 
MD Labor and JAEC can handle the reporting requirement with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with 
this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
State Board of Barbers 
 
The State Board of Barbers issues barber and barber-stylist (limited) licenses. The barber 
license encompasses the full scope of barbering, while the barber-stylist license applies 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 241/ Page 2 
solely to the hair portion of barbering. The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for 
licensure must pass a written and a practical exam and meet specified experience 
(apprenticeship) or education (1,200 hours of instruction at an approved barber school for 
a barber license) requirements. A registered apprentice must complete at least 2,250 hours 
of supervised work as an apprentice within two years prior to applying for a license. 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists 
 
The State Board of Cosmetologists issues two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and 
senior cosmetologist) and five limited licenses (hairstylist, blow-drying, nail technician, 
esthetician, and eyelash extension services). A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist 
license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, nail, esthetic, and eyelash extension 
services. A limited license authorizes the licensee to provide just that service. The board 
also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure must pass a written and a practical 
examination and have successfully completed either a registered apprenticeship program 
or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 
 
A licensed barber seeking a cosmetology license may be credited with one-half of the 
training requirement for a cosmetology license; the same is true for a licensed 
cosmetologist seeking a barber license. 
 
State Board of Professional Land Surveyors 
 
The Board for Professional Land Surveyors qualifies and licenses individuals seeking 
licensure and issues permits to business entities through which land surveying is practiced. 
The board investigates complaints against licensees, as well as complaints related to 
unlicensed practice. 
 
State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and 
Home Inspectors 
 
Chapter 594 of 1990 established the commission (formerly the State Commission of Real 
Estate Appraisers) to implement and administer a real estate appraiser licensing and 
certification program that complies with federal law. Commission authority was later 
expanded to include home inspectors (2001) and appraisal management companies (2011). 
Federal law requires all states to implement an appraisal licensing program in accordance 
with federal requirements. The commission fulfills that requirement. 
 
Chapters 526 and 527 of 2023 extended the termination date for the commission by 
three years (to July 1, 2026) and required MD Labor to hire a consultant to conduct an 
independent evaluation of the commission by January 1, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 241/ Page 3 
State Board of Individual Tax Preparers  
 
The State Board of Individual Tax Preparers establishes educational and professional 
standards of competence and conduct for individual tax preparers providing federal and 
state tax return service for Marylanders. The board accomplishes this mission through a 
framework of examination, registration, continuing education, investigation of consumer 
complaints, and enforcement of State law and regulations. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
Each of the above entities is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject 
to termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland 
Program Evaluation Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office 
of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to 
their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by 
specified entities or by legislation. The above entities above are generally scheduled to 
terminate July 1, 2027; however, the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, 
Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors is scheduled to terminate  
July 1, 2026. OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation of these entities. 
Accordingly, each entity requires reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 133 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Legislative Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 241/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Business Occupations and Professions - State Boards and 
Commissions - Sunset Extensions 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 241 
 
PREPARED BY: John Dove   
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4