START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 290 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 290 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax – Cybersecurity Technology and Service Tax Credit – Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the Buy Maryland Cybersecurity Tax Credit by (1) codifying 
the program name and specifying program intent; (2) making the credit fully refundable; 
(3) increasing the annual aggregate limit on the amount of credits that may be claimed for 
cybersecurity technology or cybersecurity services purchased from a single qualified seller 
from $200,000 to $1.0 million; (4) expanding the definitions of “qualified buyer” and 
“qualified seller” for purposes of the credit; (5) repealing a requirement that the Secretary 
of Commerce award 25% of the annual authorized amount of credits to qualified buyers 
that purchase cybersecurity services; (6) repealing an authorization for the Department of 
Commerce (Commerce) to establish a specified panel; and (7) sunsetting the program after 
tax year 2030. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and 
beyond. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  In FY 2027, general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $2.8 million, 
Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues decrease by an estimated $0.2 million, 
and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by an estimated $0.6 million, as 
discussed below. General and special fund revenues decrease by similar amounts annually 
through FY 2031. Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) revenues are potentially also 
affected (not shown below). TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants 
decrease by an estimated $0.1 million annually in FY 2027 through 2031. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($2.8) 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
SF Revenue 
($0.8) 
($0.7) 
($0.7) 
($0.7) 
($0.7) 
SF Expenditure 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
Net Effect 
($3.5) 
($3.5) 
($3.5) 
($3.5) 
($3.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 290/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues decrease by an estimated $0.1 million annually 
in FY 2027 through 2031, as discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Commerce has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that the tax credit is intended to promote the 
cybersecurity industry in the State by helping Maryland businesses and nonprofits purchase 
cybersecurity technologies and services from Maryland cybersecurity companies to protect 
business and customer information.  
 
The bill expands the definition of “qualified buyer” for purposes of the credit to include 
businesses with 50 or more employees in the State. The bill also expands the definition of 
“qualified seller” to include otherwise-eligible cybersecurity businesses with less than 
$10.0 million in annual revenue or that are owned by an individual or group of individuals 
who belong to a group that historically has been deprived of access to normal economic or 
financial resources.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 578 of 2018 established a nonrefundable credit against the State 
income tax for costs incurred by a qualified buyer (defined as any entity that has fewer than 
50 employees in the State and is required to file a Maryland income tax return) to purchase 
cybersecurity technology or services from a qualified seller. The value of the credit is equal 
to 50% of the eligible costs incurred, not to exceed $50,000 per qualified buyer. The 
Secretary of Commerce may approve up to $4.0 million in tax credit certificates annually 
and must award 25% of the amount of authorized tax credits to qualified buyers that 
purchase cybersecurity services. 
 
For purposes of the credit, “qualified seller” is defined as a cybersecurity business that 
(1) has its headquarters and base of operations in the State; (2) has less than $5.0 million 
in annual revenue, is a minority-owned, woman-owned, veteran-owned, or 
service‑disabled veteran-owned business, or is located in a historically underutilized 
business zone designated by the U.S. Small Business Administration; and (3) owns or has 
properly licensed any proprietary cybersecurity technology or provides a cybersecurity 
service (among other specified requirements). Commerce may establish a panel composed 
of experts in the areas of cybersecurity technology and cybersecurity service to assist the 
department in determining if a cybersecurity business is a qualified seller.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 290/ Page 3 
Background:  On average, Commerce has awarded a little over $400,000 in tax credit 
certificates annually under the program – well below the program’s annual $4.0 million 
cap on aggregate tax credit awards. Commerce advises that the bill is intended to make the 
program more flexible and increase utilization of the tax credit.  
 
State Revenues:  In fiscal 2027, general fund revenues decrease by an estimated 
$2.8 million, HEIF revenues decrease by an estimated $0.2 million, and TTF revenues 
decrease by an estimated $0.6 million due to an increase in credits claimed against the 
income tax. General fund, HEIF, and TTF revenues decrease by similar amounts annually 
through fiscal 2031. To the extent credits are claimed by a corporation that operates a 
qualified data center, SEIF revenues are also affected. This estimate assumes that (1) the 
bill’s changes sufficiently increase utilization of the tax credit to maximize the existing 
$4.0 million annual limit on tax credit awards and (2) 80% of overall tax credit awards 
under the program as modified by the bill are claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures for local highway user revenue grants decrease by 
an estimated $0.1 million annually in fiscal 2027 through 2031 due to an increase in credits 
claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local highway user revenues decrease by an estimated $0.1 million 
annually in fiscal 2027 through 2031 due to an increase in credits claimed against the 
corporate income tax. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Legislation with similar provisions has been introduced 
within the last three years. See SB 427 and HB 498 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 25 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 290/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Cybersecurity Technology and Service Tax Credit – 
Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 290 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: Matthew Kachura (410-767-6443) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  X      WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposed bill affects the Buy Maryland Cybersecurity Tax Credit (BMC) – Proposed 
alterations are intended to increase the program’s flexibility for buyers and sellers of 
cybersecurity services and technologies. Modifications include:  
 Removing the limit on the size of the company that can be considered a Qualified 
Buyer 
 Increasing the limit on annual revenue for a business to be considered a Qualified 
Seller 
 Making the tax credit refundable 
 Increasing the amount of aggregate credits that can be claimed for purchases from 
a single qualified seller 
 Eliminating the requirement that 25 percent of the credit be awarded to qualified 
buyers that purchase cybersecurity services as opposed to products 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 290/ Page 5 
Maryland’s top-tier universities, pipeline of skilled workers, and proximity to multiple 
major cities make it an attractive location for many research and cybersecurity firms. 
Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Quarterly Census of Employment and 
Wages (QCEW)1 show that Maryland has a high concentration of employment in the 
‘Computer Systems Design and Related Services’ industry (NAICS 54151); the state has 
a location quotient of 2.0 in 2024, indicating that the industry is twice as prevalent when 
compared to the nation as a whole.  Similarly, the ‘Scientific Research and Development 
Services’ (NAICS 5417) industry has a location quotient of 2.5, suggesting a 
concentration of two and half times the U.S. average.  
 
Importantly, several industries most affected by the proposed bill are well represented by 
small businesses. The Census Bureau’s latest Statistics of U.S. Businesses2 reveal that 
nearly 64 percent of ‘Software Publishers’ (NAICS 5112) employ less than 20 people. 
Nearly 83 percent of ‘Computer Systems Design and Related Services’ (NAICS 54151) 
companies report having less than 20 employees. Finally, over 71 percent of Maryland 
firms in the ‘Scientific Research and Development Services’ industry (NAICS 5417) 
employ fewer than 20 people. 
 
NAICS NAICS Description 
Share of Maryland 
Firms with less than 
20 employees 
5112 
Software Publishers 
63.7% 
54151 
Computer Systems Design and 
Related Services 
82.8% 
5417 
Scientific Research and Development 
Services 
71.5% 
 
The proposed bill helps reinforce several of Maryland’s in-demand industries which rely 
on highly skilled workforces. Increasing flexibility and removing existing limitations of 
the BMC program should expand the pool of firms that can benefit. In summary, the 
proposed bill has the potential to build on the state’s existing assets to positively impact 
small cybersecurity and innovation-related businesses.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
1 https://www.bls.gov/cew/ 
2 https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2022/econ/susb/2022-susb-annual.html 

END OF PAGE 5