START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 275 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 275 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Health 
 
 
Medicare Supplement Policies - Issuance - Requirements 
 
   
This departmental bill requires an insurance carrier that issues Medicare supplement 
policies in Maryland to issue such policies to individuals that meet specified criteria by 
establishing two 63‑day special enrollment periods (SEPs). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) 
is anticipated to be minimal and absorbable with existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A carrier must issue a Medicare supplement policy to a Medicare‑eligible 
individual if the individual (1) was enrolled in Medicare Part B while enrolled in Medicaid; 
(2) was not disenrolled or terminated from Medicaid until at least six months following 
enrollment in Medicare Part B; (3) applies for the policy during the 63‑day period 
following termination from Medicaid; and (4) submits evidence of the date of termination 
or disenrollment from Medicaid with the application for a Medicare supplement policy.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 275/ Page 2 
A carrier must also issue any Medicare supplement policy currently open to new enrollees 
to a Medicare‑eligible individual if the individual (1) became eligible for Medicare before 
January 1, 2020; (2) qualifies under any federal SEP guaranteed issue right; (3) applies for 
the policy during the 63‑day period following the qualifying event for the federal SEP 
guaranteed issue right; and (4) submits evidence of the date of the qualifying event for the 
federal SEP with the application for a Medicare supplement policy. 
 
Current Law:  For individuals aged 65 and older, federal law provides a one-time only 
open enrollment period during the first six months after enrollment in Medicare Part B. 
During this period, individuals can buy any Medicare supplement policy sold in the State. 
Maryland law requires carriers to extend a similar, limited open enrollment period to 
individuals younger than age 65 who are eligible for Medicare due to a disability.  
 
During this open enrollment period, carriers may not deny or condition the issuance or 
effectiveness of a Medicare supplement; discriminate in the pricing of a policy; or deny, 
reduce, or condition coverage or apply an increase premium rating under such a policy 
because of the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care, or medical condition 
of the applicant. A Medicare supplement policy or certificate may not (1) exclude or limit 
benefits for losses incurred more than six months after the effective date of coverage 
because the losses involved a preexisting condition or (2) define a preexisting condition 
more restrictively than a condition for which a physician gave medical advice or 
recommended or gave treatment within six months before the effective date of coverage. 
 
Generally, if an individual seeks to enroll in a Medicare supplement policy (or change 
policies) after this open enrollment period, guaranteed issue requirements do not apply. 
Thus, an individual may be subject to medical underwriting and/or charged higher 
premiums based on health status. However, Chapter 680 of 2022 requires a carrier that 
sells Medicare supplement policies to provide an enrolled individual the opportunity to 
switch to a different Medicare supplement policy with equal or lesser benefits within 
30 days following the individual’s birthday. A carrier may not deny or condition a new 
policy, discriminate in the pricing of the policy, or deny, reduce, or condition coverage 
because of the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care, or medical condition 
of the individual. A carrier must notify an insured of their right to switch policies at least 
30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the insured’s birthday. 
 
Background:  Following the end of the COVID‑19 Public Health Emergency, a temporary 
provision allowed for an SEP following loss of Medicaid coverage. As that temporary 
provision has expired, the bill establishes a new 63‑day SEP to ensure that individuals 
losing Medicaid – including under the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (better known as 
QMB) or Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiary (better known as SLMB) programs 
– have a viable option outside of Medicare Advantage plans. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 275/ Page 3 
Changes to the federal Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2014 closed 
new enrollment in Medicare Supplement plans C or F by prohibiting beneficiaries who 
became eligible for Medicare on or after January 1, 2020, from purchasing those specific 
supplement plans. Instead, those beneficiaries may choose new plans D or G, which mirror 
C and F but exclude coverage for the Medicare Part B deductible. The bill provides the 
same right to choose plans D or G to individuals who became eligible for Medicare before 
January 1, 2020. 
 
While Maryland law allows all existing policyholders to switch to plans D or G without 
underwriting during their birthday month, those who became Medicare-eligible prior to 
January 1, 2020, do not have a straightforward option to access plans D or G, even when 
they are in a situation that qualifies them for an SEP with a guaranteed issue right. To 
access plan D or G, older Medicare beneficiaries who would like a Medicare supplement 
Plan D or G must choose a different supplement plan, stay on it until their birthday month, 
and then switch again to plan D or G. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 134 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 275/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   Medicare Supplement Policies - Issuance - Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 275  
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jamie N. Sexton 
 
 
 
Associate Commissioner of External Affairs and Policy Initiatives 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) does not expect the proposed bill will 
have any  meaningful economic impact on Maryland small businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4