START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 249 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 249 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Automated Enforcement - Reciprocal Agreements, 
Arrangements, and Declarations 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administrator to make an agreement, 
arrangement, or declaration with the authorized representative of any other jurisdiction to 
allow reciprocal enforcement of violations recorded by traffic control signal monitoring 
systems (i.e., red light cameras) and speed monitoring systems (i.e., speed cameras) 
between the State and the other jurisdiction. Any such agreement, arrangement, or 
declaration may authorize the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to refuse to register 
or reregister a motor vehicle. The bill also alters the State policy regarding the promotion 
and encouragement of reciprocal enforcement efforts by specifying that such cooperation 
also contributes to the safety of the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund, Transportation Trust Fund (TTF), and nonbudgeted revenues 
increase, potentially beginning as early as FY 2027, to the extent that the bill results in 
unpaid automated enforcement citations being paid, as discussed below. MVA can 
implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Any additional caseload for the 
District Court can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase, potentially beginning as early as 
FY 2027, to the extent that the bill results in unpaid automated enforcement citations being 
paid, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 249/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement Systems – Generally  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, work zone speed control systems, and noise 
abatement monitoring systems. Statute prescribes various requirements for each of the 
different types of systems related to, among other things, which local jurisdictions and 
State entities are authorized to deploy the systems, the number of systems that are 
authorized to be used within a particular location, the notification process that a local 
jurisdiction or State agency must follow before placing a system, and the process by which 
citations are issued for recorded violations. 
 
Red Light Cameras and Speed Cameras – Citations and Penalties 
 
The maximum fine for a violation captured by a traffic control signal monitoring system 
(red light camera) is $100, while the maximum fine for a violation captured by a speed 
monitoring system (speed camera) ranges from $40 to $425, depending on the 
excessiveness of the speed violation. Generally, a person who receives a citation may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems must be 
paid (1) to the administering State agency or local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and 
(2) directly to the District Court (and consequently the general fund) in a case that is 
contested in District Court. 
 
Please see the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems for additional information about 
speed cameras. 
 
Reciprocal Agreements  
 
It is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the fullest possible use of its highway 
system by authorizing vehicle reciprocal or proportional registration agreements, 
arrangements, and declarations with other jurisdictions as to vehicles registered in this State 
and in those other jurisdictions, thus contributing to the economic and social development 
and growth of this State. To that end, the Motor Vehicle Administrator is authorized to 
make reciprocal agreements, arrangements, and declarations; however, State law specifies 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 249/ Page 3 
the types of benefits, privileges, and exemptions for which those agreements, 
arrangements, and declarations may apply. 
 
State law does not explicitly authorize the Motor Vehicle Administrator to participate in 
reciprocal enforcement activities related to any automated enforcement systems. 
 
Background:  MDOT advises that the bill is needed to allow MVA to enter into reciprocal 
agreements with other states to mutually enforce unpaid automated enforcement citations. 
Specifically, the bill is anticipated to help address repeat offenders who regularly speed 
and run red lights through multiple jurisdictions. MDOT advises that the bill furthers the 
goals set out by the State’s Vision Zero program by allowing Maryland to work regionally 
to increase enforcement against the most dangerous drivers. 
 
In 2024, the District of Columbia passed the STEER Act, which, among other things, 
allows the district’s Attorney General to pursue civil penalties against out‑of‑district 
drivers with outstanding citations. MDOT advises that some Maryland drivers have already 
been targeted by the district for unpaid automated enforcement system citation penalties. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  The reciprocal agreements made possible by the bill are likely to 
result in additional automated enforcement system citations being paid beginning as early 
as fiscal 2027. Because various automated enforcement systems are administered by the 
State Highway Administration, the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local 
jurisdictions, and because contested cases are adjudicated through the District Court, 
revenues from these citations may accrue to TTF, MDTA’s nonbudgeted fund, directly to 
the local jurisdictions, and/or the general fund as they are collected. 
 
However, the amount of citation revenues that may be received cannot be determined 
without actual experience under the bill. MVA advises that it has no information on the 
amount of outstanding citation revenues owed to the State from out‐of‐state vehicles, nor 
the number of Maryland vehicles that owe fines to other states. Additionally, as the use of 
reciprocal agreements for automated enforcement systems between states and jurisdictions 
is a relatively new concept (with the STEER Act discussed above being one of the first), 
there is little information available from other jurisdictions to estimate the collection rate 
that MVA may experience under the bill. 
 
TTF revenues also increase, likely minimally, to the extent that administrative flag fees are 
paid for State-registered vehicles that have their registrations suspended after MVA 
receives notifications from other jurisdictions. Specifically, MVA charges a  
$30 administrative fee in order for an owner to reregister the vehicle after a registration is 
suspended. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 249/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures:  Local jurisdictions must typically use any revenues they receive 
from speed camera programs for specified purposes (generally related to public safety). 
Thus, local expenditures increase to the extent that the bill results in the collection of unpaid 
speed camera citations as those revenues are used for required purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 173 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 249/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Vehicle Laws - Automated Enforcement - Reciprocal Agreements, 
Arrangements, and Declarations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 249 
 
PREPARED BY: DREW MORRISON  
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X___  WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation permits the Motor Vehicle Administration to implement into agreements 
concerning automated enforcement citation reciprocity. No small business interests are at 
issue in this legislation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 249/ Page 6 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 249/ Page 7 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7