START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 232 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 232 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Military) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Military Department – National Guard – Tuition Assistance 
 
 
This departmental bill, for the purposes of tuition assistance provided by the Military 
Department, (1) expands the definition of “institution” to include any trade or career school 
recognized by the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) or the Maryland 
Apprenticeship and Training Council (MATC), including by removing the requirement 
that private schools provide a minimum tuition waiver; (2) expands the assistance the 
Military Department may provide to include “training assistance,” as defined under the 
bill; and (3) establishes that existing two-year post-course service obligation requirements 
apply to career courses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as described below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  The Military Department has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 232/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Tuition Assistance to the Members of the National Guard 
 
To the extent that funds are provided in the State budget, the Military Department is 
authorized to provide assistance to a National Guard member certified as eligible by the 
Adjutant General equal to 100% of the cost of in-State tuition for any regularly scheduled 
course, as specified. Members who receive the benefit must remain active members for a 
specified amount of time after the course is completed. For example, a member who 
receives assistance for an undergraduate credit, vocational-technical, or trade course must 
remain an active member for at least two years following the completion of the course. 
However, there are exceptions when a member does not need to remain active. Even so, 
the Adjutant General may not certify a member as eligible unless the member is committed 
to serve for a minimum of 24 months following the first day of classes for the semester.  
 
The following are eligible institutions: 
 
 
any campus of the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland, Baltimore City Community College, and any local 
community college in the State; 
 
any private institution of higher education that grants a member a tuition waiver of 
at least 50%; 
 
any public postsecondary vocational-technical or trade school; and 
 
any private postsecondary vocational-technical or trade school that grants a member 
a tuition waiver of at least 50%. 
 
“Tuition” is defined as the basic instructional charge for undergraduate, graduate, 
professional, vocational-technical, and trade school credit courses and related fees at an 
institution. “Tuition” does not include charges for self-supporting programs.  
 
List of Partnership Schools 
 
MHEC must maintain a list of State higher education institutions, including community 
colleges, offering tuition waivers to members of the Maryland National Guard. The list 
must include the tuition waiver policy of each institution and a contact name and telephone 
number, be updated annually, and be shared with the Military Department for distribution 
to members of the Maryland National Guard. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 232/ Page 3 
Private Career Schools  
 
“Private career school” is defined in statute as a privately owned and privately operated 
institution of postsecondary education other than an institution of higher education that 
furnishes or offers to furnish programs, whether or not requiring a payment of tuition or 
fee, for the purpose of training, retraining, or upgrading individuals for gainful employment 
as skilled or semiskilled workers or technicians in recognized occupations or in new and 
emerging occupations.  
 
To operate in Maryland, a private career school must be approved by MHEC (i.e., have a 
certificate of approval); some are also accredited by national associations. Private career 
school programs generally provide training in one of the following areas:  allied health; 
audio visual methods; cosmetology; barbering; bartending; computers; massage; the 
Montessori Method of education; real estate; truck driving; or mechanics. There are also 
programs in cooking, dog grooming, dry cleaning, maritime studies, photography, 
polygraph, travel, and trade schools. 
 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council 
 
MATC is a 12-member body that reviews standards and policies for the approval and 
registration of apprenticeship programs in the State. The Maryland Department of Labor’s 
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning works with MATC to oversee 
registered apprenticeship programs in the State, and MATC acts in an advisory role for 
legislation and regulations. MATC also recommends changes to update apprenticeship 
laws. Additional information about MATC can be found on its website.  
 
Maryland Military Department 
 
The Military Department provides overall direction and maintenance of the Maryland 
National Guard, which is comprised of the Maryland Army National Guard and the 
Maryland Air National Guard. The Maryland National Guard may be called up by the 
Governor during State emergencies or may be activated by the U.S. Department of 
Defense. 
 
The Military Department advises the bill is intended to enable the department in supporting 
service members by reimbursing career-related overhead expenses. The Military 
Department further advises the bill will allow the department to reimburse career-related 
overhead expenses for service members participating in State-certified apprenticeship 
programs, which is not authorized under current law.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill removes the requirement that private postsecondary 
vocational-technical schools provide a tuition waiver of at least 50% in order to qualify as 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 232/ Page 4 
an institution under the program. The bill also expands the program to cover the cost of 
training assistance for program participants. However, statute explicitly authorizes the 
Military Department to provide assistance to the extent that funds are provided in the State 
budget. The fiscal 2025 and 2026 budgets included $600,000 for tuition assistance to 
members of the National Guard, and the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced also includes 
$600,000. As the bill does not require the Military Department to provide assistance 
beyond that provided in the State budget, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State 
finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 142 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Military Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 232/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Maryland Military Department - National Guard - Tuition Assistance 
BILL NUMBER: HB 232 
PREPARED BY: Dr. Tony Campbell 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 5