START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 265 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 265 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Secretary of 
State) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Board of Elections - Address Confidentiality Program - Designation of 
Contact Person 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to designate a contact 
person for the Address Confidentiality Program to act as a contact for inquiries about the 
program from local boards of elections and program participants. It further specifies that 
each local board of elections must use a program participant’s actual address for absentee 
ballots. The bill authorizes SBE to adopt related regulations. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SBE can designate a contact person for the Address Confidentiality Program 
and establish related regulations using existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Secretary of State has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Secretary of State (SOS) administers the Address 
Confidentiality Program for survivors of threatened, attempted, or actual domestic 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 265/ Page 2 
violence, sexual assault, stalking, harassment, or human trafficking. The program is 
intended to enable State and local agencies to respond to requests for public records without 
disclosing the location of a survivor of specified crimes and also enable program 
participants to use an address designated by SOS as a substitute address. SOS collaborates 
with the District Court and the circuit courts, the Motor Vehicle Administration, SBE, 
public schools, and other agencies to provide address confidentiality to program 
participants. Generally, program participation is for four years. Additional information 
about the program can be found on the program’s website. 
 
Local boards of election must use a program participant’s actual address for all 
election-related purposes. A program participant may not use the substitute address 
designated by SOS as the program participant’s address for voter registration purposes. A 
local board of elections may not make a program participant’s address contained in voter 
registration records available for public inspection or copying except on request by a law 
enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes, and as directed by a court order to 
disclose the address. 
 
SOS advises that the bill is intended to ensure program participants can speak directly with 
SBE, who can then provide quick responses on election-related questions. SOS advises that 
current practice requires immediate turnarounds of requests and to do this effectively, SOS 
must be able to contact a trained professional in SBE who can coordinate with the local 
boards of elections and can rectify issues in a timely manner. 
 
SBE advises the bill should reduce the number of election staff and interagency interactions 
involved in the maintenance of voter registrations and issuing mail-in ballots to program 
participants. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 91 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Secretary of State) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and 
Howard counties; Secretary of State; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 265/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 265/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Board of Elections - Address Confidentiality Program - Designation of 
Contact Person 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 265 
 
PREPARED BY:  Michael Lore 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4