START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 250 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 250 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Environment) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Environment - Water Resources and Wetlands - Enforcement 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to 
impose an administrative penalty for a violation of provisions of the Environment Article 
relating to the appropriation or use of waters, reservoirs, and dams as well as wetlands and 
riparian rights. The bill also (1) expands MDE’s authorization to use administrative orders 
for violations related to waterway construction and dam safety; (2) standardizes related 
administrative notice and hearing procedures; and (3) specifies that, under existing civil 
penalty provisions relating to wetlands and riparian rights violations, each day is a separate 
violation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by an estimated $250,000 in FY 2027 due to 
the bill’s penalty provisions. The bill effectuates contingent language in the FY 2027 
budget as introduced; as a result, in FY 2027, special fund expenditures increase by 
$250,000, and general fund expenditures decrease correspondingly. Future years reflect 
ongoing but indeterminate effects. Other State agencies are not materially affected, as 
discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$250,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
($250,000) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Expenditure 
$250,000 
-  
-  
-  
-  
Net Effect 
$250,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures are not materially affected, assuming local governments 
comply with the affected provisions, as discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 250/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) generally 
concurs with this assessment, as discussed below.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  
 
Title 5, Subtitle 5 of the Environment Article – Appropriation or Use of Waters, Reservoirs, 
and Dams 
 
Under current law, a person who violates any provision of Title 5, Subtitle 5 (Appropriation 
or Use of Waters, Reservoirs, and Dams) or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted 
or issued under the subtitle is liable for a civil penalty of up to $10,000 per violation. Each 
day is a separate violation. MDE is also authorized to seek injunctive relief. Additionally, 
a person who violates any provision of Title 5, Subtitle 5 or fails to perform any duty 
imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under the subtitle is guilty 
of a misdemeanor and subject to fines, imprisonment, and enjoinment, as specified under 
§ 9-343 of the Environment Article.   
 
In addition to any other remedies available and after an opportunity for a hearing (which 
may be waived), the bill authorizes MDE to impose an administrative penalty for any 
violation of Subtitle 5 or any regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under the 
subtitle. Specifically, MDE may impose an administrative penalty of up to $5,000 for each 
violation (not exceeding $100,000 total), which must be assessed with consideration given 
to specified factors. Each day is a separate violation. The bill establishes provisions 
regarding the collection of such an administrative penalty and procedures that must be 
taken if a person fails to pay the penalty. 
 
The bill makes clarifying and conforming changes to provisions governing the Maryland 
Clean Water Fund to specify that any administrative or civil penalties collected under 
Subtitle 5 (other than penalties and fines that must be paid into the Private Repair Dam 
Fund) must be paid into the Maryland Clean Water Fund. 
 
Under current law, MDE is authorized (after or concurrently with the service of a complaint 
under Subtitle 5) to issue an order and send a notice requiring a person to take corrective 
action and appear and engage in a hearing regarding a complaint under the subtitle relating 
to water appropriation and use. MDE must give notice and hold any hearing related to 
such orders in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act. The bill repeals the 
specification that MDE is authorized to take these actions regarding a complaint relating 
to water appropriation and use, and instead authorizes MDE to take these actions after or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 250/ Page 3 
concurrently with the service of a complaint under all of Subtitle 5. These changes allow 
MDE to issue administrative orders for complaints related to waterway construction and 
dam safety and standardize the notice and hearing processes for complaints under  
Subtitle 5.  
 
Title 16 of the Environment Article – Wetlands and Riparian Rights  
 
Under current law, in addition to specified criminal penalties that apply to violations of 
Title 16, a person who violates any provision of Title 16 or any regulation, permit, license, 
or order issued pursuant to Title 16 is liable for a civil penalty of up to $10,000. The bill 
specifies that each day a violation occurs is a separate violation. Also, in addition to any 
other remedies available and after an opportunity for a hearing (which may be waived), the 
bill authorizes MDE to impose an administrative penalty of up to $5,000 for each violation 
(not exceeding $100,000 total), which must be assessed with consideration given to 
specified factors. Each day is a separate violation. The bill establishes provisions regarding 
the collection of such an administrative penalty and procedures that must be taken if a 
person fails to pay the penalty. Pursuant to current law, any penalty imposed by MDE or a 
court under Title 16 is paid into the Tidal Wetlands Compensation Fund.  
 
Background:  MDE notes that under current law, the department does not have sufficient 
resources to effectively enforce violations of water appropriation or use permits, waterway 
and floodplain construction laws, and State tidal wetlands laws; as a result, historically, it 
has only pursued egregious violations. According to MDE, in general, bringing 
administrative enforcement actions is less resource-intensive than pursuing civil actions 
and criminal cases. Administrative enforcement actions are also typically concluded more 
quickly and give MDE more flexibility to negotiate final outcomes. As a result, the bill’s 
changes are intended to enable MDE to bring more enforcement actions, which MDE 
anticipates will improve compliance with affected statutory and regulatory provisions.  
 
MDE notes that in the last three years, there were 186 sites identified as noncompliant with 
waterway and floodplain construction laws and that an estimated 40 of those sites would 
have warranted administrative penalties under the bill. MDE also notes that over the last 
three years, it identified 132 sites that were noncompliant with tidal wetlands laws. Of those 
sites, an estimated 75 sites would have warranted administrative penalties under the bill. 
Finally, MDE estimates that one-third of its current water appropriation and use permittees 
are in violation of applicable laws.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 250/ Page 4 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
Special Fund Revenues from Additional Penalties Collected:  Based on information 
provided by MDE, which is based on violation data over the past three years, special fund 
revenues (for the Maryland Clean Water Fund, the Private Dam Repair Fund, and the  
Tidal Wetlands Compensation Fund), increase by an estimated total of $250,000 in 
fiscal 2027. Based on the persistent backlog of violations that have not been pursued, MDE 
anticipates that special fund revenues continue to increase in the out years even as some 
violators presumably come into compliance with affected statutory provisions.  
 
DLS does not have sufficient data to independently verify MDE’s violation data or its 
penalty revenue estimate, but concurs that based on the information provided, MDE is 
likely to meet, if not exceed, the revenue estimate in fiscal 2027, and that special fund 
revenues continue to increase in the out years by an indeterminate amount.   
 
Use of Additional Penalty Revenue and Related Budgetary Impacts:  Because the 
fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $250,000 reduction in MDE’s general fund 
appropriation and a corresponding $250,000 special fund appropriation contingent on the 
enactment of legislation that expands MDE’s civil and administrative penalty authority, 
special fund expenditures for MDE increase by $250,000 in fiscal 2027, and general fund 
expenditures decrease correspondingly. In future years, it is assumed that MDE continues 
to collect additional penalties due to the bill’s changes and that the additional special funds 
continue to be used in lieu of general funds. Any such impact in the out years has not been 
quantified. 
 
Other State Agencies and Local Governments as Regulated Entities  
 
This fiscal and policy note generally assumes that State agencies and local governments 
that are regulated under the affected provisions strive for compliance; to the extent State 
and local agencies comply with the affected provisions, the bill does not materially affect 
their expenditures. However, to the extent any State agencies or local governments violate 
the affected provisions, they may be subject to additional penalties under the bill.  
 
MDE notes that water appropriation and use permit violations account for the largest 
volume of violations (approximately 2,000), and that many of these permit holders are 
municipal water systems and local governments. Additionally, for wetlands and waterway 
construction sites, MDE advises that many of the violations involve expired permits 
(1,300 sites), which is a category that frequently involves public-sector entities that have 
failed to modernize permit authorizations. However, MDE also advises that it is committed 
to consulting with local governments before assessing penalties.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 250/ Page 5 
The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the 
Office of Administrative Hearings or the Judiciary. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS concurs with MDE’s assessment that small businesses are 
not affected if they comply with the affected statutory and regulatory provisions. To that 
end, this fiscal and policy note generally assumes that small businesses regulated under the 
affected provisions strive for compliance. However, to the extent that any small businesses 
violate the affected provisions, they may be subject to additional penalties under the bill. 
MDE notes that for wetlands and waterway construction sites, it anticipates that 
enforcement actions taken under the bill will involve private developers, some of which 
may be small businesses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 108 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 250/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Environment - Water Resources and Wetlands - Enforcement 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 250 
PREPARED BY: 
Less Knapp, Assistant Director of the Water and Science 
Administration 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Small businesses will not be impacted by this new law if they abide by the current laws 
and regulations for water use and wetlands. When issuing penalties, MDE takes the size 
of a business into consideration to ensure a fair and equitable settlement. 
 

END OF PAGE 6