START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 223 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 223 
(Delegate Lopez) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention - Resources, Tools, and 
Educational Materials 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention to create 
resources, tools, and educational materials (and conduct public awareness campaigns as 
authorized under current law) related to (1) the secure storage of firearms; (2) extreme risk 
protective orders (ERPOs); (3) suicide prevention, including the 9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis 
Lifeline; and (4) any other topics the center determines appropriate and necessary to 
promote firearm safety in the State. The center may consult with State and local agencies 
and third-party organizations in creating such campaigns, resources, tools, and materials. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the center chooses to use the bill’s authority, it can likely do so with 
existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Any collaboration between counties or municipalities and the center can be 
absorbed within existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention 
 
Chapters 706 and 707 of 2024 established the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and 
Intervention in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The purpose of the center is 
to reduce firearm violence, harm from firearm violence, and misuse of firearms in the State 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 223/ Page 2 
by partnering with federal, State, and local agencies and affected communities to 
implement a public health approach to firearm violence reduction. The center must  
(1) work in consultation with specified State agencies and stakeholders; (2) solicit and 
consider recommendations from specified communities and experts; and (3) submit to the 
Governor and the General Assembly a preliminary State Plan for a Public Health Approach 
to Reducing Firearm Violence by May 1, 2025, and a State Strategic Plan for Firearm 
Violence Reduction Using Public Health Strategies by May 1, 2029, and every four years 
thereafter. 
 
In addition to outlining the center’s required duties, Chapters 706 and 707 also authorize 
the center to engage in several specified activities. Among other things, the center may 
conduct public awareness campaigns and engage in any other activity consistent with the 
center’s mission. 
 
Extreme Risk Protective Orders 
 
Chapter 250 of 2018 established ERPOs in the State. An ERPO is a court order temporarily 
preventing an individual from purchasing or possessing firearms or ammunition and 
requiring the individual to surrender any firearms or ammunition to law enforcement. 
 
9-8-8 Hotline 
 
Under Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide Hotline Designation 
Act of 2020, MDH designated 9-8-8 as the State’s behavioral health crisis hotline on  
July 16, 2022. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, the center already has the authority under current 
law to conduct public awareness campaigns and engage in any other activity consistent 
with its mission. Thus, even in the absence of the bill, the center can likely conduct the 
activities explicitly authorized by the bill. 
 
Even so, MDH advises that if the center chooses to use the bill’s authority, its general fund 
expenditures increase by an estimated $80,681 in fiscal 2027, with ongoing costs in the 
out‑years of at least $55,410 annually, to (1) hire one part-time (50%) contractual health 
policy analyst to develop and coordinate the public awareness campaign and the resources, 
tools, and educational materials specified in the bill and (2) contract with a communications 
and media vendor to develop the content for and market the public awareness campaign. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services generally disagrees. Given that the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced includes approximately $1.0 million in general funds for the center  
– and that the center’s broad authority already encompasses the activities addressed in the 
bill – it is assumed that any costs incurred by the center to conduct a public awareness 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 223/ Page 3 
campaign and/or to develop the resources, tools, and educational materials specified in the 
bill can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. To the extent existing 
resources prove insufficient, MDH can request additional resources through the annual 
budget process.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 934 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3