START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 273 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance – Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Enrollment 
– Effective Dates 
 
   
This departmental bill aligns Maryland health insurance law with existing federal 
regulations by altering the effective dates of enrollment in a Small Business Health Options 
Program (SHOP) Exchange plan for individuals who enroll during a special enrollment 
period (SEP). 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice, which reflects federal regulations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration has determined that this 
bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If an eligible employee enrolls certain individuals in a SHOP plan during 
the first 31 days of an SEP, coverage must become effective on the first day of the month 
following receipt of the plan selection if allowed by the SHOP exchange and selected by 
the eligible employee. 
 
Current Law:  SHOP is a health insurance exchange designed for small employers 
(typically 1 to 50 employees) to provide health and dental insurance to their employees. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 273/ Page 2 
All small employer health benefit plans must provide an SEP during which specified 
individuals may be enrolled under the plan (i.e., new dependents, the spouse of an eligible 
employee at the birth or adoption of a child).  
 
Under current Maryland law, the effective date for coverage for a newly enrolled individual 
is generally the first day of the month following plan selection if the selection is made by 
the fifteenth day of the month or the first day of the second month following receipt of the 
plan selection if the selection is made between the sixteenth and the last day of the month. 
For example, an individual who enrolls on January 14 receives an effective date of 
February 1, while an individual who enrolls on January 16 receives an effective date of 
March 1. However, federal regulations specify that an exchange must ensure a coverage 
effective date of the first of the month following plan selection. 
 
Background:  The bill aligns Maryland law with federal regulations (45 CFR 156.286(b), 
45 CFR 155.726(c)(5), and 45 CFR 155.420(b)), eliminating the current discrepancy in 
effective dates for SHOP plans. The Maryland Health Benefit Exchange advises that it 
currently operates the Maryland Health Connection SHOP platform in accordance with 
federal law and regulations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 14 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 273/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   Health Insurance - Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) 
Enrollment - Effective Dates 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 273  
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jamie N. Sexton 
 
 
 
Associate Commissioner of External Affairs and Policy Initiatives 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) estimates that the proposal will have no 
economic impact on Maryland small businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3