START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 221 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 221 
(Delegates Bouchat and Hornberger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Election Law - Primary Elections - Change of Political Party Affiliation 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, authorizes a voter, during a primary election, to appear in person at an 
early voting center or precinct polling place, change the voter’s political party affiliation, 
and vote the ballot for the voter’s new political party affiliation. Contingent on the passage 
of the proposed amendment, and its ratification by the voters, the bill makes a conforming 
change to § 3-303 of the Election Law Article (which governs change of party affiliation). 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the proposed constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, 
general fund expenditures are expected to increase by an indeterminate amount beginning 
in FY 2028 and in future years in which a primary election occurs, as discussed below. 
Under one (illustrative) set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase by $154,000 
in FY 2028. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  If the proposed constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, local 
government expenditures are expected to increase by an indeterminate amount beginning 
in FY 2028 and in future years in which a primary election occurs, as discussed below. 
Under one (illustrative) set of assumptions, local government expenditures increase, 
collectively, by at least $480,000 in FY 2028. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 221/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Party affiliation changes can be made at any time that voter registration is 
open. Voter registration is only closed beginning on the twenty-first day preceding an 
election until the eleventh day after the election. There are certain exceptions to the close 
of registration during that time period:  (1) during early voting, an individual may appear 
in person at an early voting center in the individual’s county of residence and apply to 
register to vote or change the voter’s address on an existing voter registration, then 
subsequently vote the appropriate ballo; and (2) on Election Day, an individual may appear 
at a precinct polling place in the individual’s county of residence and apply to register to 
vote, and then vote.  
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  If the proposed constitutional amendment is approved by 
the voters at the 2026 general election, State and local government expenditures are 
expected to increase beginning in fiscal 2028 (and in future years in which a primary 
election occurs) to implement the bill in fiscal years in which a primary election occurs; 
however, the extent of additional costs cannot be reliably estimated at this time primarily 
for two reasons: 
 
 
Uncertain Method of Implementation – It is unclear whether voters who choose to 
change party affiliation at an early voting center or Election Day polling place can 
be allowed to vote a regular ballot. The State Board of Elections (SBE) indicates 
that such voters cannot vote a regular ballot under the current pollbook and voter 
registration systems (which are set to be replaced prior to the 2028 and  
2030 
elections, 
respectively), 
and 
it 
appears 
that, 
in 
at 
least 
the  
2028 primary election, voters will need to vote a provisional ballot, unless changes 
are made, prior to the 2028 primary election, at likely significant cost (based on 
indications from SBE), to the soon-to-be-replaced voter registration system. 
 
Uncertain Amount of Voters Who Will Change Party Affiliation – It is uncertain how 
many voters choose, under the bill, to change their party affiliation at an early voting 
center or Election Day polling place in a primary election. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, general fund expenditures increase by $154,000 and 
local government expenditures increase by at least $480,000 in fiscal 2028, if certain 
assumptions are made, including that voters who change their party affiliation vote a 
provisional ballot. This illustrative estimate accounts for costs of additional paper ballots 
and additional provisional ballot election judges (two of the larger costs expected to be 
incurred), as well as costs for voter education and revision of the provisional ballot 
application. This estimate is based on the following assumptions/information: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 221/ Page 3 
 
Additional Ballots (State – $56,000; local – $56,000) – 500,000 additional ballots 
are ordered (at $0.23 per ballot), to be prepared for a certain portion of voters turning 
out to vote, changing their affiliation (or non-affiliation), and voting a different 
ballot than expected. Paper ballot costs are shared by SBE and the local boards. 
 
Additional Provisional Judges (State – $58,000; local – $383,000) – An additional 
provisional ballot election judge is needed at each early voting center and at least 
25% of Election Day polling places to administer provisional voting for additional 
voters. Costs of election judges are largely borne by the local boards, with the 
exception of the additional $100 paid to returning election judges, of which SBE 
pays half. 
 
Voter Education and Revision of the Provisional Ballot Application  
(State – $40,000; local – $40,000) – These are estimated costs based on information 
provided by SBE (for this bill and past legislation), assumed to be shared costs. 
 
Additional costs, not accounted for in the above illustrative estimate, include costs of 
additional provisional ballot canvassing staff, provisional ballot applications, and 
additional ballot transport carts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 890 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Worcester counties; Maryland 
State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3