START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 212 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 212 
(Delegate Addison) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Out-of-State Vehicles - Improper Registration 
 
 
This bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to engage in a specified 
process to facilitate compliance with State vehicle registration requirements when MVA 
has probable cause to believe that a vehicle owner is a resident of the State and has failed 
to properly register the vehicle with MVA and display registration plates issued by MVA. 
The process, as described below, includes (1) the issuance of warnings by MVA to 
applicable vehicle owners with a 60-day compliance period; (2) the assessment of civil 
fines by MVA for noncompliance beyond the initial 60 days; and (3) referrals by MVA to 
local jurisdictions for potential additional enforcement actions against vehicles when 
owners remain out of compliance after 120 days from when the warning was issued.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues (primarily Transportation Trust Fund (TTF)) increase 
beginning in FY 2027, likely by several million dollars under the assumptions discussed 
below. TTF expenditures increase by $379,400 in FY 2027 for MVA to administer the bill; 
out-years reflect annualization and ongoing operating costs, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues increase from additional local highway user 
revenues and payment of past-due automated enforcement citations, as discussed below. 
Expenditures are not anticipated to be materially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition to any other penalty specified in the Maryland Vehicle Law, 
if MVA has probable cause to believe that a vehicle owner is a resident of the State and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 212/ Page 2 
has failed to properly register the vehicle with MVA and display valid registration plates 
issued by MVA on the vehicle, MVA must engage in the process described below to bring 
the vehicle into compliance with Maryland vehicle registration requirements. 
 
 
Issuance of Warning and 60-day Compliance Period – MVA must issue a warning 
to the vehicle owner that the owner has 60 days from the date of the warning to 
either properly register the vehicle in Maryland and display valid MVA-issued 
registration plates or provide proof acceptable to MVA that the vehicle is not 
required to be registered in the State. The vehicle owner must obtain and display on 
the vehicle a nonresident permit issued by MVA if the owner provides this 
acceptable proof and MVA determines a permit is required. 
 
Civil Fine for Continued Noncompliance – If, within the 60-day compliance 
period, the vehicle owner fails to comply with Maryland vehicle registration 
requirements or provide acceptable proof that Maryland registration is not required, 
MVA must impose a civil fine against the vehicle of $7.00 per day of continued 
noncompliance for up to 60 days. 
 
Civil Action In Rem Against the Vehicle for Persistent Noncompliance – MVA 
must notify the appropriate local jurisdiction if the vehicle owner still has not 
complied after 120 days from the initial warning. The appropriate county State’s 
Attorney may bring a civil action in rem (an action against the vehicle) for 
immobilization of the vehicle by towing or removal and impoundment or booting. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Out-of-state Registration 
 
Unless otherwise exempt, each motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer driven on 
a highway in the State must be registered with MVA. Registration is not required for a 
vehicle owned by a new resident of the State during the first 60 days of residency if the 
vehicle displays a valid out-of-state registration. If a motor vehicle required to be registered 
is not registered, a person may not park the unregistered motor vehicle on any public alley, 
street, or highway or on private property used by the public in general, including parking 
lots of shopping centers, condominiums, apartments, or town house developments. Also, a 
person may not drive or attempt to drive a vehicle on any highway in the State without a 
valid registration as required from MVA. The annual vehicle registration fee varies by class 
and weight. 
 
A person who has not properly registered a vehicle is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject 
to a maximum fine of $500. The District Court assesses a prepayment penalty of $290 for 
this offense. Also, MVA may take possession of any certificate of title, registration card, 
permit, license, or registration plate that has been issued by another jurisdiction but is being 
illegally used or displayed. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 212/ Page 3 
Nonresident Permit  
 
Individuals meeting specified criteria are exempt from Maryland vehicle registration 
requirements. However, these individuals may be required to, or may choose to, obtain a 
nonresident permit, which allows a licensed driver to maintain and operate a vehicle 
registered out of state. Examples of these individuals include students enrolled in Maryland 
colleges and universities, active-duty military, and temporary employees. 
 
If a nonresident temporarily maintains or occupies a dwelling in the State for a period more 
than 30 days, but not more than one year, the nonresident must obtain a nonresident permit 
from MVA, in lieu of registration, within 10 days immediately following the 30-day period. 
A nonresident permit is generally valid for up to one year. 
 
However, a nonresident who is a student enrolled in an accredited school, college, or 
university of the State or of a bordering state must obtain a nonresident permit from MVA, 
in lieu of registration, within 30 days of maintaining or occupying a dwelling in Maryland. 
A nonresident permit issued to a student is valid for up to one year but may be renewed 
annually in accordance with the nonresident’s eligibility for the exemption. 
 
Also, a nonresident who is a member of the uniformed services of the United States or of 
the U.S. Public Health Services and is serving on active duty in the State, an adjoining 
state, or the District of Columbia may obtain a nonresident permit (which is valid until the 
expiration date of the registration plates of the vehicle) from MVA, in lieu of registration, 
if the permit application is made within 10 days immediately following the 30-day period. 
 
Generally, the nonresident permit must be displayed on the windshield of the nonresident’s 
exempt vehicle in the place and manner described by MVA. The annual fee for a 
nonresident permit is $27. 
 
Out-of-state Improper Registrations Report 
 
Chapter 648 of 2024 required MVA, in consultation with Baltimore City and other 
interested jurisdictions, to prepare a report, as specified, on motor vehicles owned by 
Maryland residents that are improperly registered in another state. MVA issued its report 
in January 2025. Since then, MVA has determined that, as of October 2025, approximately 
77,550 individuals with Maryland addresses have a vehicle registered in Virginia. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  TTF expenditures increase by $379,365 in fiscal 2027 for MVA to 
establish an administrative framework to implement the bill. 
 
Initial enforcement actions are expected to be targeted at the approximately 77,550 vehicles 
identified as being, often improperly, registered in Virginia. MVA assumes that  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 212/ Page 4 
one-half (38,775) of those vehicles are likely to comply with Maryland registration 
requirements. If they were all to come into compliance in fiscal 2027 (which assumes 
expeditious implementation), the readily quantifiable revenue impacts under the bill could 
total approximately $15.4 million that year, as discussed further below. However, for the 
initial group that comes into compliance, out-year revenues are lower. 
 
Nevertheless, revenues continue to grow as additional enforcement efforts are undertaken 
to facilitate compliance of other vehicles owned by Maryland residents who maintain 
out-of-state registrations. 
 
Expenditures 
 
MVA advises that additional customer service agents are needed to handle the likely influx 
of registrations. Accordingly, TTF expenditures increase by $379,365 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by $481,697 in fiscal 2031. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring five additional customer service agents to manage 
increased workloads under the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$278,795 
Operating Expenses 
  100,570 
FY 2027 MVA Staffing Expenditures 
$379,365 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This estimate also includes 
ongoing mailing costs totaling $54,866 annually. 
 
Revenues 
 
Special fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2027, which assumes expeditious 
implementation of the bill, likely by at least $15.4 million in the first year. Under the 
assumptions below, most of that revenue impact is on TTF ($13.8 million), while other 
special funds realize a combined $1.6 million in fiscal 2027. Out-year impacts reflect only 
ongoing fees (annual or biennial) and are assumed to total $6.2 million. 
 
Exhibit 1 illustrates the likely and readily quantifiable special fund revenue impacts under 
the bill over the five-year period from fiscal 2027 through 2031. It reflects only the group 
of vehicle owners assumed to be initially targeted (the first cohort) and quickly come into 
compliance with Maryland registration requirements. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 212/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Illustrative Readily Quantifiable Revenue Impacts from Targeting 
Vehicles Registered in Virginia 
Fiscal 2027-2031 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Associated with Registration 
Transportation Trust Fund 
Annual Registration Fee 
$4,103,558 
$4,103,558 
$4,103,558 
$4,103,558 
$4,103,558 
Titling Fee (one-time) 
7,755,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Flag Fee (one-time) 
581,625 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Other Special Funds 
EMS Annual Surcharge 
to MEMSOF 
$949,988 
$949,988 
$949,988 
$949,988 
$949,988 
to MTPSF 
252,038 
252,038 
252,038 
252,038 
252,038 
to Shock Trauma 
348,975 
348,975 
348,975 
348,975 
348,975 
Other Related Requirements 
Transportation Trust Fund 
VEIP (biennial) 
$465,300 
$465,300 
$465,300 
$465,300 
$465,300 
Nonresident Permit Fee  
104,679 
104,679 
104,679 
104,679 
104,679 
Civil Fines (one-time) 
814,275 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Transportation Trust Fund 
$13,824,437  $4,673,537  $4,673,537  $4,673,537  $4,673,537  
Other Special Funds 
$1,551,000 
$1,551,000 
$1,551,000 
$1,551,000 
$1,551,000 
Total Quantified Impact  
$15,375,437  $6,224,537  $6,224,537  $6,224,537  $6,224,537  
 
EMS:  Emergency Medical Services 
MEMSOF:  Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (as much as $24.50 of the $40.00 surcharge) 
MTPSF:  Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund ($6.50 of the $40.00 surcharge) 
Shock Trauma:  R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center (at least $9.00 of the $40.00 surcharge) 
VEIP:  Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program 
 
Notes:  This illustrative example is based on (1) targeting of 77,550 vehicles in Maryland with Virginia 
registration plates, with expeditious implementation of the bill; (2) 38,775 of them becoming registered in 
Maryland in the first year of implementation (fiscal 2027) and paying other fees/surcharges associated with 
registration; (3) 31,020 of those registered vehicles being subject to VEIP (with 15,510 tested each year as 
the testing is done on a biennial basis and one-half are assumed to carry forward their testing from Virginia 
on a reciprocal basis); and (4) another 3,877 instead being eligible for nonresident permits on an ongoing 
basis. From among the group of 77,550 vehicles, 7,755 owners are assumed to pay, on average, 15 days of 
civil fines at $7.00 a day. 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 212/ Page 6 
 
Annual Vehicle Registration – In fiscal 2027, 38,775 of the 77,550 vehicles (50%) 
comply with Maryland registration requirements and choose to annually renew their 
registration. The annual vehicle registration fee varies by class and weight. 
 
A certificate of title for each vehicle must be issued by MVA when coming 
into compliance with Maryland registration requirements. The one-time 
titling fee is $200.00 (other costs associated with titling are not as readily 
quantifiable and have not been accounted for). 
 
According to MVA, the average annual registration fee for Class A and 
Class M vehicles is $105.83. 
 
Additionally, each vehicle registration incurs a $40.00 surcharge, which is 
distributed to the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund, the  
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center, and the Maryland Emergency 
Medical Systems Operations Fund. 
 
Electric vehicles are also subject to annual surcharges at registration; any 
such additional surcharges have not been accounted for. 
 
Removing the Administrative Flag – In fiscal 2027 only, 19,388 vehicles (50% of 
vehicles coming into compliance with Maryland registration requirements) must 
pay an administrative flag fee of $30.00 before the vehicle can be registered. Flags 
are placed on a vehicle’s account by MVA for unpaid fees or fines and must be 
cleared before registration (whether initial or renewal). 
 
Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program – Beginning in fiscal 2027, 15,510 of the 
newly registered vehicles are subject to testing each year (which is biennial). This 
assumes that a total of 31,020 vehicles (80% of vehicles coming into compliance 
with Maryland registration requirements) are subject to the Vehicle Emissions 
Inspection Program (VEIP). Further, it assumes that one-half of those 
vehicles (15,510) had a similar VEIP test in Virginia and are exempt from the 
Maryland VEIP requirements in the first year under reciprocity provisions. The 
VEIP test fee is $30.00. 
 
Nonresident Permits – In fiscal 2027, 3,877 vehicles (5% of all targeted vehicles) 
qualify for a nonresident permit and a similar number renew each year. The annual 
fee for a nonresident permit is $27.00. 
 
Civil Fines – In fiscal 2027 only, 7,755 vehicles (10% of the vehicles with 
Virginia tags) incur a civil fine of $7.00 per day for an average of 15 days. 
 
Other Assumptions 
 
As noted above, this estimate assumes the total number of vehicle registrations coming into 
compliance under the bill (38,775 vehicles) in fiscal 2027 remains constant in the out-years. 
To the extent fewer vehicles come into compliance, revenues are lower. Conversely, to the 
extent the number of vehicle registrations increases beyond that accounted for in this 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 212/ Page 7 
analysis, special fund revenues increase further. MVA advises that out-of-state improper 
registrations in states other than Virginia are likely. 
 
The special fund revenue estimates in this analysis reflect only the initial targeted cohort 
of vehicle owners who are residents of Maryland maintaining a registration in Virginia. In 
the out-years, MVA is likely to target registrations from other states. The same categories 
of revenues are expected to be realized for each such targeted group (or cohort) coming 
into compliance and result in a compounding effect on revenues. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the revenues and expenditures referred 
to above do not account for (1) special fund revenues for excise taxes, the annual surcharge 
for electric vehicles, and compliance by vehicle owners who are Maryland residents 
maintaining a registration in a state other than Virginia; (2) other likely effects outside of 
vehicle registration, including issuance of additional Maryland driver’s licenses; and 
(3) any quantification of local highway user revenue impacts. Even so, a preliminary 
analysis from MVA indicates that vehicle excise tax revenues under the bill could be 
significant, ranging from $26.2 million to $65.5 million, depending on the number of 
vehicles subject to the tax and their value. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments may benefit from additional local highway user 
revenues (because a portion of MVA vehicle registration fees is shared with local 
governments through the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle Revenue Account) and the payment 
of past-due local automated enforcement citations (required before a vehicle may be 
registered in the State). For example, Baltimore City advises that 63% of such citations 
issued to vehicles with Virgina tags in 2025 are still outstanding; the percentage for 
unpaid 2024 citations is even higher, at 82%. 
 
Based on responses from a limited number of counties, the number of civil actions in rem 
is expected to be nominal. However, expenditures may increase negligibly to the extent a 
county State’s Attorney initiates a civil action in rem (against the vehicle) for a vehicle 
owner who has not come into compliance with Maryland registration requirements as 
specified in the bill. Costs for immobilization of the vehicle by towing or removal and 
impoundment, or booting are assumed to be paid by the vehicle owner. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 219 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 111 (Senator McCray) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 212/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Baltimore and Prince 
George’s counties; Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8