START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 204

M3, J1 6lr1329
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1724

By: Delegate Allen
Requested: October 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Drinking Water – Regulation – Control and Prevention of Waterborne Disease

3 FOR the purpose of establishing minimum detectable disinfectant residual level
4 requirements, disinfectant residual testing requirements, and related requirements
5 for the control of Legionella bacteria and other pathogens in the public water supply;
6 requiring suppliers of water to provide certain notices and records regarding
7 disruptions in the water distribution system; establishing requirements for the
8 investigation of reported cases of Legionnaires’ disease; requiring the owner or
9 operators of certain buildings to implement certain water management programs on
10 or before a certain date; requiring the Department of the Environment and the
11 Maryland Department of Health to make certain information required under this
12 Act available on their websites; requiring the Maryland Department of Health to
13 develop a public awareness campaign and targeted consumer education program
14 related to the prevention of Legionnaires’ disease; requiring any penalties collected
15 for a violation of this Act to be distributed to a special fund in the Maryland
16 Department of Health to be used for certain purposes; and generally relating to the
17 control and prevention of waterborne diseases including Legionnaires’ disease.

18 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
19 Article – Environment
20 Section 9–401(a), (l), and (m)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
24 Article – Environment
25 Section 9–412 and 9–413
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0204*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 204

1 BY adding to
2 Article – Environment
3 Section 9–429 through 9–436 to be under the new part “Part III. Control and
4 Prevention of Waterborne Disease”
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

7 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
8 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

9 Article – Environment

10 9–401.

11 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

12 (l) (1) “Public water system” means a system that:

13 (i) Provides to the public water for human consumption through
14 pipes or other constructed conveyances; and

15 (ii) 1. Has at least 15 service connections; or

16 2. Regularly serves at least 25 individuals.

17 (2) “Public water system” includes:

18 (i) Any collection, treatment, storage, or distribution facility that is
19 under the control of the operator of the system and is used primarily in connection with the
20 system; and

21 (ii) Any collection or pretreatment storage facility that is not under
22 the control of the operator of the system and is used primarily in connection with the
23 system.

24 (m) “Supplier of water” means any person who owns or operates a public water
25 system.

26 9–412.

27 (a) A supplier of water may not:

28 (1) Fail to comply with § 9–410 of this subtitle;

29 (2) Disseminate any false or misleading information in or about any notice
30 required under § 9–410 of this subtitle or about any remedial action being undertaken to
31 achieve compliance with State primary drinking water regulations;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 204 3

1 (3) Knowingly make any false statement, representation, or certification in
2 any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or permit adopted or issued
3 under this subtitle;

4 (4) Fail to comply with the rules and regulations adopted under § 9–407 of
5 this subtitle; [or]

6 (5) Fail to comply with any conditions for variances or exemptions
7 authorized under § 9–409 of this subtitle; OR

8 (6) FAIL TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF PART III OF THIS
9 SUBTITLE.

10 (b) A person may not:

11 (1) Fail to comply with any order issued by the Secretary under this
12 subtitle; or

13 (2) Falsify or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or
14 method required to be maintained under this subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or
15 permit adopted or issued under this subtitle.

16 9–413.

17 (a) A person who willfully violates § 9–412(a)(4) [or], (5), OR (6) of this subtitle
18 is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for each day on which the violation exists.

19 (b) A person who violates § 9–412(a)(1), (2), or (3) of this subtitle is guilty of a
20 misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each day on
21 which the violation occurs or failure to comply continues.

22 (c) In an action brought in the appropriate court to enforce the order, a person
23 who willfully violates or fails or refuses to comply with any order issued by the Secretary
24 under this subtitle may be fined not more than $5,000 for each day on which the violation
25 occurs or failure to comply continues.

26 (d) (1) In addition to any other remedies available at law and after an
27 opportunity for a hearing, which may be waived in writing by the person accused of a
28 violation, the Department may impose a penalty for violation of any provision of this
29 subtitle or any order, regulation, or plan adopted or issued under this subtitle.

30 (2) The penalty imposed on a supplier of water serving a population of more
31 than 10,000 under this subsection shall be:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 204

1 (i) Up to $1,000 per day for each violation, but not exceeding
2 $25,000 total for each violation; and

3 (ii) Assessed with consideration given to:

4 1. The willfulness of the violation, the extent to which the
5 existence of the violation was known to but uncorrected by the violator, and the extent to
6 which the violator exercised reasonable care;

7 2. Any actual harm to the environment or to human health,
8 including injury to or impairment of the use of the waters of this State or the natural
9 resources of the State;

10 3. The cost of cleanup and the cost of restoration of natural
11 resources;

12 4. The nature and degree of injury to or interference with
13 general welfare, health, and property;

14 5. The extent to which the location of the violation, including
15 location near waters of this State or areas of human population, creates the potential for
16 harm to the environment or to human health or safety;

17 6. The available technology and economic reasonableness of
18 controlling, reducing, or eliminating the violation;

19 7. The degree of hazard posed by the particular pollutant or
20 pollutants involved;

21 8. The extent to which the current violation is part of a
22 recurrent pattern of the same or similar type of violation committed by the violator; and

23 9. Whether or not penalties were assessed or will be assessed
24 under other provisions of this subtitle.

25 (3) The penalty imposed on a supplier of water serving a population of
26 3,301 to 10,000 under this subsection shall be:

27 (i) Up to $500 per day for each violation, but not exceeding $12,500
28 total for each violation; and

29 (ii) Assessed with consideration given to the factors set forth in
30 paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection.

31 (4) The penalty imposed on a supplier of water serving a population of 501
32 to 3,300 under this subsection shall be:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 204 5

1 (i) Up to $250 per day for each violation, but not exceeding $6,250
2 total for each violation; and

3 (ii) Assessed with consideration given to the factors set forth in
4 paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection.

5 (5) The penalty imposed on a supplier of water serving a population of 500
6 or less under this subsection shall be:

7 (i) Up to $100 per day for each violation, but not exceeding $5,000
8 total for each violation; and

9 (ii) Assessed with consideration given to the factors set forth in
10 paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection.

11 (6) Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation under this
12 subsection.

13 (7) Any penalty imposed under this subsection is payable to the State and
14 collectible in any manner provided at law for the collection of penalties.

15 (8) (I) [All] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF
16 THIS PARAGRAPH, ALL penalties collected under this subtitle shall be paid into the
17 Maryland Clean Water Fund created under § 9–320 of this title.

18 (II) ANY PENALTIES COLLECTED FOR A VIOLATION OF §
19 9–412(A)(6) OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO A SPECIAL FUND IN THE
20 MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, TO BE USED ONLY FOR THE PURPOSES
21 SPECIFIED IN § 9–435 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

22 9–427. RESERVED.

23 9–428. RESERVED.

24 PART III. CONTROL AND PREVENTION OF WATERBORNE DISEASE.

25 9–429.

26 (A) IN THIS PART III OF THIS SUBTITLE, “DISRUPTION IN THE WATER
27 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM” MEANS ANY DISRUPTION TO NORMAL WATER
28 TRANSMISSION WITHIN A PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.

29 (B) “DISRUPTION IN THE WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM” INCLUDES:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 204

1 (1) A CHANGE IN THE WATER TREATMENT PROCESS, INCLUDING
2 TEMPORARY CHANGES FROM THE USE OF CHLORINE TO THE USE OF CHLORAMINE
3 OR VICE VERSA;

4 (2) ANY PLANNED OR UNPLANNED EVENT THAT REDUCES WATER
5 DELIVERY PRESSURE BELOW 20 POUNDS PER SQUARE INCH;

6 (3) A LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT;

7 (4) A NEW CONSTRUCTION TIE–IN;

8 (5) A SOURCE WATER CHANGE;

9 (6) WATER TREATMENT PLANT MAINTENANCE OR CHANGES;

10 (7) CHANGES IN DIRECTIONAL WATER FLOW;

11 (8) FLOODING;

12 (9) THE REPLACEMENT OF VALVES, HYDRANTS, OR METERS;

13 (10) PUMPING FAILURES;

14 (11) PIPELINE OR WATER MAIN BREAKS;

15 (12) SYSTEM REPAIRS; OR

16 (13) EMERGENCY CONDITIONS.

17 9–430.

18 (A) NOTWITHSTANDING § 9–407(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE, ON OR BEFORE
19 JANUARY 1, 2026, EACH SUPPLIER OF WATER SHALL:

20 (1) MAINTAIN IN ALL ACTIVE PARTS OF THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
21 A DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL LEVEL OF AT LEAST:

22 (I) 0.5 MILLIGRAMS OF FREE CHLORINE PER LITER; OR

23 (II) 1.0 MILLIGRAMS OF MONOCHLORAMINE PER LITER; AND

24 (2) CONDUCT DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL TESTING AT FREQUENT AND
25 REGULAR INTERVALS TO DETERMINE THE AMOUNT AND TYPE OF DETECTABLE
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 204 7

1 DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL EXISTING AT DIFFERENT POINTS IN THE PUBLIC WATER
2 SYSTEM.

3 (B) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
4 CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, SHALL ADOPT
5 REGULATIONS TO:

6 (I) REQUIRE NITRIFICATION PLANS FOR PUBLIC WATER
7 SYSTEMS THAT UTILIZE MONOCHLORAMINE; AND

8 (II) ESTABLISH REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MONITORING OF A
9 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES THAT MAY IMPACT THE
10 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.

11 (2) IN ADDITION TO THE MEASURES DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1)
12 OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND
13 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO:

14 (I) INCREASE MINIMUM DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT
15 RESIDUAL LEVEL REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS; OR

16 (II) ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL DISINFECTANT OR TESTING
17 REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS TO MINIMIZE THE GROWTH AND
18 TRANSMISSION OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA.

19 (3) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT REDUCE THE MINIMUM DETECTABLE
20 DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL LEVEL REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER
21 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

22 (C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF A SUPPLIER
23 OF WATER FAILS TO MEET THE MINIMUM DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL
24 REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
25 CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION OF THE VIOLATION.

26 (2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY AUTHORIZE A THIRD–PARTY ENTITY TO
27 CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

28 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP PROCEDURES AND
29 GUIDELINES REGARDING THE INVESTIGATION OF SUPPLIERS OF WATER UNDER
30 THIS SUBSECTION, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 204

1 (I) A DEFINITION OF WHAT CONSTITUTES A REPEATED
2 FAILURE TO MEET MINIMUM DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL
3 REQUIREMENTS;

4 (II) REQUIREMENTS FOR REPORTING VIOLATIONS OF MINIMUM
5 DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL REQUIREMENTS;

6 (III) GUIDANCE ON WHEN TO INITIATE INITIAL AND
7 SUBSEQUENT INVESTIGATIONS OF VIOLATIONS OF MINIMUM DETECTABLE
8 DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL REQUIREMENTS;

9 (IV) THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NOTICE TO INFORM THE PERSONS
10 SERVED BY A SUPPLIER OF WATER IF THE SUPPLIER OF WATER FAILS TO MAINTAIN
11 THE MINIMUM DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL LEVELS REQUIRED UNDER
12 THIS SECTION; AND

13 (V) IF APPLICABLE, THE CRITERIA USED BY THE DEPARTMENT
14 TO SELECT THIRD–PARTY ENTITIES TO CONDUCT INVESTIGATIONS UNDER THIS
15 SUBSECTION.

16 9–431.

17 (A) (1) A SUPPLIER OF WATER SHALL PROVIDE TIMELY WRITTEN NOTICE
18 OF ANY DISRUPTION IN THE WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM THAT COULD RESULT IN
19 INCREASED LEVELS OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA TO ALL RESIDENTIAL,
20 COMMERCIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL CUSTOMERS SERVED BY THE PUBLIC WATER
21 SYSTEM AND LOCATED IN THE AREA AFFECTED BY THE DISRUPTION.

22 (2) THE NOTICE SHALL BE IN THE FORM AND MANNER PRESCRIBED
23 BY REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

24 (3) THE NOTICE SHALL, AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE:

25 (I) NOTIFICATION THAT PLANNED CONSTRUCTION,
26 MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT OF A PART OF THE WATER DISTRIBUTION
27 SYSTEM MAY AFFECT AND TEMPORARILY INCREASE THE LEVELS OF LEGIONELLA
28 BACTERIA IN THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM;

29 (II) THE ESTIMATED LENGTH OF TIME THAT THE LEVEL OF
30 LEGIONELLA BACTERIA MAY REMAIN ELEVATED, AS DETERMINED BY THE
31 DEPARTMENT;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 204 9

1 (III) GENERAL INFORMATION ON THE POSSIBLE SOURCES OF
2 LEGIONELLA BACTERIA IN THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM AND THE HEALTH EFFECTS
3 OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE AND RELATED ILLNESSES ON AT–RISK POPULATIONS;
4 AND

5 (IV) INFORMATION ON MEASURES CONSUMERS CAN TAKE TO
6 REDUCE OR ELIMINATE EXPOSURE TO LEGIONELLA BACTERIA, INCLUDING:

7 1. ENSURING HOT WATER HEATERS ARE WORKING
8 PROPERLY AND MAINTAINING A TEMPERATURE OF AT LEAST 130 DEGREES
9 FAHRENHEIT AT THE WATER HEATER OUTLET;

10 2. FLUSHING WATER LINES, INCLUDING THE HOT
11 WATER HEATER DRAIN AND EXTERNAL HOSE CONNECTIONS, DURING AND AFTER
12 COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION WORK;

13 3. REMOVING AND CLEANING FAUCET AERATOR
14 SCREENS AND SHOWERHEADS; AND

15 4. INSTALLING A WATER FILTRATION SYSTEM OR WATER
16 TREATMENT DEVICE CERTIFIED TO REMOVE LEGIONELLA BACTERIA.

17 (B) (1) AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, AND NOT LATER THAN 24 HOURS AFTER
18 THE OCCURRENCE OF A DISRUPTION IN THE WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, A
19 SUPPLIER OF WATER SHALL PROVIDE A WRITTEN RECORD OF THE DISRUPTION TO
20 THE DEPARTMENT.

21 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH ON ITS WEBSITE A
22 PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE DATABASE OF THE RECORDS OF DISRUPTIONS IN THE WATER
23 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM RECEIVED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

24 (C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
25 CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, SHALL ADOPT
26 REGULATIONS SPECIFYING THE FORM AND MANNER OF NOTICES REQUIRED UNDER
27 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

28 (2) THE REGULATIONS SHALL INCLUDE THE SPECIFIC INFORMATION
29 TO BE INCLUDED IN NOTICES REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

30 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH REGULATIONS ADOPTED
31 UNDER THIS SUBSECTION ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

32 9–432.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 204

1 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (2) “DE–IDENTIFIED DATA” MEANS INFORMATION:

4 (I) THAT DOES NOT IDENTIFY ANY INDIVIDUAL;

5 (II) FOR WHICH THERE IS NO REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE
6 THAT THE INFORMATION CAN BE USED TO IDENTIFY ANY INDIVIDUAL; AND

7 (III) THAT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS FOR DE–IDENTIFICATION
8 OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION UNDER THE FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE
9 PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996 AND IMPLEMENTING
10 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
11 SERVICES.

12 (3) “WATER EXPOSURE POINT” MEANS A LOCATION WHERE AN
13 INDIVIDUAL DIAGNOSED WITH LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE RESIDED, WAS EMPLOYED,
14 OR FREQUENTLY VISITED WITHIN THE 14 DAYS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE
15 INDIVIDUAL’S DIAGNOSIS.

16 (B) FOR EACH REPORTED DIAGNOSIS OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE, THE
17 MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL:

18 (1) CONDUCT A COMPREHENSIVE INVESTIGATION INTO THE
19 REPORTED CASE; AND

20 (2) ADVISE THE INDIVIDUAL DIAGNOSED WITH LEGIONNAIRES’
21 DISEASE ABOUT THE AVAILABILITY OF TESTING BY THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT
22 OF HEALTH OF THE FIXTURES AND WATER–USING EQUIPMENT AT WATER EXPOSURE
23 POINTS IDENTIFIED BY THE INDIVIDUAL.

24 (C) (1) IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE CONSENT PROVIDED BY THE
25 INDIVIDUAL DIAGNOSED WITH LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE OR THE OWNER OF THE
26 PROPERTY, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL SAMPLE AND TEST
27 FIXTURES AND WATER–USING EQUIPMENT AT THE WATER EXPOSURE POINTS
28 IDENTIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION FOR THE PRESENCE OF
29 LEGIONELLA BACTERIA.

30 (2) EACH TEST SHALL BE CONDUCTED BY A LABORATORY CERTIFIED
31 FOR THIS PURPOSE BY THE DEPARTMENT.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 204 11

1 (D) (1) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL DEVELOP
2 PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES REGARDING THE INVESTIGATION OF EACH
3 REPORTED DIAGNOSIS OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
4 SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

5 (2) THE PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES SHALL, AT A MINIMUM,
6 INCLUDE REQUIREMENTS REGARDING:

7 (I) THE DOCUMENTATION OF ANY DISRUPTION IN THE WATER
8 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SERVING WATER EXPOSURE POINTS IDENTIFIED UNDER
9 SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION THAT MAY HAVE CAUSED THE RELEASE
10 OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA INTO THE WATER EXPOSURE POINTS;

11 (II) THE INVESTIGATION OF POTENTIAL SOURCES OF
12 EXPOSURE TO LEGIONELLA BACTERIA FROM FIXTURES, WATER–USING EQUIPMENT,
13 OR FEATURES AT THE INDIVIDUAL’S RESIDENCE, INCLUDING WATER EXPOSURES
14 EXTERNAL TO THE RESIDENCE SUCH AS IRRIGATION, HOSES, OR WATER–BASED
15 EQUIPMENT AND DEVICES; AND

16 (III) THE INVESTIGATION OF POTENTIAL SOURCES OF
17 EXPOSURE TO LEGIONELLA BACTERIA FROM OTHER IDENTIFIED WATER EXPOSURE
18 POINTS, SUCH AS:

19 1. VISITS TO BUILDINGS, WATER FEATURES, OR CAR
20 WASHES; AND

21 2. EXPOSURE TO IRRIGATION SYSTEMS, PRESSURE
22 WASHING, CAR WINDSHIELD FLUIDS, PUBLIC FOUNTAINS OR TOILETS, OR OTHER
23 ASPECTS OF DAILY TRAVEL AND ACTIVITIES.

24 (E) AS THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH DEEMS APPROPRIATE,
25 THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH MAY DELEGATE ITS RESPONSIBILITIES
26 REGARDING TESTING AND INVESTIGATIONS UNDER THIS SECTION TO THE LOCAL
27 HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR THE JURISDICTION WHERE A PATIENT DIAGNOSED WITH
28 LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE LIVES, FREQUENTLY VISITS, OR IS EMPLOYED.

29 (F) (1) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL ESTABLISH ON
30 ITS WEBSITE A PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE REGISTRY OF DE–IDENTIFIED DATA RELATED
31 TO EACH CASE OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE REPORTED TO THE DEPARTMENT.

32 (2) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL MAKE EVERY
33 EFFORT TO PROVIDE INFORMATION THROUGH THE REGISTRY ON THE
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 204

1 APPROXIMATE LOCATION OF EACH CASE OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE TO THE
2 NEAREST CITY BLOCK OR GENERAL NEIGHBORHOOD DESCRIPTION.

3 9–433.

4 (A) (1) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL IMMEDIATELY
5 NOTIFY THE DEPARTMENT OF ANY REPORTED DIAGNOSIS OF LEGIONNAIRES’
6 DISEASE.

7 (2) A NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE
8 ADDRESSES WHERE THE INDIVIDUAL DIAGNOSED WITH LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE
9 RESIDED, FREQUENTLY VISITED, OR WAS EMPLOYED IN THE MONTH IMMEDIATELY
10 PRECEDING THE INDIVIDUAL’S DIAGNOSIS.

11 (B) (1) UPON RECEIPT OF A NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
12 SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SAMPLE AND TEST THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
13 FOR THE PRESENCE OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA AT ALL LOCATIONS IDENTIFIED IN
14 THE NOTICE.

15 (2) ALL TESTING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
16 CONDUCTED:

17 (I) BY A LABORATORY CERTIFIED FOR THIS PURPOSE BY THE
18 DEPARTMENT; AND

19 (II) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE SAMPLING AND TESTING
20 METHODS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

21 (C) IF THE PRESENCE OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA IS DETECTED THROUGH
22 INITIAL TESTING CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
23 DEPARTMENT SHALL CONDUCT, OR REQUIRE THE SUPPLIER OF WATER FOR THE
24 APPLICABLE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM TO CONDUCT, FURTHER TESTING TO CONFIRM
25 THE PRESENCE OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA IN ANY SOURCE AS DETERMINED
26 NECESSARY BY THE DEPARTMENT.

27 9–434.

28 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “COVERED BUILDING” MEANS A BUILDING THAT
29 MEETS THE CRITERIA SET FORTH IN THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HEATING,
30 REFRIGERATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING ENGINEERS (ASHRAE) STANDARD
31 188–2018.
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 204 13

1 (B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A
2 COVERED BUILDING SHALL IMPLEMENT A WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM TO
3 MINIMIZE THE GROWTH AND TRANSMISSION OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA IN THE
4 BUILDING’S WATER SYSTEM, CONSISTENT WITH ASHRAE STANDARD 188–2018.

5 (C) THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A COVERED BUILDING SHALL MAKE THE
6 WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST TO AN EMPLOYEE OF
7 THE DEPARTMENT, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, OR ANY OTHER
8 STATE OR LOCAL DEPARTMENT WITH LICENSE OR INSPECTION AUTHORITY FOR THE
9 COVERED BUILDING.

10 (D) THE DEPARTMENT, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, OR ANY
11 OTHER STATE OR LOCAL DEPARTMENT WITH LICENSE OR INSPECTION AUTHORITY
12 MAY ENFORCE THIS SECTION CONSISTENT WITH ITS EXISTING AUTHORITY.

13 9–435.

14 (A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF
15 HEALTH SHALL DEVELOP A PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN AND TARGETED
16 CONSUMER EDUCATION PROGRAM TO EDUCATE CONSUMERS, ESPECIALLY
17 VULNERABLE POPULATIONS, ON:

18 (1) THE ENVIRONMENTAL SOURCES OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA;

19 (2) THE MOVEMENT OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA THROUGH WATER
20 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS;

21 (3) THE NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PART III OF THIS
22 SUBTITLE AND HOW THE REQUIREMENTS IMPACT CONSUMERS; AND

23 (4) THE METHODS TO CONTROL LEGIONELLA BACTERIA IN A
24 PERSON’S HOME.

25 (B) THE PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN AND EDUCATION PROGRAM SHALL,
26 AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE:

27 (1) INFORMATION ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE RISKS OF
28 THE PROLIFERATION OF LEGIONELLA BACTERIA AND WATER TEMPERATURE;

29 (2) THE TEMPERATURE REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDICAL DEVICES,
30 EXPANSION TANKS, HOT TUBS, WHIRLPOOLS, SPAS, POOLS, AIR–CONDITIONING
31 EQUIPMENT, ORNAMENTAL FOUNTAINS, AND OTHER EQUIPMENT OR DEVICES THAT
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 204

1 RELEASE WATER AEROSOLS IN A PERSON’S HOME OR ON A PERSON’S PROPERTY;
2 AND

3 (3) THE RELATED RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE INHALATION BY
4 VULNERABLE POPULATIONS OF WATER DROPLETS CONTAINING LEGIONELLA
5 BACTERIA.

6 9–436.

7 ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
8 DEPARTMENT, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
9 SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
10 STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

11 (1) THE NUMBER OF CASES OF LEGIONNAIRES’ DISEASE IN THE
12 STATE REPORTED IN EACH OF THE PREVIOUS 10 YEARS;

13 (2) THE NUMBER AND TYPE OF VIOLATIONS OF THIS PART III OF THIS
14 SUBTITLE FOR WHICH PENALTIES WERE ASSESSED; AND

15 (3) RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LEGISLATIVE ACTION AS MAY BE
16 NECESSARY TO FURTHER CONTROL LEGIONELLA BACTERIA AND OTHER
17 WATERBORNE PATHOGENS IN THE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AND AFFECTED
18 BUILDINGS, INCLUDING RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING WHETHER THE MINIMUM
19 DETECTABLE DISINFECTANT RESIDUAL LEVEL REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC WATER
20 SYSTEMS SHOULD BE INCREASED.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 14