START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 236 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 236 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
State Athletic Commission - Blood Testing of Contestants - Timing 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the period of time, from 30 to 90 days, before which an 
applicant for a license to participate as a contestant in a boxing, kickboxing, wrestling, or 
mixed martial arts (MMA) contest must be tested for specified diseases. A contestant must 
present documentary evidence to the State Athletic Commission (SAC) of negative test 
results for the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the antigen of virus hepatitis B, and 
antibodies to virus hepatitis C conducted within the 90-day period (instead of 30 days) 
prior to a license application or, when requested by SAC, participation in a contest. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Labor has determined that this bill has a 
meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SAC has regulatory and licensing authority over all boxing, kick boxing, 
MMA, or wrestling contests held in the State, with the exception of some intercollegiate 
or amateur events. The commission licenses participants, managers, referees, judges, 
seconds, matchmakers, and promoters of these contests. 
 
Each applicant for a license to participate as a contestant in a contest must present 
documentary evidence, satisfactory to the commission within the prior 30-day period the 
applicant has been test for the presence of:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 236/ Page 2 
 
antibodies to HIV; 
 
the antigen of virus hepatitis B; and 
 
antibodies to virus hepatitis C. 
 
The results of all tests must be negative. Additionally, an individual who is licensed to 
participate as a contestant must present documentary evidence, upon request by SAC, that 
they have tested negative for these pathogens within 30 days prior to participating in a 
contest. 
 
Background:   
 
SAC advises that this bill is needed to bring the Commission’s bloodwork regulations in 
line with industry standards observed by other athletic commissions across the  
United States. Under current law, bloodwork required to be eligible to participate in SAC 
events is only valid for 30 days, which is far shorter than the neighboring states; for 
comparison, Pennsylvania and Virginia currently allow 180 days. 
 
Fighters not used to such a timeframe have several times been forced to pull out of fights 
due to a lack of valid bloodwork. Extending the timeframe to 90 days reduces the financial 
burden on promoters and creates a larger pool of eligible replacement fighters without 
having to incur additional fees for expedited testing. Lower production costs create 
opportunities for more events to be held throughout the year, which in turn, helps increase 
revenue generated by the Commission. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 32 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 236/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Athletic Commission - Blood Testing of Contestants - Timing  
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 236 
 
PREPARED BY: Johnston Brown  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Extending the blood work validity period from 30 to 90 days would ease the burden on promoters by reducing 
the frequency and cost of testing for replacement fighters. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3