START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 208

D1, N1 6lr1131
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegate Griffith
Requested: October 8, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Courts – Evidence – Proof of Ownership of Real Property

3 FOR the purpose of establishing that certain documentation relating to real property may
4 be used to establish a rebuttable presumption of ownership of the property in certain
5 court proceedings; and generally relating to evidence of the ownership of real
6 property in court proceedings.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
9 Section 10–926
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Real Property
14 Section 3–101(a) and (b)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

20 10–926.

21 (A) THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION IS TO ENABLE A NEW OWNER OF REAL
22 PROPERTY TO ENGAGE IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS TO PROTECT THE PROPERTY
23 DURING THE PROCESSING TIME REQUIRED FOR THE RECORDATION OF A DEED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0208*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 208

1 (B) (1) IN A PROCEEDING INVOLVING REAL PROPERTY, EVIDENCE THAT
2 A DEED HAS BEEN SUBMITTED FOR RECORDATION TO THE CLERK OF THE CIRCUIT
3 COURT OF THE COUNTY WHERE THE REAL PROPERTY IS LOCATED, OR OTHER
4 DOCUMENTS REQUIRED BY LAW FOR THE SALE OF REAL PROPERTY OR TO SECURE A
5 MORTGAGE, MAY BE USED TO ESTABLISH A REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION OF
6 OWNERSHIP OF THE PROPERTY.

7 (2) EVIDENCE PRODUCED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
8 SUBSECTION MAY INCLUDE:

9 (I) A CERTIFIED COPY OF THE COMPLETED INTAKE SHEET
10 REQUIRED FOR RECORDATION UNDER § 3–104 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE;
11 OR

12 (II) A HUD–1 SETTLEMENT STATEMENT OR CLOSING
13 DISCLOSURE REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL REAL ESTATE SETTLEMENT
14 PROCEDURES ACT.

15 (C) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND MAY ADOPT RULES AND FORMS
16 TO IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

17 Article – Real Property

18 3–101.

19 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no estate of inheritance or
20 freehold, declaration or limitation of use, estate above seven years, or deed may pass or
21 take effect unless the deed granting it is executed and recorded.

22 (b) Subsection (a) of this section does not limit any other method of transferring
23 or creating an estate, declaration, or limitation which is permitted by the law of the State
24 except to the extent required by law.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
26 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2