START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 211 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 211 
(Delegate Nawrocki) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore County – Property Tax Credit – Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 34 
 
 
This bill authorizes Baltimore County to grant, by law, a 100% property tax credit for real 
property owned by the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 34, located in Middle River, 
Maryland. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County property tax revenues may decrease by approximately 
$9,600 annually beginning in FY 2027, to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Tax credit programs mandated by law may be applicable only to specific 
counties or municipalities. These credits can be found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the  
Tax – Property Article. In addition to statewide optional tax credits, some optional credits 
are applicable only to a specified county or municipality within a specified county. These 
county specific optional credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax – Property Article. 
Exhibit 1 shows the mandatory and optional property tax credits in Baltimore County. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 211/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Baltimore County Property Tax Credits 
 
9-305 
Optional Tax Credits 
(b)(1) 
Twin River Protective and Improvement Association 
(b)(2) 
Bowley’s Quarters Improvement Association 
(b)(3) 
Oliver Beach Improvement Association 
(b)(4) 
Baltimore County Game and Fish Association 
(b)(5) 
Eastfield Civic Association 
(b)(6) 
Rockaway Beach Improvement Association 
(b)(7) 
Fire Museum of Maryland 
(b)(8) 
Carney Rod and Gun Club 
(b)(9) 
Real property improvements that promote business redevelopment 
(b)(10) 
Condominium units where an association provides services that would 
otherwise be county’s responsibility 
(b)(11) 
Dwellings where a homeowners association provides services that would 
otherwise be county’s responsibility 
(b)(12) 
Rosa Ponselle Charitable Foundation; Villa Pace 
(b)(13) 
Agricultural land in agricultural preservation district 
(b)(14) 
Friends of the Oliver House 
(b)(15) 
Bird River Beach Community Association 
(b)(16) 
Harewood Park Community League 
(b)(17) 
Real property owned by NPO, civic league, or recreational or athletic 
association 
(b)(18) 
Personal property owned by Genesee Valley Outdoor Learning Center 
(b)(19) 
Maryland State Game and Fish Protective Association 
(b)(20) 
Personal property owned by Leadership through Athletics 
(b)(21) 
Bowerman-Loreley Beach Community Association 
(b)(22) 
Civic League of Inverness 
(b)(23) 
Rosewald Beach Civic League 
(d) 
Gunpowder Valley Conservancy 
(e) 
Homes near Eastern Sanitary Landfill Solid Waste Management Facility 
(contingent on environmental surcharges) 
 
 
9-305 
Mandatory Tax Credits 
(a)(1) 
Harford Park Improvement Association 
(a)(2) 
Lynch Point Improvement Association 
(a)(3) 
Chestnut Ridge Improvement Association 
(a)(4) 
Relay Improvement Association 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 211/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 34 is located at 
730 Wampler Road in Middle River, Maryland. The property has a fiscal 2027 assessment 
of $868,200. As a result of the proposed property tax credit under the bill, 
Baltimore County property tax revenues may decrease by approximately $9,600 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027. This estimate is based on a county property tax rate of 
$1.10 per $100 of assessment. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Baltimore County 
 
Baltimore County is projected to collect approximately $1.3 billion in property tax 
revenues in fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the 
report is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 30 (Senator West) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
State 
Department 
of 
Assessments 
and 
Taxation;  
Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3