START OF PAGE 1
  HB 279 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 279 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Health 
 
 
Correctional Services - Medication Review Committee - Administration of 
Psychotropic Medication to an Incarcerated Individual 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes a policy for the administration of psychotropic 
medication to an incarcerated individual in a licensed mental health infirmary within a 
State correctional facility who refuses the medication. The policy parallels current law 
provisions governing the administration of psychiatric medication in State mental health 
facilities. The bill (1) specifies when psychotropic medication may be administered; 
(2) provides for the composition, procedures, and responsibilities of a medical review 
committee that determines whether to administer psychotropic medication on a 
nonemergency basis; (3) outlines the rights of an incarcerated individual in relation to 
committee meetings and decisions, including a right to an administrative hearing 
(conducted by the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH)) and an appeal to the  
circuit court; and (4) requires a treating practitioner, when administration of psychotropic 
medication is ordered, to document the benefits and side effects of the medication on a 
specified interval. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Facilities (DPSCS) can 
implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. OAH general fund expenditures may 
increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. The bill is not anticipated to 
significantly affect the finances of the Judiciary. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances. Any increase 
in workload for the circuit courts is not anticipated to be significant.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 279/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  DPSCS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Committee” means a medication review committee established in accordance with the bill 
that convenes to determine whether to approve the administration of psychotropic 
medication on a nonemergency basis to an incarcerated individual who refuses to accept 
psychotropic medication as prescribed. 
 
“Lay advisor” means an individual who is knowledgeable about mental health practice and 
can assist incarcerated individuals with understanding the process outlined in the bill. 
 
Involuntary Administration of Psychotropic Medication 
 
In an emergency, psychotropic medication can be administered to an incarcerated 
individual who refuses the medication on the order of a practitioner when the incarcerated 
individual presents an imminent danger to the life or safety of self or others. 
 
In a nonemergency, psychotropic medication can be administered to an incarcerated 
individual who refuses the medication if the treating practitioner has recommended the 
involuntary administration because:   
 
 
the incarcerated individual has a mental disorder and is unable to function in general 
population within a correctional facility and requires inpatient care in a licensed 
mental health infirmary within DPSCS; 
 
the incarcerated individual presents a danger to the life and safety of self or others; 
 
the incarcerated individual is unable or unwilling to give informed consent to the 
administration of psychotropic medication;  
 
there are no less restrictive treatment interventions, including encouraging voluntary 
medication compliance, consistent with the welfare and safety of the individual; 
 
the use of psychotropic medication is clinically indicated as the most appropriate 
treatment for the incarcerated individual’s condition according to current practice 
for restoring or preventing further deterioration of the incarcerated individual’s 
mental or physical health; and  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 279/ Page 3 
 
a committee has determined that psychotropic medication should be administered 
over the objection of the incarcerated individual. 
 
Medical Review Committee 
 
Composition:  A medical review committee must comprise the chief psychiatrist for the 
region where the licensed mental health infirmary is located, another psychiatrist, and a 
mental health professional who is not a physician. An individual who is directly responsible 
for implementing the incarcerated individual’s treatment plan may not serve as a committee 
member. The Director of Mental Health (or their designee) must assign an impartial lay 
advisor to assist the incarcerated individual with the process set forth in the bill. 
 
Required Notice and Rights of the Incarcerated Individual:  At least 10 business days 
before convening the committee, the Director of Mental Health (or their designee) must 
give the incarcerated individual written notice of (1) the date, time, and location of the 
scheduled committee meeting; (2) the purpose of the committee; and (3) a complete 
description of the following rights. In connection with the convening of a committee, an 
incarcerated individual has the right to:   
 
 
attend the committee meeting (but not committee deliberations); 
 
present information, including witnesses; 
 
ask questions of any person presenting information to the committee; 
 
request assistance from a lay advisor; and 
 
be informed of their own diagnosis, the identity of the assigned lay advisor, and the 
clinical need for the psychotropic medication (including potential side effects and 
material risks and benefits of taking or refusing the medication). 
 
The chair of a committee may postpone or continue the committee for good cause for up 
to seven days and take appropriate measures necessary to conduct the committee in an 
orderly fashion. 
 
Report from Treating Psychiatric Provider:  No less than 72 hours prior to a committee 
meeting, the treating psychiatric provider must distribute to the committee a detailed report 
of the incarcerated individual’s medical record, including:   
 
 
the basis for the request to administer psychotropic medication on a nonemergency 
basis;  
 
the incarcerated individual’s diagnosis, behaviors observed, and current mental 
status;  
 
a description of daily functioning;  
 
recommended psychotropic medication;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 279/ Page 4 
 
methods used to encourage voluntary medication adherence;  
 
voluntary and involuntary medication history; and 
 
a description of the less intrusive treatment alternatives considered or attempted. 
 
Before determining whether to approve the administration of psychotropic medication, the 
committee must review the treating psychiatric provider’s report and meet to receive 
information and clinically assess the incarcerated individual’s need for medication by:   
 
 
consulting with the incarcerated individual about their reason for refusing the 
psychotropic medication prescribed and their willingness to accept alternative 
treatment, including other medication; 
 
consulting with the treating clinicians about the incarcerated individual’s current 
treatment plan and alternative modes of treatment that have been considered; 
 
receiving information presented by the incarcerated individual and others 
participating in the committee;  
 
providing the incarcerated individual with the opportunity to ask questions, as 
specified; and 
 
reviewing the consequences of both requiring the administration of psychotropic 
medication and the continued refusal of the medication.  
 
Basis for Approval of Psychotropic Medication:  The committee may approve the 
administration of psychotropic medication and may recommend and approve alternative 
medication if it determines that:   
 
 
the medication is prescribed by a psychiatric provider to treat the incarcerated 
individual’s mental disorder; 
 
the administration of psychotropic medication represents a reasonable exercise of 
professional judgment; and 
 
without the medication, the incarcerated individual is at substantial risk of continued 
self-harm and dangerous behaviors because the individual will (1) remain seriously 
mentally ill with no significant relief of the psychiatric symptoms that cause the 
incarcerated individual to be a danger to self or others while in the licensed mental 
health infirmary or would cause the incarcerated individual to be a danger to self or 
others if discharged or (2) relapse into a condition in which the incarcerated 
individual is unable to provide for the individual’s essential human needs of health 
and safety. 
 
Committee Decision:  The committee must base its decision on its clinical assessment of 
the information contained in the incarcerated individual’s record and information presented 
to the committee. The committee must meet privately to render a decision and document 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 279/ Page 5 
its consideration of the issues and the basis for its decision. The committee must provide a 
written decision to the incarcerated individual, the lay advisor, and the individual’s 
treatment team. 
 
If the committee approves the administration of psychotropic medication, the decision must 
specify (1) the medication approved, including its dosage and frequency range; (2) the 
duration of the approval (which may not exceed 90 days); and (3) the reason that alternative 
treatments were rejected by the committee. If the committee approves the administration 
of psychotropic medication, the decision must also contain notice of the right to request an 
administrative hearing and appeal. The lay advisor must promptly advise the incarcerated 
individual of (1) their right to request an administrative hearing and appeal and (2) of the 
provision for renewal of an approval. 
 
An initial committee decision to authorize the administration of medication must be stayed 
for 72 hours. If a request for hearing is filed, the stay must remain in effect until an 
administrative decision is issued. 
 
Right to Administrative Hearing and Appeal of Committee Decisions 
 
An incarcerated individual may request an administrative hearing to appeal the 
committee’s decision within 72 hours of receiving the committee decision. Within 24 hours 
of receiving the request, the Director of Mental Health (or their designee) must forward the 
request to OAH, which must conduct a hearing and issue a decision within 10 calendar 
days of the committee’s decision. The administrative hearing may be postponed by 
agreement of the parties or for good cause shown.  
 
An administrative law judge (ALJ) must conduct a de novo hearing to determine whether 
the standards and procedures required by the bill have been met. At the hearing, the 
individual representing the facility (1) may introduce the decision of the committee as 
evidence and (2) must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the standards and 
procedures under the bill have been met. The ALJ must state on the record the findings of 
fact and conclusions of law. The determination of the ALJ is a final decision for the purpose 
of judicial review of a final decision under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). 
 
Within 14 calendar days from the ALJ’s decision, the individual or facility may appeal the 
decision to the circuit court on the record from the hearing. The scope of review must be 
as a contested case under APA. Review must be on the audio tape and does not need a 
transcription, unless either party to the appeal requests it. A request for transcription must 
be made at the time the appeal is filed. OAH must prepare the transcription before the 
appeal hearing, and the party that requested the transcription must bear the cost. The 
circuit court must hear and issue a decision on an appeal within 7 calendar days from the 
date it was filed. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 279/ Page 6 
Documentation of Benefits and Side Effects 
 
When administration of psychotropic medication is ordered, the treating practitioner must 
document any known benefits of taking the medication to the incarcerated individual and 
side effects of the medication that affect the incarcerated individual at least every 15 days.  
 
Renewals of Administration of Medication 
 
Before an approval period expires, if the incarcerated individual continues to refuse 
psychotropic medication, a committee may be convened to evaluate a renewal. If a 
committee approves the renewal, the administration of medication does not need to be 
interrupted when the incarcerated individual requests administrative review of the renewal.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Involuntary Administration of Psychiatric Medications in a Mental Health Facility 
 
Under § 10‑708 of the Health‑General Article, psychiatric medication prescribed for the 
treatment of a mental disorder may not be administered to an individual in a mental health 
facility who refuses the medication except (1) in an emergency, on the order of a physician 
where the individual presents a danger to the life or safety of the individual or others or 
(2) in a nonemergency, when the individual is hospitalized involuntarily or committed for 
treatment by order of a court and the medication is approved by a clinical review panel.  
 
A clinical review panel consists of (1) the clinical director of the psychiatric unit, if the 
clinical director is a physician, or a physician designated by the clinical director; (2) a 
psychiatrist; and (3) a mental health professional, other than a physician. A person who is 
directly responsible for implementing the individual’s treatment plan may not be part of 
the panel.  
 
Clinical Review Panel Process 
 
The chief executive officer of the facility (or their designee) must give the individual and 
the lay advisor written notice containing specified information at least 24 hours prior to 
convening a panel. The individual may attend the panel meeting (but not panel 
deliberations) and has specified rights at the panel meeting, including presenting 
information and witnesses; asking questions of presenters to the panel; and requesting 
assistance from a lay advisor (an individual at a facility who is knowledgeable about mental 
health practice and who assists individuals with rights complaints).  
 
Prior to determining whether to approve the administration of medication, the panel must 
(1) review the individual’s clinical record; (2) assist the individual and the treating 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 279/ Page 7 
physician to arrive at a mutually agreeable treatment plan; and (3) meet for the purpose of 
receiving information and clinically assessing the individual’s need for medication by 
consulting with the individual and facility personnel, receiving information presented by 
the individual and other persons participating in the panel, providing the individual with 
an opportunity to ask questions of anyone presenting information to the panel, and 
reviewing the potential consequences of requiring the administration of medication and of 
withholding the medication from the individual.  
 
The panel may approve the administration of medication or medications and may 
recommend and approve alternative medications if the panel determines that:   
 
 
the medication is prescribed by a psychiatrist for the purpose of treating the 
individual’s mental disorder;  
 
the administration of medication represents a reasonable exercise of professional 
judgment; and  
 
without the medication, the individual is at substantial risk of continued 
hospitalization because the individual will (1) remain seriously mentally ill with no 
significant relief of the mental illness symptoms that caused the individual to be a 
danger to the individual or others while in the hospital, resulted in the individual 
being committed to a hospital, or would cause the individual to be a danger to the 
individual or others if released from the hospital; (2) remain seriously mentally ill 
for a significantly longer period of time with the mental illness symptoms described 
above; or (3) relapse into a condition in which the individual is unable to provide 
for the individual’s essential human needs of health or safety. 
 
A panel may not approve the administration of medication where alternative treatments are 
available and are acceptable to both the individual and the facility personnel who are 
directly responsible for implementing the individual’s treatment plan. 
 
A panel must document its consideration of the issues and the basis for its decision on the 
administration of medication(s) and must provide a written decision on the administration 
of medication(s). The decision must be provided to the individual, the lay advisor, and the 
individual’s treatment team for inclusion in the individual’s medical record. 
 
If a panel approves the administration of medication(s), the decision must contain specified 
information, including a list of the approved medication(s), dosage information, and the 
duration of the panel’s approval of treatment, which cannot exceed 90 days. 
 
Appeals of Clinical Review Panel Decisions 
 
An individual may request an administrative hearing to appeal the panel’s decision by filing 
a request for hearing with the chief executive officer of the facility (or their designee) 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 279/ Page 8 
within 48 hours of receipt of the decision of the panel. An individual has a right to legal 
representation at the hearing. Hearings are conducted before OAH, and an initial panel 
decision authorizing the administration of medication must be stayed for 48 hours or until 
the issuance of OAH’s decision if the individual requested a hearing. 
 
OAH must conduct a hearing and issue a decision within 7 calendar days of the decision 
by the panel, but the hearing may be postponed by agreement of the parties or for good 
cause shown. Within 14 calendar days from the decision of the ALJ, the individual or the 
facility may appeal the decision, and the appeal must be to the circuit court on the record 
from the hearing conducted by OAH. The scope of review in the circuit court must be as a 
contested case under APA. The circuit court must hear and issue a decision on an appeal 
within 7 calendar days from the date the appeal was filed. 
 
Renewals of Administration of Medications 
 
Prior to expiration of an approval period and if the individual continues to refuse 
medication, a panel may be convened to decide whether renewal is warranted. If a clinical 
review panel approves the renewal of the administration of medication or medications, the 
administration of medication(s) need not be interrupted if the individual appeals the 
renewal of approval. When medication is ordered pursuant to the approval of a panel, and 
at a minimum of every 15 days, the treating physician must document any known benefits 
and side effects to the individual.  
 
Background:  The bill establishes a process for administration of psychotropic medication 
on a nonemergent basis to individuals incarcerated in a State correctional facility that refuse 
such medication. The process is parallel to that under current law regarding the 
administration of psychiatric medication in State mental health facilities. Currently, 
DPSCS only administers psychotropic medication to incarcerated individuals on an 
emergency basis, which reduces dangerous behavior only for a short period. DPSCS 
advises that long-term use of involuntary medication has been successfully used in 
correctional facilities and psychiatric hospitals for many years to provide proper medical 
and mental health care to individuals with incurable mental illness. 
 
Approximately 12% of incarcerated individuals in DPSCS facilities have a serious mental 
illness and refuse medication. This negatively impacts the individuals themselves, as well 
as those around them and the staff who care for them. Because of their mental illness, those 
individuals often are unable to make rational decisions or follow instructions of personnel, 
leading to use of force against them. Additionally, DPSCS advises that those individuals 
often have comorbid medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, or obesity that are 
untreated, as they do not understand that they have medical conditions. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 279/ Page 9 
Many of these individuals are released to the community, but do not receive sufficient 
re‑entry planning due to their instability. DPSCS advises that recidivism rates are higher 
for those released without complete re-entry plans, and released individuals often end up 
homeless and lack proper mental and medical health care. DPSCS notes that the bill is 
intended to allow the department to administer psychotropic medication to an incarcerated 
individual to improve their level of functioning and overall health. 
 
State Expenditures:  OAH advises that they currently conduct clinical review panel 
hearings at State mental health facilities on a weekly basis. The bill requires adding 
two DPSCS facilities to OAH’s hearing schedule – Patuxent Institution and 
Maryland Correctional Institution for Women – with up to 35 individuals between the 
two facilities potentially requiring hearings. As the number of these incarcerated 
individuals who may request a hearing is unknown, the exact number of additional hearings 
that OAH must conduct under the bill cannot be reliably estimated at this time.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2027 by an 
indeterminate amount to the extent OAH requires additional ALJs to conduct hearings for 
incarcerated individuals at DPSCS. For illustrative purposes only, should OAH require 
one additional ALJ, general fund expenditures increase by approximately $175,000 in 
fiscal 2027. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one full-time ALJ, and includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. Out-year 
expenditures associated with hiring one ALJ range from $154,100 in fiscal 2028 to 
$175,600 in fiscal 2031. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation was introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 779 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 196 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
  
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 279/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Correctional Services - Medication Review Committee - Administration of 
Psychotropic Medication to an Incarcerated Individual 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB279 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jason Davidson, Director, Government and Legislative Affairs 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
 X  WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
 BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 10