START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 205

E5, E2 6lr1473
(PRE–FILED)

By: Delegates Bouchat, Nkongolo, Schmidt, and Tomlinson
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Violent Criminals – Parole Limitation and Legislative Testimony Removal
3 (Sexual Offender Accountability and Victim Protection Act)

4 FOR the purpose of providing that an incarcerated individual who is serving a certain
5 sentence for a certain sexual crime may be considered for parole only one time after
6 becoming eligible; providing that if a victim, victim’s family, victims’ advocacy
7 organization, or victim’s representative objects to the granting of parole to a certain
8 individual, parole shall be denied permanently; requiring that a certain record of
9 legislative testimony of an individual who has been convicted of a certain crime of
10 violence be removed from the General Assembly’s website on request of the victim,
11 victim’s family, or victim’s representative; and generally relating to violent criminals
12 and victims’ rights.

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Correctional Services
15 Section 7–311
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Criminal Procedure
20 Section 11–106
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2025 Replacement Volume)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Correctional Services

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0205*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 205

1 7–311.

2 (A) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SERVING A SENTENCE OF LIFE
3 PLUS ANY NUMBER OF YEARS FOR A CONVICTION OF A SEXUAL CRIME UNDER TITLE
4 3, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR SEXUAL ABUSE OF A MINOR
5 UNDER § 3–602 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE MAY BE CONSIDERED FOR PAROLE
6 ONLY ONE TIME AFTER BECOMING ELIGIBLE AS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

7 (B) BEFORE AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION
8 (A) OF THIS SECTION IS CONSIDERED FOR PAROLE, THE COMMISSION SHALL MAKE
9 ALL REASONABLE EFFORTS TO LOCATE ALL VICTIMS OF THE CRIME AND THE
10 VICTIMS’ REPRESENTATIVES AND PROVIDE TO THE VICTIMS AND THE VICTIMS’
11 REPRESENTATIVES NOTIFICATION OF THE PAROLE CONSIDERATION.

12 (C) IF A VICTIM, VICTIM’S FAMILY, VICTIMS’ ADVOCACY GROUP, VICTIM’S
13 REPRESENTATIVE, OR THE COMMISSION OBJECTS TO THE GRANTING OF PAROLE TO
14 AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,
15 PAROLE SHALL BE DENIED PERMANENTLY.

16 Article – Criminal Procedure

17 11–106.

18 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “CRIME OF VIOLENCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
19 § 14–101 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

20 (B) IF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF A CRIME OF VIOLENCE
21 TESTIFIES BEFORE A COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, ALL WRITTEN AND
22 AUDIOVISUAL RECORD OF THE TESTIMONY SHALL BE REMOVED FROM THE
23 GENERAL ASSEMBLY’S WEBSITE ON REQUEST OF THE VICTIM, VICTIM’S FAMILY, OR
24 VICTIM’S REPRESENTATIVE.

25 (C) IN PLACE OF TESTIMONY THAT HAS BEEN REMOVED FROM THE
26 GENERAL ASSEMBLY’S WEBSITE UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
27 FOLLOWING NOTICE SHALL BE SUBSTITUTED:

28 “(NAME) PROVIDED LEGISLATIVE TESTIMONY ON (DATE). THIS TESTIMONY
29 HAS BEEN REMOVED TO PROTECT VICTIMS’ RIGHTS. IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
30 RECEIVE A COPY OF THIS TESTIMONY, PLEASE CONTACT THE MANAGER OF THE
31 COMMITTEE BY E–MAIL AT (E–MAIL ADDRESS) OR BY STANDARD MAIL AT (ADDRESS).

32 PLEASE ALLOW A MINIMUM OF 30 DAYS AND UP TO 6 MONTHS FOR REVIEW
33 AND APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF YOUR REQUEST. PLEASE BE AWARE THAT YOU MAY
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 205 3

1 BE QUESTIONED REGARDING YOUR IDENTITY AND THE REASON FOR YOUR REQUEST.
2 A MANAGER OF THE COMMITTEE WILL CONSULT WITH THE VICTIM OR THE VICTIM’S
3 REPRESENTATIVE BEFORE DETERMINING WHETHER TO APPROVE OR DENY YOUR
4 REQUEST. PLEASE NOTE THAT MOST, IF NOT ALL, REQUESTS FOR A COPY OF THE
5 TESTIMONY FROM ANYONE OTHER THAN A CURRENT VOTING MEMBER OF THE
6 GENERAL ASSEMBLY WILL BE DENIED.”.

7 (D) A COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY SHALL FOLLOW THE
8 PROCEDURE DESCRIBED IN THE NOTICE SET FORTH IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
9 SECTION.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
11 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3