START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 262 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 262 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information 
Technology) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Government – Council for Open Data – Membership and Responsibilities 
 
 
This departmental bill modifies the name, membership, and responsibilities of the Council 
on Open Data. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The name of the Council on Open data is changed to the Council for Open 
Data. The number of members on the council is reduced from 37 to 11. The council is 
comprised of the State Chief Data Officer, who must serve as chair of the council, and 
specified government and nongovernment representatives. 
 
The responsibilities of the council are expanded to include (1) advising on data initiatives 
and priorities and (2) identifying and exploring the means by which partnerships may be 
developed and strengthened to connect Maryland data with communities and social service 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 262/ Page 2 
organizations. Additionally, the definition of “data” that must be considered by the council 
is modified to mean all statistical or factual information that meets specified requirements 
instead of only the final version of any such information. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 69 of 2014 established the Council on Open Data and established 
that it is the policy of the State that open data be machine readable and released to the 
public in ways that make the data easy to find, accessible, and usable, including through 
the use of open data portals. The council is chaired by the Secretary of Information 
Technology and must be staffed by DoIT, the Governor’s Office of Performance 
Improvement, and any other staff designated by the Governor. The council must meet at 
least twice per year and may establish workgroups as necessary to complete its duties. The 
council must promote the aforementioned State policy on open data by:   
 
 
providing guidance and policy recommendations related to open data, as specified;  
 
coordinating the appropriate staff at each State entity for the development, 
maintenance, and use of open data and open data portals;  
 
identifying specified operational and investment costs related to open data and 
advising the Governor and General Assembly on budget matters related to open 
data; 
 
inviting and encouraging local entities and the legislative and judicial branches to 
(1) use open data portals established by State entities; (2) create their own open data 
portals; and (3) adopt policies consistent with the State policy on open data; 
 
establishing a plan for providing all open data to the public at no cost; 
 
advocating for sound records management and data preservation practices; and 
 
making specified recommendations concerning the purchase of new data processing 
devices, systems, and software by the State. 
 
By January 10 of each year, the council must report to the Governor and General Assembly 
on its activities from the previous year and any recommendations for legislation.  
 
Background:  DoIT advises that the bill modernizes the council’s membership and 
responsibilities to better align with DoIT’s statewide data governance framework. 
Specifically, the bill ensures that the State Chief Data Officer is represented on the council, 
ensures the appropriate local government representatives and external stakeholders are 
represented on the council, and allows the council to focus on technical open data issues, 
instead of only broader priorities and issues. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 262/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 200 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information Technology) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 262/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Government - Council for Open Data - Membership and 
Responsibilities 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB262 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sara Elalamy - DoIT Legislative Director  
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4