START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 294 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 294 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Personal Property Tax - Exemptions for Low Assessment - Alteration 
 
   
This departmental bill repeals prohibitions on the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) from collecting personal property information or requiring a person or 
individual to submit a personal property tax return if the person or individual is exempt 
from personal property valuation and taxation due to the fact that the person or individual 
has personal property valued at less than $20,000. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and 
applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. SDAT can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources.   
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local personal property tax revenues to the 
extent that more businesses are required to pay personal property taxes due to the enhanced 
tax compliance capabilities at SDAT provided under the bill.  
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.   
 
 
Analysis 
Current Law:    
 
Personal Property Taxation 
 
In Maryland, there is a tax on business‑owned personal property that is imposed and 
collected by local governments. Personal property generally includes business property 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 294/ Page 2 
including furniture, fixtures, office and industrial equipment, machinery, tools, supplies, 
inventory, and any other property not classified as real property. To provide for uniform 
assessments, SDAT is responsible for assessing all personal property. Each county or 
municipal government is responsible for issuing the tax bills and collecting the tax. The 
tax year begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. The personal property tax has been a local 
tax exclusively since 1984 when the State tax rate on personal property was set at zero. 
 
Personal Property Assessment Process 
 
At the beginning of each calendar year, SDAT notifies business entities on record that a 
personal property tax return must be filed by April 15. This tax return must include personal 
property located in Maryland as of January 1, the date of finality. The date of finality is the 
date used to determine ownership, location, value, and liability for tax purposes. The 
assessment is calculated using the cost less depreciation method. Once the assessment is 
completed, it is certified to the county or municipality in Maryland. SDAT shares the 
certifications for the current assessment year by July 1, when the jurisdictions can start 
billing. If a business entity wants to appeal the assessment, they have 45 days from the date 
of notice to appeal. All tax returns are currently filed electronically. An annual report fee 
is required to be paid to SDAT with the personal property tax return. The annual report fee 
is for the privilege of maintaining the legal entity’s existence in the State. 
 
Exemptions to Filing Personal Property Tax Return 
 
If all of a person’s personal property statewide had a total original cost of less than $20,000, 
the personal property is exempt from personal property valuation and taxation. Personal 
property owned by an individual and is used in connection with a business, occupation, or 
profession that is located at the individual’s principal residence and the sum total of the 
personal property, excluding specified vehicles, had a total original cost of less than 
$20,000 is exempt from personal property valuation and taxation. 
 
SDAT is prohibited from collecting personal property information or requiring the person 
or individual to submit a personal property tax return if the person or individual has 
personal property valued at less than $20,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill provides SDAT the means to verify eligibility for a personal 
property tax exemption and to verify accuracy for audit purposes. Absent this authority, as 
under current law, the department is unable to confirm whether or not business entities are 
entitled to the exemption because personal property assessment values can change from 
year to year. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that the bill results in more business entities being 
subject to personal property taxes, local government revenues may increase by a minimal 
amount. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 294/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 296 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 137 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 294/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Personal Property Tax - Exemptions for Low Assessment - 
Alteration 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 294 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Joshua Greenberg 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
To the extent that a business may receive a request for additional documentation from the 
Department, that business would be required to submit that documentation for review. In 
cases where it appears a business has erroneously reported less than $20,000, that 
business may be assessed at a higher value than initially reported and be subject to 
taxation on property at its actual value.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4