START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 265

G1, P1 6lr0230
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 91

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Secretary of State)
Requested: September 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Elections – Address Confidentiality Program – Designation of
3 Contact Person

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Elections to designate a contact person for
5 the Address Confidentiality Program; and generally relating to the State Board of
6 Elections and the Address Confidentiality Program.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – State Government
9 Section 7–303
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – State Government
14 Section 7–309
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – State Government

20 7–303.

21 The Secretary of State shall establish and administer an Address Confidentiality
22 Program for survivors of threatened, attempted, or actual domestic violence, sexual assault,
23 stalking, harassment, or human trafficking.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0265*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 265

1 7–309.

2 (a) (1) Each local board of elections shall use a Program participant’s actual
3 address for all election–related purposes, INCLUDING ABSENTEE BALLOTS.

4 (2) A Program participant may not use the substitute address designated
5 by the Secretary of State as the Program participant’s address for voter registration
6 purposes.

7 (b) A local board of elections may not make a Program participant’s address
8 contained in voter registration records available for public inspection or copying except:

9 (1) on request by a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes;
10 and

11 (2) as directed by a court order to disclose the address.

12 (C) (1) THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL DESIGNATE A CONTACT
13 PERSON FOR THE PROGRAM.

14 (2) THE CONTACT PERSON SHALL ACT AS CONTACT FOR INQUIRIES
15 ABOUT THE PROGRAM FROM LOCAL BOARDS OF ELECTIONS AND PROGRAM
16 PARTICIPANTS ON MATTERS RELATED TO IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS SECTION.

17 (D) THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY
18 OUT THIS SECTION.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2