START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 276

J1 6lr0224
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 24

By: Chair, Health Committee (By Request – Departmental – Maryland Institute
for Emergency Medical Services Systems)
Requested: October 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Emergency Medical Services Board – Public Access Automated External
3 Defibrillator Program – Revisions

4 FOR the purpose of altering the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program,
5 including by establishing requirements regarding an automated external
6 defibrillator (AED) coordinator, repealing certain provisions of law regarding
7 regional council AED committees, and exempting certain law enforcement agencies
8 from being required to obtain a certificate for an AED deployed in a patrol vehicle of
9 the law enforcement agency; and generally relating to the Public Access Automated
10 External Defibrillator Program.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Education
13 Section 13–517
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Health – General
18 Section 21–330.3(c)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Public Safety
23 Section 2–101(a) and (g)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0276*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 276

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 13–517.

5 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (2) “AED COORDINATOR” MEANS THE INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED BY A
7 REGISTERED ENTITY TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
8 SECTION.

9 [(2)] (3) “Automated external defibrillator (AED)” means a medical heart
10 monitor and defibrillator device that:

11 (i) Is cleared for market by the [federal] U.S. Food and Drug
12 Administration;

13 (ii) Recognizes the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or
14 rapid ventricular tachycardia;

15 (iii) Determines, without intervention by an operator, whether
16 defibrillation should be performed;

17 (iv) On determining that defibrillation should be performed,
18 automatically charges; and

19 (v) 1. Requires operator intervention to deliver the electrical
20 impulse; or

21 2. Automatically continues with delivery of electrical
22 impulse.

23 [(3)] (4) “Certificate” means a certificate issued by the EMS Board to a
24 registered [facility] ENTITY.

25 [(4) (i)] (5) [“Facility”] “ENTITY” means AN ORGANIZATION, A
26 BUSINESS, AN ASSOCIATION, an agency, [an association,] a corporation, a firm, OR a
27 partnership[, or any other entity] IN THE STATE.

28 [(ii) “Facility” does not include a grocery store or restaurant that is
29 subject to § 21–330.3 of the Health – General Article.]

30 [(5)] (6) “Jurisdictional emergency medical services operational program”
31 means the institution, agency, corporation, or other entity that has been approved by the
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 276 3

1 EMS Board to provide oversight of emergency medical services for each of the local
2 government and State and federal emergency medical services programs.

3 (7) “LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
4 2–101 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

5 [(6)] (8) “Program” means the Public Access Automated External
6 Defibrillator Program.

7 [(7) “Regional administrator” means the individual employed by the
8 Institute as regional administrator in each EMS region.

9 (8) “Regional council” means an EMS advisory body as created by the Code
10 of Maryland Regulations 30.05.

11 (9) “Regional council AED committee” means a committee appointed by the
12 regional council consisting of:

13 (i) The regional medical director;

14 (ii) The regional administrator; and

15 (iii) Three or more individuals with knowledge of and expertise in
16 AEDs.]

17 [(10)] (9) “Registered [facility”] ENTITY” means an [organization, a
18 business association, an agency, or any other] entity that meets the requirements of the
19 EMS Board for registering with the Program.

20 (b) (1) There is a Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program.

21 (2) The purpose of the Program is to:

22 (i) Coordinate an effective statewide public access defibrillation
23 program; and

24 (ii) Implement the initiative to co–locate naloxone with automated
25 external defibrillators placed in public buildings, as required under § 13–518 of this
26 subtitle.

27 (3) The Program shall be administered by the EMS Board.

28 (c) The EMS Board may:

29 (1) Adopt regulations for the administration of the Program;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 276

1 (2) Issue and renew certificates to [facilities] ENTITIES that meet the
2 requirements of this section;

3 (3) Deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the certificate of a registered
4 [facility] ENTITY for failure to meet the requirements of this section;

5 (4) Approve educational and training programs required under this section
6 that:

7 (i) Are conducted by any private or public entity; AND

8 (ii) [Include training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
9 automated external defibrillation; and

10 (iii)] May include courses from nationally recognized [entities]
11 ORGANIZATIONS such as the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, and
12 the National Safety Council; AND

13 [(5) Approve the protocol for the use of an AED; and]

14 [(6)] (5) Delegate to the Institute any portion of its authority under this
15 section.

16 (d) (1) [Each facility] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
17 SUBSECTION, EACH ENTITY that desires to make automated external defibrillation
18 available shall possess a valid certificate from the EMS Board.

19 (2) This subsection does not apply to:

20 (i) A jurisdictional emergency medical services operational
21 program;

22 (ii) A licensed commercial ambulance service;

23 (iii) A health care facility as defined in § 19–114 of the
24 Health – General Article; or

25 (iv) A place of business for health care practitioners who are licensed
26 as dentists under Title 4 of the Health Occupations Article or as physicians under Title 14
27 of the Health Occupations Article and are authorized to use an AED in accordance with
28 that license.

29 (3) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN
30 A CERTIFICATE FOR AN AED DEPLOYED IN A PATROL VEHICLE OF THE LAW
31 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 276 5

1 (e) To qualify for AND RETAIN a certificate [a facility] AN ENTITY shall:

2 (1) [Comply with the written protocol approved by the EMS Board] HAVE
3 A WRITTEN PLAN for the use of an AED [which] THAT includes [notification of] A
4 REQUIREMENT THAT THE ENTITY NOTIFY the emergency medical services system
5 through the use of the 911 universal emergency access number as soon as possible on the
6 use of an AED;

7 (2) Have established [automated external defibrillator] AED
8 maintenance, placement, operation, AND reporting[, and quality improvement] procedures
9 as required by the EMS Board;

10 (3) [Maintain] REQUIRE THE AED COORDINATOR TO MAINTAIN THE
11 FUNCTIONALITY OF each AED and all related equipment and supplies in accordance with
12 the standards established by the device manufacturer and the [federal] U.S. Food and
13 Drug Administration;

14 [(4) Ensure that each individual who is expected to operate an AED for the
15 registered facility has successfully completed an educational training course and refresher
16 training as required by the EMS Board; and]

17 (4) REQUIRE THE AED COORDINATOR TO PROMOTE AWARENESS OF
18 THE LOCATION AND OPERATION OF THE AED AMONG POTENTIAL OR FORESEEABLE
19 AED OPERATORS IN CASE OF EMERGENCY; AND

20 (5) If the [facility] ENTITY is a public building, meet any requirements
21 established under § 13–518 of this subtitle relating to the co–location of naloxone with each
22 AED maintained [in] BY the [facility] ENTITY.

23 (f) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED IN THIS SECTION,
24 AN ENTITY OTHER THAN A GROCERY STORE OR RESTAURANT THAT IS SUBJECT TO §
25 21–330.3 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE SHALL ENSURE THAT THE AED
26 COORDINATOR HAS SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED AN EDUCATIONAL TRAINING
27 COURSE AND ANY REFRESHER TRAINING COURSES AS REQUIRED BY THE EMS
28 BOARD.

29 (G) A registered [facility] ENTITY shall report the use of an AED to the Institute
30 [for review by the regional council AED committee] USING THE FORM PROVIDED BY THE
31 INSTITUTE.

32 [(g)] (H) [A facility] AN ENTITY that desires to [establish] OBTAIN or renew a
33 certificate shall:

34 (1) Submit an application on the form that the EMS Board requires; and
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 276

1 (2) Meet the requirements under this section.

2 [(h)] (I) (1) The EMS Board shall issue a new or a renewed certificate to [a
3 facility] AN ENTITY that meets the requirements of this section.

4 (2) Each certificate shall include:

5 (i) The type of certificate;

6 (ii) The full name and address of the [facility] ENTITY;

7 (iii) A unique identification number; and

8 (iv) The dates of issuance and expiration of the certificate.

9 (3) A certificate is valid for 3 years.

10 [(i)] (J) The EMS Board may issue a cease and desist order or obtain injunctive
11 relief if [a facility] AN ENTITY makes automated external defibrillation available in
12 violation of this section.

13 [(j)] (K) (1) In addition to any other immunities available under statutory or
14 common law, a registered [facility] ENTITY is not civilly liable for any act or omission in
15 the provision of automated external defibrillation if the registered [facility] ENTITY:

16 (i) Has satisfied the requirements for making [automated external
17 defibrillation] AN AED available under this section; and

18 (ii) Possesses a valid certificate at the time of the act or omission.

19 [(2) In addition to any other immunities available under statutory or
20 common law, a member of the regional council AED committee is not civilly liable for any
21 act or omission in the provision of automated external defibrillation.]

22 [(3)] (2) In addition to any other immunities available under statutory or
23 common law, an individual is not civilly liable for any act or omission if:

24 (i) The individual is acting in good faith while rendering automated
25 external defibrillation to a person who is a victim or reasonably believed by the individual
26 to be a victim of a sudden cardiac arrest;

27 (ii) The assistance or aid is provided in a reasonably prudent
28 manner; and

29 (iii) The automated external defibrillation is provided without fee or
30 other compensation.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 276 7

1 [(4)] (3) The immunities in this subsection are not available if the conduct
2 of the registered [facility] ENTITY or an individual amounts to gross negligence, willful or
3 wanton misconduct, or intentionally tortious conduct.

4 [(5)] (4) This subsection does not affect, and may not be construed as
5 affecting, any immunities from civil or criminal liability or defenses established by any
6 other provision of the Code or by common law to which a registered [facility, a member of
7 the regional council AED committee,] ENTITY or an individual may be entitled.

8 [(k)] (L) (1) A registered [facility] ENTITY aggrieved by a decision of the
9 Institute acting under the delegated authority of the EMS Board under this section shall
10 be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the EMS Board.

11 (2) A registered [facility] ENTITY aggrieved by a decision of the EMS
12 Board under this section shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with
13 Title 10, Subtitle 2 of the State Government Article.

14 Article – Health – General

15 21–330.3.

16 (c) [Beginning January 1, 2025, each] EACH owner and operator of a grocery
17 store or restaurant shall:

18 (1) Place an automated external defibrillator in a prominent area,
19 accessible to employees and customers; and

20 [(2) Maintain the functionality of the automated external defibrillator.]

21 (2) COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PUBLIC ACCESS
22 AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR PROGRAM UNDER § 13–517 OF THE
23 EDUCATION ARTICLE.

24 Article – Public Safety

25 2–101.

26 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

27 (g) (1) “Law enforcement agency” means a law enforcement agency of a
28 department, county, or municipal corporation of the State.

29 (2) “Law enforcement agency” includes:

30 (i) sheriffs; and
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 276

1 (ii) similar agencies of other states and the United States.

2 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
3 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8