START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 233 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 233 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public School Construction) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Education - Public School Construction - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) repeals the requirement that the Interagency Commission on 
School Construction (IAC) approve projects that comprise 75% of the preliminary school 
construction allocation before December 31 of each year; (2) clarifies conditions under 
which the State may require reimbursement of debt service for school buildings; (3) alters 
conditions under which the State Superintendent must review and approve school 
construction projects; (4) clarifies that the IAC may adopt regulations for eligibility for 
State funding for school construction projects and systemic renovation projects; (5) alters 
various reporting requirements; (6) clarifies practices relating to the IAC’s Maintenance 
Effectiveness Report and Statewide Facilities Assessment (SFA); and (7) updates statutory 
terminology to be consistent with standard IAC usage. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is largely procedural in nature and therefore does not have a fiscal 
impact on the State. However, IAC advises that administrative changes in the bill may 
allow the agency to more efficiently use its available resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is largely procedural in nature and therefore does not have a direct 
fiscal impact on local governments. Nevertheless, the bill’s alterations to reporting 
requirements and funding approval timelines may have operational effects on local school 
systems, as discussed below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  IAC has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 233/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:          
 
Public School Construction Program Approvals Timeline 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that the IAC must, before December 31 of each year 
approve school construction projects that comprise 75% of the preliminary school 
construction allocation for the following year. Accordingly, the bill repeals an existing 
appeals process for the 75% round of approvals and requires IAC to establish an appeals 
process to allow local jurisdictions to request funding for projects that were not approved 
by the IAC as part of the annual 90% round of approvals. 
 
Reimbursement of Debt Service 
 
The bill clarifies that the State may require reimbursement of debt service from a county 
for a school that is no longer used for a purpose that is eligible for State funding for public 
school construction, instead of simply for school purposes.  
 
State Superintendent and IAC Project Review 
 
The bill makes clarifications to the actions of local boards of education (related to school 
construction) 
that 
require 
approval 
by 
the 
State 
Superintendent 
or 
the 
State Superintendent’s designee. Generally, actions subject to superintendent approval 
must relate to projects used for the education of students and relate to student-occupied 
spaces in a school building. Additionally, the bill replaces references to remodeling with 
the term addition or renovation as it relates to such approvals. The minimum value for a 
change order requiring Superintendent approval increases from $50,000 to $200,000. 
The bill also adds language specifying that county board requests for additions or 
renovations require approval by the State Superintendent or designee if the addition 
(1) costs more than $1.0 million, (2) will affect the plan configuration of student-occupied 
spaces, and (3) conforms to the bylaws, rules and regulations of the State Board of 
Education.  
 
Notwithstanding the superintendent review process, current law also requires major school 
construction projects be approved by IAC in accordance with a process outlined in 
Education Article §5-314. The bill clarifies that such processes apply only to construction 
and systemic renovation projects that (1) cost more than $1.0 million and have received 
State funding or for which a school system will be requesting State funding or (2) replace 
or change a heating, ventilation, or air-conditioning system.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 233/ Page 3 
Regulations 
 
The bill clarifies that the IAC may adopt regulatory requirements for eligibility for 
State funding for construction projects and systemic renovation projects. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill alters the dates IAC must submit a report on its Statewide Appropriations Account. 
Under the bill, IAC must submit reports one month earlier than under current law, and 
reports must represent the balance of the fund on the last day of the immediately 
preceding quarter, instead of the balance as of the reporting date. Under the bill, IAC must 
report to the Governor and General Assembly quarterly by February 28, May 31, 
August 31, and November 30. 
 
The bill combines two required reports on solar energy systems and alternative energy 
systems into one report and delays submission of that combined report from December 31 
to February 28 annually. The bill also specifies that the combined report must contain 
information from the immediately preceding calendar year. 
 
Statewide Facilities Assessment and Maintenance Effectiveness Assessment  
 
The bill distinguishes between the IAC’s annual SFA and Maintenance Effectiveness 
Assessment, by referring to both programs by name in statute. The bill likewise clarifies 
reporting dates by codifying the requirement that on or before November 1 each year, the 
IAC must report to the Governor and General Assembly on the results of the SFA. This 
change distinguishes the SFA reporting date from the annual October 1 annual reporting 
requirement for the maintenance effectiveness assessment.  
 
The bill further clarifies which required information must be incorporated into the 
Maintenance Facilities Assessment and which information pertains to the SFA. While the 
maintenance assessment must include a process to incorporate maintenance data for 
individual school buildings, the SFA must include a process for local school systems to 
report additional information that is relevant to the assessment, including a place in the 
Master Facility Asset Library System for the school system to (1) report each year to the 
IAC on deficiencies in a school building, even if an assessment of the school building was 
not completed the immediately preceding year; (2) identify spaces in a school building 
likely to have been painted with lead paint; and (3) report certification of the 
Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act plan for the space. The bill also specifies that 
the SFA must include data on temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide levels, and other items 
as specified as provided by local school systems.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 233/ Page 4 
Terminology 
 
The bill replaces the term “maximum State construction allocation” with  
“maximum State award” when referring to State funding for an individual school 
construction project (maintaining use of the term “construction allocation” when referring 
to the overall capital funding available for IAC to award). 
 
Background/Current Law:  For an overview of State support for public school 
construction, including an overview of the timeline for public school construction program 
approvals, please see the Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction. 
DLS notes that the December 31 allocation being repealed by the bill is the only allocation 
of three required in statute that is made prior to the beginning of the annual General 
Assembly session. 
 
Reimbursement of State Debt 
 
In general, the State requires counties to reimburse it for any outstanding debt service for 
schools that:   
 
 
were built at least in part using State debt;  
 
were initially constructed or substantially altered by additions, alterations, or 
renovations valued at more than $100,000 and completed after February 1971;  
 
are no longer used for school purposes;  
 
have had their titles transferred to the county government;  
 
are being used for local government purposes other than public education; and  
 
have outstanding debt that exceeds $5,000.  
 
Under specified circumstances, including that the school is no longer used for school 
purposes, counties do not need to reimburse the State for any outstanding debt service for 
schools initially constructed before February 1971.  
 
Project Review 
 
Subject to the bylaws, rules, and regulations of the State Board of Education, the 
State Superintendent of Schools or the superintendent’s designee must approve or 
disapprove each (1) proposal for the purchase or sale of any ground, school, or site 
building; (2) plan or specification for the remodeling of a school building if the remodeling 
costs more than $1.0 million; (3) plan or specification for the construction of a new school 
building; and (4) change order that costs more than $50,000 for the remodeling, restoration, 
or construction of a school building. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 233/ Page 5 
Additionally, with the approval of the State Superintendent of Schools or the 
superintendent’s designee, each local board of education may (1) buy or otherwise acquire 
land, school sites, or buildings and (2) rent, repair, improve, and build school buildings or 
approve contracts for doing so if the plans conform to the bylaws, rules, and regulations of 
the State Board of Education. 
 
Notwithstanding the State Superintendent of Schools review process outlined above, 
school construction projects are also subject to review by IAC and the Department of 
General Services (DGS) as outlined in Education Article § 5-314. For both major school 
construction projects and systemic renovation projects, DGS must review and IAC must 
approve design and construction documents. However, DGS, with the review and approval 
of IAC, must develop a certification process by which a local school system may be exempt 
from (1) IAC/DGS review of educational specifications, schematic designs, and design and 
construction documents and (2) IAC oversight of compliance with preventative 
maintenance schedules. Local school systems seeking certification must demonstrate that 
they have the capacity to complete the necessary reviews or compliance monitoring within 
the county. The certification must be for five years and renewable. DGS must work with 
local school systems to develop timelines for the submission of design and construction 
documents. IAC must allow all necessary documentation involved in the review and 
approval process to be submitted electronically.  
 
Change orders for major construction projects and systemic renovation projects may not 
be reviewed by DGS and are not subject to approval by IAC. The State may not withhold 
a portion of its funding allocation for change orders, but local school systems must maintain 
contingency funds to address unanticipated costs. 
 
Reporting requirements 
 
The IAC must report to the General Assembly and DLS on the balance in the 
Statewide Appropriations Account for the IAC as of the reporting date quarterly on 
March 30, June 30, September 30, and December 31 Additionally, statue currently 
specifies separate reporting requirements, each of which IAC must submit by December 31 
annually, on solar technologies and on alternative energy systems used in public school 
construction and major renovation projects in each jurisdiction. 
 
Statewide Facilities Assessment and Maintenance Effectiveness Assessment  
 
Chapter 14 of 2018, the 21st Century School Facilities Act, required IAC, in consultation 
with local school systems, to adopt educational facilities sufficiency standards for 
Maryland public schools by July 1, 2018. Chapter 14 also required IAC to complete an 
initial statewide facilities assessment using the sufficiency standards by July 1, 2019. Based 
on recommendations of the Workgroup on the Assessment and Funding of School 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 233/ Page 6 
Facilities, IAC was required to adopt regulations by May 1, 2020, that establish the use of 
facility assessment results in annual school construction funding decisions beginning no 
earlier than fiscal 2021. This date was subsequently delayed by Chapter 20 of 2020 (the 
Built to Learn Act), Chapter 32 of 2022, and most recently by Chapter 354 of 2024. Under 
Chapter 354, funds from the Nancy K Kopp Public Schools Facilities Fund must be used 
to address the facility needs of the highest priority schools identified by the SFA beginning 
in fiscal 2028. Under Chapter 354 and for fiscal 2027 only, the purpose of Nancy K. Kopp 
Public Schools Facilities Priority Fund is to provide State funds to address the severity of 
issues in a school, including (among other things) air conditioning, heating, and plumbing. 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, the Governor must appropriate at least $70.0 million to the fund 
annually. 
 
The IAC publishes its annual Maintenance Effectiveness Assessment to provide an 
overview of maintenance assessments conducted at selected school facilities in each 
Maryland public school system in accordance with statutory requirements for the IAC to 
survey the condition of school buildings identified by the department. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems may require operational changes to conform to 
updated reporting and funding timelines under the bill. However, such changes can likely 
be accommodated with existing resources.  
 
Frederick County Public Schools (FCPS) advises that elimination of the December 31 
allocation of 75% of expected funding for public school construction could negatively 
affect the formation of local capital budgets. According to FCPS, information in the 
75% allocation is integral to the creation of local capital funding allocations and future 
project planning. However, IAC advises that local school systems have little information 
on the amount of available local funding for school construction projects in December. 
Because of this, project prioritization also changes drastically between the 75% round in 
December and the 90% round in February. IAC therefore advises that eliminating the 
75% allocation requirement will give LEAs more time to complete their capital 
improvement plan submissions and ultimately result in those submissions being more 
representative of the fiscal year’s available budget. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 48 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public School Construction) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 233/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Interagency 
Commission on School Construction; Maryland Association of Counties; Anne Arundel 
County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Charles County Public Schools; 
Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County 
Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 233/ Page 8 
Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction 
 
 
School Construction Review and Approval Process 
 
The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State review and 
approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local systems develop and submit 
to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school facility needs based 
on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. The master plan 
must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local school system 
submits a capital improvement plan to IAC that includes projects for which it seeks 
planning and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include projects 
that the local system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the local school 
board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the county’s governing 
body. Typically, the submission letter to IAC contains signatures of both the school board 
president and either the county executive and county council president or chair of the board 
of county commissioners. 
 
Based on its assessment of the relative merit of all the project proposals it receives, and 
subject to the projected level of school construction funds available, IAC determines which 
projects to fund through the Public School Construction Program (PSCP). By December 31 
of each year, IAC must approve projects comprising 75% of the preliminary school 
construction allocation projected to be available by the Governor for the upcoming  
fiscal year. Local school systems may appeal these preliminary decisions by IAC. By 
March 1 of each year, IAC must recommend to the General Assembly projects comprising 
90% of the allocation for school construction submitted in the Governor’s capital budget. 
Following the legislative session, IAC approves projects comprising the remaining school 
construction funds included in the enacted capital budget, no earlier than May 1. The final 
allocations are not subject to appeal. 
 
Built to Learn Act 
 
The Built to Learn Act (Chapter 20 of 2020) authorizes the Maryland Stadium Authority 
(MSA) to issue up to $2.2 billion in revenue bonds, backed by annual payments from the 
Education Trust Fund (ETF) beginning in fiscal 2022, for public school construction 
projects in the State, including to support a public-private partnership (P3) agreement to 
build six new schools in Prince George’s County (the P3 agreement in place is actually for 
eight schools). Proceeds from the revenue bonds are in addition to funding available from 
PSCP and are allocated among local school systems as shown in Exhibit 1 (based on 
MSA’s most recent projection of anticipated revenues of $1.7 billion given increases in 
interest rates since the program’s enactment). 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 233/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 1 
Allocation of Built to Learn Bond Sale Proceeds 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
Percent of Total 
Proceeds 
Anne Arundel 
12.5% 
$212.5 
Baltimore City 
21.0% 
357.0 
Baltimore 
21.0% 
357.0 
Frederick 
5.1% 
86.7 
Howard 
6.6% 
112.2 
Montgomery 
21.0% 
357.0 
Prince George’s 
* 
* 
All Other Counties 
11.5% 
195.5 
Unallocated/Maryland Stadium Authority 
1.3% 
22.1 
Total 
100.0% 
$1,700.0 
 
* Under Chapter 20 of 2020, as amended by Chapter 679 of 2023, Prince George’s County receives 
$27.0 million annually for up to 30 years to supplement local funds for an availability payment if it enters 
into a public-private partnership agreement, subject to other provisions in the Act. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The Built to Learn Act also (1) extends mandated funding for the Healthy School Facility 
Fund by three years, through fiscal 2024, with Chapter 32 of 2022 subsequently extending 
funding to at least $90.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 2026; (2) raises the mandated annual 
funding level for the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classrooms (EGRC) program from 
$40.0 million to $80.0 million beginning in fiscal 2027; and (3) creates the Public School 
Facilities Priority Fund (PSFPF), later renamed by Chapter 32 to be the Nancy K. Kopp 
Public Schools Facilities Priority Fund) to provide State funds to address the facility needs 
of the highest priority schools identified by the statewide facilities assessment completed by 
IAC. Under Chapter 354 of 2024 and only for fiscal 2027, the purpose of PSFPF is to provide 
State funds to address the severity of issues in a school, including (among other things) air 
conditioning, heating, and plumbing. In accordance with funding amounts updated by 
Chapter 354, beginning in fiscal 2027, the Governor must appropriate at least $70.0 million 
to the fund annually. 
 
Prior to distributing funds under the Built to Learn program, MSA must enter into a 
program memorandum of understanding (MOU) with IAC (which is in place), and each 
county, local school board, and MSA must enter into a project MOU for each project 
seeking funding from the program. All projects receiving Built to Learn funds must be 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 233/ Page 10 
approved by IAC using the same process it uses for PSCP. As of January 2026, IAC has 
approved 59 projects and committed more than $1.5 billion in funding to those projects. 
 
Eligible School Construction Costs 
 
IAC establishes a range of appropriate per-student, square-foot allocations for elementary, 
middle, and high schools as well as for special education students, career and technology 
students, and specialized programs. IAC updated the space allocations in 2019 and 
renamed them gross area baselines. IAC also establishes, on an annual basis, a  
cost per square foot that is applicable to major school construction projects. For 
calendar 2026, the cost per square foot is $431 for new construction without site 
development (up from $416 in calendar 2025) and $513 for new construction with site 
development (up from $495 in calendar 2025). In general, multiplying the cost per square 
foot by the applicable gross area baseline for each proposed project (based primarily on the 
State-rated capacity of a building) yields the maximum allowable cost that is subject to the 
State/local cost-share formula. Thus, any portion of a project that exceeds the gross area 
baseline is not eligible for State funding and must be paid for by the local school system. 
 
The cost of acquiring land may not be considered an eligible construction cost and may not 
be paid by the State. Otherwise, regulations specify public school construction-related costs 
that are eligible and ineligible for State funding. Chapter 20 expanded the costs eligible for 
State funding. In general, the following costs are now included among eligible expenses: 
 
 
planning and design costs (including architectural and engineering fees); 
 
construction of a new facility, renovation of a new facility, an addition to an existing 
facility, or a replacement of an existing building or building portion (i.e., “bricks 
and mortar”); 
 
building and site development; 
 
replacement of building systems, including roofs; windows; and heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning (i.e., “systemic renovations”); 
 
modular construction that meets specified standards; 
 
State-owned relocatable facilities and temporary facilities that are required to be on 
site during construction; and 
 
furniture, fixtures, and equipment with a median useful life of at least 15 years. 
 
Among the major items explicitly not eligible for State funding under current law (besides 
site acquisition) are (1) master plans and feasibility studies; (2) projects or systemic 
renovations for buildings and systems that have been replaced, upgraded, or renovated 
within the last 15 years; and (3) items that do not have a useful life of at least 15 years. 
State Share of Eligible Costs 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 233/ Page 11 
The State pays at least 50% of eligible costs of school construction and renovation projects, 
based on a funding formula that takes into account numerous factors, including each local 
school system’s wealth and ability to pay. State law requires that the cost-share formula be 
recalculated every two years. Exhibit 2 shows the State share of eligible school 
construction costs for all Maryland jurisdictions for fiscal 2026 through 2028, as approved 
by IAC. When updating the cost-share calculations every two years, Chapter 32 requires 
IAC to limit the percentage decrease in the State share for any county to 5%. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
State Share of Eligible School Construction Costs 
Fiscal 2026-2028 
 
County 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Allegany 
89% 
95% 
95% 
Anne Arundel 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Baltimore City 
91% 
91% 
91% 
Baltimore 
57% 
56% 
56% 
Calvert 
56% 
54% 
51% 
Caroline 
94% 
97% 
97% 
Carroll 
54% 
57% 
57% 
Cecil 
61% 
63% 
63% 
Charles 
64% 
66% 
66% 
Dorchester 
98% 
97% 
97% 
Frederick 
67% 
69% 
69% 
Garrett 
89% 
95% 
95% 
Harford 
58% 
59% 
59% 
Howard 
51% 
50% 
50% 
Kent 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Montgomery 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Prince George’s 
68% 
67% 
67% 
Queen Anne’s 
50% 
50% 
50% 
St. Mary’s 
58% 
58% 
58% 
Somerset 
100% 
98% 
95% 
Talbot 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Washington 
78% 
82% 
82% 
Wicomico 
95% 
99% 
99% 
Worcester 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Maryland School for the Blind* 
100% 
100% 
100% 
 
* Chapter 192 of 2024 establishes the State share at 100% for Maryland School for the Blind for all eligible 
school construction projects. 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 233/ Page 12 
State Funding Levels 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018, the 21st Century School Facilities Act, established the State’s intent 
to provide at least $400.0 million annually, within current debt affordability guidelines. 
Chapter 32 increased the legislature’s intended annual funding level to $450.0 million 
beginning in fiscal 2023. Chapter 354 clarifies that the intended threshold does not include 
funding provided through the Built to Learn program. The State surpassed the intended 
thresholds in fiscal 2019 and 2021 through 2025; the State would have surpassed 
$400.0 million in fiscal 2020, but the $10.0 million allocation for the School Safety Grant 
Program (SSGP) was canceled by the Board of Public Works for cost-containment reasons. 
Chapter 679 of 2023 repeals the Aging Schools Program beginning in fiscal 2027 with the 
intent that funding be transferred to PSFPF, which takes effect that year. Although  
Chapter 679 also repealed SSGP beginning fiscal 2027, Chapter 354 subsequently retained 
the $10.0 million funding mandate for the program indefinitely. Exhibit 3 shows annual 
State public school construction funding from fiscal 2022 through 2026, by county. 
 
The fiscal 2027 operating and capital budgets as introduced provide funding that, not 
including the Prince George’s County P3 funding under Built to Learn, meets the  
$450.0 million statutory goal. State support for school construction is divided among 
general obligation (GO) bond funding and special funds as follows: 
 
 
$300.0 million in GO bonds for PSCP; 
 
$80.0 million in GO bonds for EGRC; 
 
$70.0 million in GO bonds for PSFPF 
 
$69.0 million in special funds for the P3 to construct and maintain schools in  
Prince George’s County (of which $27.0 million are State funds from ETF and the 
remainder are local funds). 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 233/ Page 13 
 
Exhibit 3 
State Public School Construction Funding 
Fiscal 2022-2026 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Allegany 
$2,613 
$4,116 
$5,742 
$12,308 
$9,854 
Anne Arundel 
170,456 
76,974 
58,141 
88,551 
44,641 
Baltimore City 
83,293 
327,001 
154,841 
282,068 
79,863 
Baltimore 
258,315 
127,687 
75,823 
201,151 
63,917 
Calvert 
13,454 
8,678 
18,737 
8,250 
10,585 
Caroline 
4,791 
7,059 
4,469 
5,967 
4,546 
Carroll 
38,831 
20,955 
16,609 
16,417 
18,179 
Cecil 
5,508 
19,590 
42,912 
5,490 
7,684 
Charles 
35,892 
35,237 
21,031 
22,982 
17,058 
Dorchester 
6,616 
4,670 
6,114 
3,992 
6,853 
Frederick 
109,454 
48,808 
43,608 
21,131 
29,313 
Garrett 
12,185 
11,065 
18,479 
23,802 
9,420 
Harford 
47,453 
16,911 
33,455 
18,238 
22,517 
Howard 
70,378 
69,797 
26,993 
19,642 
28,230 
Kent 
158 
2,331 
3,242 
406 
8,885 
Montgomery 
305,449 
50,233 
198,048 
57,636 
53,730 
Prince George’s 
51,147 
124,264 
76,967 
52,782 
63,786 
Queen Anne’s 
2,368 
4,526 
6,934 
784 
16,168 
St. Mary’s 
5,773 
7,878 
15,951 
7,073 
24,698 
Somerset 
815 
266 
9,409 
6,813 
13,195 
Talbot 
1,380 
1,129 
6,202 
6,438 
3,701 
Washington 
8,804 
10,413 
14,903 
27,890 
14,909 
Wicomico 
26,169 
33,416 
22,072 
7,861 
11,584 
Worcester 
5,014 
308 
689 
8,202 
7,293 
Maryland School for the Blind 
2,021 
9,100 
13,605 
4,595 
11,328 
Statewide 
6,500 
4,279 
63 
9,033 
1,849 
Total 
$1,274,837 $1,026,691 
$895,038 
$919,501 
$583,784 
 
Notes:  Includes general obligation bonds, Built to Learn revenue bonds, pay-as-you-go funds, and 
reallocated funds that were previously authorized (as shown in IAC Capital Improvement Program 100% 
Allocation reports). Allocated funds include the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classroom program, 
School Safety grants, and Healthy School Facility grants. Statewide funds include unallocated discretionary 
funds, contractual costs for external reviews, and funds reserved for unforeseen contingencies. Columns 
may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 233/ Page 14 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Education - Public School Construction - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 233 
 
PREPARED BY: Victoria A. Howard  
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
X  WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS  
 
OR  
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES  
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14