START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 266

S1 6lr0266
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 85

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Information Technology)
Requested: September 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Department of Information Technology – Information Technology Investment
3 Fund – Uses

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Information Technology Investment Fund, at the
5 discretion of the Secretary of Information Technology, to be used for certain purposes
6 in connection with certain information technology agreements; and generally related
7 to the Information Technology Investment Fund.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – State Finance and Procurement
10 Section 3.5–309(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – State Finance and Procurement
15 Section 3.5–309(l)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – State Finance and Procurement

21 3.5–309.

22 (a) There is an Information Technology Investment Fund.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0266*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 266

1 (l) (1) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section and in accordance with
2 paragraph (2) of this subsection, money paid into the Fund under subsection (e)(2) of this
3 section:

4 (I) shall be used to support:

5 [(i)] 1. the State telecommunication and computer network
6 established under § 3.5–404 of this title, including program development for these
7 activities; and

8 [(ii)] 2. the Statewide Public Safety Interoperability Radio
9 System, also known as Maryland First (first responder interoperable radio system team),
10 under Title 1, Subtitle 5 of the Public Safety Article; AND

11 (II) AT THE SECRETARY’S DISCRETION, MAY BE USED TO
12 SUPPORT STATE–OWNED COMMUNICATION SITES, COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES,
13 AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT USED IN CONNECTION WITH
14 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AGREEMENTS ENTERED INTO UNDER § 3.5–307 OF
15 THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING PROGRAM MANAGEMENT FOR THESE ACTIVITIES.

16 (2) The Secretary may determine the portion of the money paid into the
17 Fund that shall be allocated to each program described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
19 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2