START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 270 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 270 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Veterans and 
Military Families) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Military Family Inclusion Act 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the membership of the Maryland Commission on Caregiving, 
the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust, the Maryland Veterans Commission, 
and the Maryland Youth Advisory Council. The bill also specifies how representative seats 
and organizations may be removed from the Maryland Veterans Commission.  
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering the composition of the specified entities does not materially affect 
government operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:           
 
Maryland Commission on Caregiving 
 
The Maryland Commission on Caregiving, staffed by the Department of Human Services 
(DHS), coordinates statewide planning, development, and implementation of family 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 270/ Page 2 
caregiver support services. The commission consists of 19 members, including 
representatives from DHS and other State agencies, consumers of respite care services, and 
service providers.  
 
The bill adds one family caregiver of a service‑disabled veteran as a member of the 
commission. 
 
Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust 
 
Chapter 742 of 2009 established the Maryland Veterans Trust and the Maryland Veterans 
Trust Fund (MVTF) to provide monetary and other assistance to veterans and their families 
and public and private programs that support veterans and their families. The Board of 
Trustees of the trust oversees and solicits funds for MVTF. The board consists of 
11 members, including a member of the House of Delegates and a member of the Senate.  
 
Under the bill, the commission members from the House of Delegates and the Senate serve 
as ex officio trustees. The bill also clarifies that a majority of the voting trustees is a quorum.   
 
Maryland Veterans Commission 
 
The Maryland Veterans Commission advises the Secretary of Veterans and Military 
Families on all matters pertaining to veterans’ issues. The commission, consisting of 
29 voting members and honorary nonvoting members, meets quarterly. DVMF provides 
staff for the commission.  
 
The bill removes American Ex‑Prisoners of War, Inc. and the Polish Legion of American 
Veterans from the list of veterans’ organizations that submit names for appointment to the 
Governor and adds to that list an organization representing military families. The bill also 
repeals the requirement that one member of the commission be an honorary nonvoting 
member appointed from a list of individuals submitted to the Governor by the Pearl Harbor 
Survivors Association.  
 
The bill specifies that an organization’s representative seat may be removed if the 
organization fails to appoint a new commissioner for two continuous years and that an 
organization may be removed from the commission if a representative from the 
organization is not recommended by that organization.  
 
The bill also repeals language that prohibits a new organization from being eligible for 
representation on the commission, by appointment of the Governor, unless it is 
congressionally chartered. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 270/ Page 3 
Maryland Youth Advisory Council 
 
The Maryland Youth Advisory Council, comprised of 24 youth members, examines issues 
of importance to youth, including (1) education; (2) a safe learning environment; 
(3) employment opportunities; (4) strategies to increase youth participation in local and 
State government; (5) the environment; (6) homelessness; (7) suicide prevention; 
(8) substance use and underage drinking; (9) poverty; and (10) educational accessibility 
issues for students with disabilities.  
 
The bill adds to the council one youth who has an immediate family member who is a 
service member, appointed by DVMF. 
 
Background:  DVMF advises that the bill is intended to update, streamline, and ensure 
military family representation on various commissions and councils, as well as to clarify 
the membership composition, appointment types, and organizational removal procedures 
for the Maryland Veterans Commission.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 254 and HB 196 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 192 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Veterans and Military Families) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 270/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Military Family Inclusion Act 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 270 
 
PREPARED BY: Peter Pantzer 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4