START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 229

R2 6lr0140
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 188

By: Chair, Appropriations Committee (By Request – Departmental –
Transportation)
Requested: September 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Transportation Authority – Revenue Bond Limit – Increase

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the limit on the amount of certain revenue bonds that the
4 Maryland Transportation Authority may have outstanding and unpaid on a certain
5 date each year; and generally relating to the amount of revenue bonds that the
6 Maryland Transportation Authority may have outstanding and unpaid.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 4–306
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 4–306.

16 (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, revenue bonds may be
17 issued by the Authority:

18 (1) Without obtaining the consent of any instrumentality, agency, or unit
19 of this State; and

20 (2) Without any proceedings or the happening of any conditions or things
21 other than those specifically required by this subtitle.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0229*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 229

1 (b) (1) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, revenue bonds
2 secured by toll revenue may be issued in any amount as long as the aggregate outstanding
3 and unpaid principal balance of the revenue bonds secured by toll revenue and revenue
4 bonds of prior issues does not exceed [$4,000,000,000] $5,000,000,000 on June 30 of any
5 year.

6 (ii) The maximum aggregate amount of revenue bonds that may be
7 outstanding and unpaid under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall be reduced by the
8 amount of:

9 1. Any loan extended to the State under the federal
10 Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act; and

11 2. Any line of credit extended to the State under the federal
12 Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act, to the extent the State draws
13 on the line of credit.

14 (2) Except as otherwise provided in this section and § 4–205 of this title,
15 without the approval of the General Assembly, the Authority may issue bonds to refinance
16 all or any part of the cost of a transportation facility project for which the Authority
17 previously issued bonds authorized under this subtitle.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
19 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2