START OF PAGE 1
SECOND PRINTING
HOUSE BILL 270

P1 6lr0088
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 192

By: Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Veterans and Military Families)
Requested: September 16, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Military Family Inclusion Act

3 FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Maryland Trust Fund Board of
4 Trustees, the Maryland Veterans Commission, the Maryland Commission on
5 Caregiving, and the Maryland Youth Advisory Council; and generally relating to
6 military membership on councils and commissions.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Human Services
9 Section 7–302(a)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Human Services
14 Section 7–303(a)(1)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
18 Article – State Government
19 Section 9–914(a) and 9–2701(b)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
23 Article – State Government
24 Section 9–914(b), 9–914.1, 9–917, and 9–2701(c)(1)
25 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0270*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 270

1 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
3 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

4 Article – Human Services

5 7–302.

6 (a) There is a Maryland Commission on Caregiving in the Department.

7 7–303.

8 (a) (1) The Commission consists of the following members:

9 (i) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the
10 President of the Senate;

11 (ii) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker
12 of the House; and

13 (iii) the following members appointed by the Governor:

14 1. two representatives from the Department of Human
15 Services;

16 2. three representatives from the Maryland Department of
17 Health;

18 3. one representative from the Department of Aging;

19 4. one representative from an area agency on aging;

20 5. one representative from the Department of Disabilities;

21 6. one representative from the Maryland Respite Care
22 Coalition;

23 7. two consumers of respite care services;

24 8. three family caregivers; [and]

25 9. three representatives of organizations that provide or
26 have interest or expertise in respite care services; AND

27 10. ONE FAMILY CAREGIVER OF A SERVICE–DISABLED
28 VETERAN.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 270 3

1 Article – State Government

2 9–914.

3 (a) The powers and duties of the Trust shall rest in and be exercised by a Board
4 of Trustees.

5 (b) The Board of Trustees shall consist of the following 12 members:

6 (1) the Secretary, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee, who shall serve as
7 the chair;

8 (2) the Secretary of Aging, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee;

9 (3) the Secretary of Labor, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee;

10 (4) the Secretary of Health, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee;

11 (5) the Secretary of Human Services, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee;

12 (6) the Secretary of Disabilities, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee;

13 (7) the Adjutant General of the Military Department, ex officio, or the
14 Adjutant General’s designee;

15 (8) one representative of each of the following organizations, appointed by
16 the Governor:

17 (i) a veterans service organization;

18 (ii) a nonprofit organization that serves veterans; and

19 (iii) the business community;

20 (9) AS AN EX OFFICIO TRUSTEE, a member of the House of Delegates
21 appointed by the Speaker of the House; and

22 (10) AS AN EX OFFICIO TRUSTEE, a member of the Senate appointed by the
23 President of the Senate.

24 9–914.1.

25 (a) The Board shall meet at places and dates to be determined by the Board, but
26 not less than 2 times a year.

27 (b) A majority of the VOTING trustees is a quorum.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 270

1 (c) A trustee:

2 (1) may not receive compensation as a trustee; but

3 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
4 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

5 (d) The Department shall provide staff, supplies, and office space for the Board.

6 9–917.

7 (a) (1) The Commission consists of the following members appointed by the
8 Governor.

9 (2) Of the members:

10 (i) 1 shall be appointed from each of the 8 congressional districts in
11 the State;

12 (ii) 1 shall be a veteran appointed from the State at large;

13 (iii) 1 shall be a woman veteran appointed from the State at large;

14 (iv) 1 shall be a representative of a retired enlisted organization;

15 (v) 1 shall be a veteran of the Iraq or Afghanistan conflict, as defined
16 in § 1–202(a–1) of the Public Safety Article; AND

17 (vi) 1 shall be appointed from a list of individuals submitted to the
18 Governor by each of the following organizations:

19 1. [the American Ex–Prisoners of War, Inc.;

20 2.] the American Legion;

21 [3.] 2.the AMVETS;

22 [4.] 3.the Catholic War Veterans;

23 [5.] 4.the Disabled American Veterans;

24 [6.] 5.the Fleet Reserve Association;

25 [7.] 6.the Jewish War Veterans;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 270 5

1 [8.] 7.the Marine Corps League;

2 [9.] 8.the Maryland Military Officers Association of America;

3 [10.] 9. the Military Order of the Purple Heart;

4 [11. the Polish Legion of American Veterans;

5 12.] 10. the Veterans of Foreign Wars;

6 [13.] 11. the Vietnam Veterans of America;

7 [14.] 12. the Korean War Veterans Association, Inc.;

8 [15.] 13. the National Association for Black Veterans;

9 [16.] 14. the Colonial Chapter of the Paralyzed Veterans of
10 America; [and]

11 [17.] 15. the Reserve Organization of America; and

12 16. AN ORGANIZATION REPRESENTING MILITARY
13 FAMILIES.

14 [(vii) 1 shall be an honorary nonvoting member appointed from a list
15 of individuals submitted to the Governor by the Pearl Harbor Survivors Association.]

16 (b) Each member must be a resident of the State and a veteran.

17 (c) (1) The term of an appointed member is 5 years.

18 (2) The terms of the appointed members are staggered as required by the
19 terms provided for members of the Commission on October 1, 1984.

20 (3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
21 appointed and qualifies.

22 (4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
23 rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

24 (5) When an organization is no longer a part of the Commission, the
25 appointment shall terminate at the end of the current member’s term.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 270

1 (6) AN ORGANIZATION’S REPRESENTATIVE SEAT MAY BE REMOVED IF
2 THE ORGANIZATION FAILS TO APPOINT A NEW COMMISSIONER FOR 2 CONTINUOUS
3 YEARS.

4 (7) AN ORGANIZATION MAY BE REMOVED FROM THE COMMISSION IF
5 A REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE ORGANIZATION IS NOT RECOMMENDED BY THAT
6 ORGANIZATION.

7 [(d) A new organization may not be eligible for representation on the Commission,
8 by appointment of the Governor, unless it is congressionally chartered.]

9 9–2701.

10 (b) There is a Maryland Youth Advisory Council.

11 (c) (1) The Council consists of:

12 (i) four youths appointed by the President of the Senate;

13 (ii) four youths appointed by the Speaker of the House of Delegates;

14 (iii) four youths appointed by the Governor; and

15 (iv) the following members appointed by the Governor’s Office for
16 Children:

17 1. four youths nominated by the local management boards
18 established under § 8–301 of the Human Services Article;

19 2. four youths nominated by the Maryland Association of
20 Student Councils;

21 3. two youths nominated by the University System of
22 Maryland Student Council; [and]

23 4. the following youths nominated by the Student Advisory
24 Council to the Maryland Higher Education Commission:

25 A. one youth who is enrolled in a community college; and

26 B. one youth who is enrolled in a private college or university;
27 AND

28 5. ONE YOUTH WHO HAS AN IMMEDIATE FAMILY
29 MEMBER WHO IS A SERVICE MEMBER, APPOINTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
30 VETERANS AND MILITARY FAMILIES.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 270 7

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7