START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 234 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 234 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Public Safety - Police Employees and Deputy State Fire Marshals - Repeal of Pay 
Rate Restriction on Promotion 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that a police employee or deputy State fire 
marshal in the Department of State Police (DSP), on promotion, be entitled only to the pay 
specified for the new rank in the next lower step than the police employee or deputy State 
fire marshal occupied before promotion if the step that the police employee or deputy State 
fire marshal occupied before promotion is higher than that held by a police employee or 
deputy State fire marshal who is already in the rank and has equal or higher service time. 
Thus, under the bill, a police employee or deputy State fire marshal is entitled to the pay 
specified for the new rank in the same step that the police employee or deputy State fire 
marshal occupied before promotion without exception. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DSP has not used the pay rate restriction for any prior promotions, so 
repealing it has no current fiscal impact. However, as police employees and deputy State 
fire marshals are promoted in the future, the impact is likely small enough that it can be 
absorbed within DSP’s existing budget. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DSP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 234/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Secretary of State Police must develop a pay plan for police 
employees, DSP communications operators, and DSP communications supervisors that 
includes the ranks and the grades within ranks that the Secretary considers appropriate. The 
pay plan is subject to approval by the Secretary of Budget and Management and is effective 
on approval by the Governor only to the extent that sufficient money is included in the 
State budget. Each police employee, DSP communications operator, and DSP 
communications supervisor is entitled to receive the pay rate, including any increment 
based on length of service, set forth in the pay plan established by the Secretary.  
 
Each police employee is entitled to the pay rate for the next highest step within the police 
employee’s rank on (1) each July 1, if the police employee was a police employee on 
July 1, 1967, or (2) each anniversary of the date of employment, for all other police 
employees.  
 
On promotion, a police employee or a deputy State fire marshal is entitled to the pay 
specified for the new rank in the same step that the police employee or deputy State fire 
marshal occupied before promotion. However, if the step that the police employee or 
deputy State fire marshal occupied before promotion is higher than that held by a police 
employee or deputy State fire marshal who is already in the rank and has equal or higher 
total service time, on promotion, the police employee is entitled only to the pay specified 
for the new rank in the next lower step than the police employee or deputy State fire 
marshal occupied before promotion. 
 
Background:  DSP advises that historically, DSP has hired all police employees and 
deputy State fire marshals at the same rank and pay step. However, in recent years due to 
difficulties with recruitment, DSP started providing additional pay steps for prior 
experience as a recruitment tool for new hires. For example, a new hire with three years of 
relevant experience from another agency could receive an additional three steps when hired 
by the State. Thus, upon promotion to a higher level, that individual may be at a higher 
step than someone hired at the same time at the higher level. DSP notes that the current 
law nullifies its recruitment efforts by penalizing these employees upon promotion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 74 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 234/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of State 
Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 234/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Safety – Police Employees and Deputy State Fire Marshals – Pay 
Rate Restriction - Repeal  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 234 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Thomas Williams 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There is no impact on small business 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4