START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 201 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 201 
(Delegate Fisher, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Tips or Gratuities - Subtraction Modification (No Income Taxes on 
Tips Act) 
 
 
This bill allows a subtraction modification against the personal income tax for any 
compensation received in the form of a tip or gratuity for employment in a food service 
facility; employment in a business licensed for on-sale consumption of alcoholic 
beverages; employment in a hotel; providing passenger-for-hire services; or providing 
taxicab services. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and 
beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate but potentially 
significant amount annually beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. The 
Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate but potentially 
significant amount annually beginning in FY 2027. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Tips, including cash tips that are not reported to an employer, are 
considered income for federal and Maryland income tax purposes and are generally 
considered wages for federal payroll tax purposes. Tips are also considered earned income 
for purposes of the federal and Maryland earned income tax credits.  
 
The One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 authorizes a federal “below-the-line” deduction 
(deducted after calculation of adjusted gross income) for qualified tips for tax 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 201/ Page 2 
years 2025 through 2028. The deduction, which is available to both itemized and standard 
deduction filers, does not flow through to the Maryland income tax return. The maximum 
allowable deduction is $25,000 reduced by $100 for each $1,000 by which the taxpayer’s 
modified adjusted gross income exceeds $150,000 ($300,000 for joint filers). For purposes 
of the deduction, “qualified tips” are defined as cash tips received by an individual in an 
occupation which customarily and regularly received tips on or before December 31, 2024, 
as provided by the Secretary of the Treasury. Qualified tips do not include any amount 
received by an individual unless (1) such amount is paid voluntarily without any 
consequence in the event of nonpayment, is not the subject of negotiation, and is 
determined by the payor; (2) the trade or business in the course of which the individual 
receives such amount is not a specified service trade or business within the meaning of the 
§ 199A qualified business income deduction; and (3) such other requirements as may be 
established in regulations or other guidance are satisfied. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  General fund revenues and local income tax revenues decrease by 
an indeterminate but potentially significant amount annually beginning in fiscal 2027 due 
to subtraction modifications claimed against the personal income tax. Due to data 
limitations, the precise effect on State and local revenues cannot be reliably estimated at 
this time. For context, according to national W-2 statistics published by the 
Internal Revenue Service, tips reported on tax year 2018 W-2s totaled $38.3 billion. The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that the subtraction modification 
contemplated under the bill, though not subject to a dollar-amount limitation or income 
eligibility threshold, applies to a narrower list of eligible occupations than the federal 
qualified tips deduction. DLS also notes that many eligible taxpayers may have little to no 
Maryland income tax liability in the absence of the bill.   
 
For context, according to American Community Survey statistics published by the 
U.S. Census Bureau, there were an estimated 140,500 individuals employed in food 
preparation and serving related occupations in Maryland in 2024; associated median 
earnings were estimated at $21,800. In a 2024 analysis of Survey of Income and Program 
Participation data, the Yale Budget Lab estimated that tips account for about 15% of wages 
earned in food preparation and service occupations. For illustrative purposes, DLS 
estimates that were the bill in effect for tax year 2025, the subtraction modification would 
have generated approximately $158 in State income tax savings for a single filer who 
(1) claims no dependents for the tax year; (2) claims the Maryland standard deduction; 
(3) was employed in a food service occupation; (4) whose tax year 2025 earnings reflect 
estimated median earnings for individuals employed in food preparation and serving 
related occupations (as adjusted for inflation); and (5) for whom qualifying tips accounted 
for 15% of tax year 2025 earnings.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 201/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1005 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Internal Revenue Service; U.S. Census 
Bureau; Yale Budget Lab; Moody’s Analytics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3