START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 208 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 208 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courts - Evidence - Proof of Ownership of Real Property 
 
 
This bill establishes that in a proceeding involving real property, certain documentation 
may be used to establish a rebuttable presumption of property ownership. The 
Supreme Court of Maryland may adopt rules and forms necessary for the bill’s 
implementation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s stated purpose is to enable a new owner of real property to 
engage in legal proceedings to protect the property during the processing time required for 
the recordation of a deed. Evidence that a deed has been submitted to the clerk of the circuit 
court for recordation may be used to establish a rebuttable presumption under the bill; other 
documents required by law for the sale of real property or to secure a mortgage may also 
be used. The bill further specifies that such evidence may include (1) a certified copy of 
the recording intake sheet (as required under existing State statute) and (2) a standard 
HUD‐1 Settlement Statement or closing disclosure (as required under federal law). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 208/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Clerks of the circuit courts are responsible for the recording of land records.  
Any printed deed or other instrument submitted for recordation must satisfy specific 
formatting requirements before being recorded.  
 
Additionally, the Judiciary provides a required administrative form (intake sheet) for use 
that must include specific information, including: 
 
 
real property identifiers (tax identification number, address, and lot number);  
 
names of specific parties; 
 
the amount of consideration payable;  
 
recording charges due; and  
 
any claimed tax exemption.  
 
In general, an intake sheet must be recorded immediately after the instrument it 
accompanies. The intake sheet is not part of the instrument and does not constitute 
constructive notice as to the contents of the instrument. The lack of an intake sheet does 
not affect the validity of any conveyance, lien, or lien priority based on recordation of an 
instrument. 
 
Under Maryland Rule 5‐1002, to prove the content of a writing, recording, or photograph, 
the original writing, recording, or photograph is required, unless otherwise provided by 
Rule or statute. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2