START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 288 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 288 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Education) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Superintendent of Schools - Prolonged State of Emergency - Authority to 
Declare 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the State Superintendent of Schools, rather than the 
Governor, to declare a “prolonged state of emergency” for an event that prevents regular, 
in-person attendance at a public school for at least 14 consecutive school days, thereby 
allowing a local school system to provide virtual instruction to affected students. The bill 
also specifies that nothing in the related subtitle may be construed to limit or interfere with 
the responsibilities of the Secretary of Health under Title 18 of the Health-General Article 
in the event of a public health emergency. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The State Superintendent of Schools can declare a prolonged state of 
emergency to authorize virtual education using existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  If the State Superintendent of Schools declares a prolonged state of 
emergency authorizing virtual education, local school systems can meet the bill’s 
requirements using existing virtual education plans and resources and without modifying 
school calendars or instructional schedules. The bill does not require new programs or 
staffing. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 288/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Governor’s Proclamation of a State of Emergency 
 
During a public emergency, the Governor may proclaim a state of emergency and designate 
the emergency area if public safety is endangered or there is a reasonable apprehension of 
immediate danger to public safety. The proclamation may be issued on the Governor’s own 
initiative or at the request of a county or municipal government or the Secretary of 
State Police. 
 
A state of emergency declared by the Governor lasts until the Governor finds that the threat 
has passed or has been dealt with. However, a state of emergency may not continue for 
longer than 30 days unless the Governor officially renews it. The General Assembly may 
terminate a state of emergency at any time by passing a joint resolution. Specific provisions 
apply to a “catastrophic health emergency,” which is defined as a situation involving 
imminent threat of extensive loss of life or serious disability due to a deadly agent. 
 
Virtual Instruction During a Prolonged State of Emergency 
 
If the Governor declares a prolonged state of emergency under Title 14 of the Public Safety 
Article, a local board of education may transition public schools in the county to virtual 
instruction under an approved virtual education plan, subject to specified limitations. 
 
Each local board is required to maintain an approved virtual education plan governing the 
use of virtual instruction during a prolonged state of emergency. 
 
Virtual Education Days for a Severe Weather Event 
 
A local board of education may authorize the local superintendent, following discussion at 
an open meeting and an affirmative vote, to provide virtual education days during severe 
weather events instead of closing public schools. 
 
A local board must publish a plan for the use of virtual education days on the school 
system’s website. The plan must address attendance, opportunities for students to make up 
missed work, access to necessary devices and internet connectivity for all students and 
staff, and the continued implementation of Individualized Education Programs and related 
services. 
 
A local superintendent may implement a virtual education day only if all calendar days 
designated for severe weather closures have been used, the local board has authorized 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 288/ Page 3 
virtual education days, and severe weather conditions are likely to prevent normal school 
attendance. Upon making this determination, the superintendent must notify school 
principals, who must promptly notify students, parents, and staff. 
 
A virtual education day must consist of at least four hours of synchronous instruction, 
together with asynchronous instruction designed to maximize online learning. Employee 
organizations may negotiate certain aspects of virtual education days through collective 
bargaining, including preparation time and the start time for synchronous instruction. If a 
virtual education day is implemented, a local school system must provide public school 
employees who are not assigned to work that day an opportunity to make up the lost work 
through other duties before the beginning of the next school year. 
 
Secretary of Health Duties 
 
According to Title 18 of the Health-General Article, the Secretary of Health’s 
responsibilities under a public health emergency focus on the investigation, regulation, a 
containment of infectious diseases. The Secretary is granted broad authority to devise 
control measures, access information, and mandate actions to protect the public. 
 
Background:  An official state of emergency declaration by the Governor is a prerequisite 
for a local school system to transition to virtual instruction. Emergencies that warrant a 
Governor’s declaration typically affect entire communities or regions. In contrast, school 
systems may experience circumstances that require the temporary closure of an individual 
school building but do not rise to the level of a statewide or regional emergency. Schools 
typically want to do this to avoid modifying the school calendar to meet State requirements 
for minimum schools days and hours. 
 
For example, during the summer of 2025, severe asbestos was discovered at 
Williamsport High School in Washington County. In response, the Washington County 
Board of Education approved a virtual education plan in August 2025 to begin the 
school year with virtual instruction. The plan included in-person options for students with 
greater needs, designated community sites where students could receive supervised, 
in-person support, and the continuation of certain extracurricular activities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 288/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 218 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Education) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 288/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Superintendent of Schools - Prolonged State of Emergency - 
Authority to Declare 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 288 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Madeline Houck 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5