START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 284 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 284 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- State Police) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Licensed Firearms Dealers - Notification Regarding Potential 
Compromise of Security Features 
 
 
This departmental bill requires a licensed firearms dealer who knows or reasonably should 
know that a burglary, attempted burglary, robbery, theft, or any other event may have 
compromised required security features to notify the Secretary of State Police within 
24 hours after the dealer first discovers that the security features may have been 
compromised. The required notice is in addition to any report made to the local law 
enforcement agency or the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE). 
A violator is subject to existing penalties that apply to the failure to meet the required 
security features. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
The application of existing civil penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not anticipated 
to materially affect State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of State Police (DSP) has determined that this 
bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 55 of 2022 prohibits a licensed firearms dealer from conducting 
business and storing firearms at a location unless (1) the premises on which the licensed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 284/ Page 2 
dealer operates is equipped with specified security features or (2) outside business hours, 
the licensed dealer locks all firearms stored on the premises in a vault, a safe, or a room or 
building that meets specified requirements. The Secretary of State Police must adopt rules 
and regulations to determine whether a licensed dealer has met the requirements. Pursuant 
to current regulations, the Secretary (1) must inspect the security requirements of a licensed 
dealer at least once every two years and (2) may inspect the security requirements at any 
time before being approved for a license, as a follow-up to a noncompliant inspection, 
during required inventory and record audits, and following a burglary/theft or attempts 
thereof. 
 
A violator is subject to a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 imposed by the Secretary. In 
addition to the civil penalty, a person who knowingly and willfully violates the 
requirements is subject to (1) for a second offense, suspension of the person’s dealer’s 
license, with the suspension remaining in effect until compliance is regained and (2) for a 
third or subsequent offense, revocation of the person’s dealer’s license. These penalties do 
not apply if the equipment or alarm system became temporarily inoperable at no fault of 
the licensed dealer. 
 
Background:  According to ATFE, during calendar 2024, licensed firearms dealers in the 
State reported 248 firearms lost or stolen. DSP advises that the bill is part of the 
department’s strategy to combat gun violence in the State by ensuring that each licensed 
firearms dealer maintains the integrity of the required security features for the business. 
DSP reports that it conducts annual inspections of licensed firearms dealers for compliance 
with all statutory and regulatory requirements; however, a dealer is not required to notify 
DSP or any law enforcement entity if there is a failure of the security features or if the 
features have been compromised. DSP believes that any reported failure in security 
requirements should be inspected before the dealer is allowed to continue to store firearms 
at the location. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 160 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms, and Explosives; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 284/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 284/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Safety - Licensed Firearms Dealers - Notification Regarding 
Potential Compromise of Security Features 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 284 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Thomas Williams 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There is no impact to small business. 
 

END OF PAGE 4