START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 292 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation – Local Reimbursement for 
Administration Costs – Alterations 
 
  
This departmental bill alters the payment schedule in which Baltimore City and county 
governments are required to reimburse the State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
(SDAT) for specified property tax assessment and information technology (IT) services. 
Under current law, Baltimore City and county governments are required to reimburse 
SDAT for these services on a quarterly basis beginning July 1. The bill requires the local 
governments to reimburse SDAT in the amount of 50% of the total owed on October 1 of 
each fiscal year and then 25% of the total on each of January 1 and April 1. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill alters the payment schedule for which SDAT is reimbursed 
by local governments for various property tax assessment and IT services but does not alter 
the amount received by the department in a fiscal year. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill alters the payment schedule for which SDAT is reimbursed 
by local governments for various property tax assessment and IT services but does not alter 
the amount that is paid to the department by local governments in a fiscal year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 292/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SDAT conducts the assessment of all property in the State. Beginning in 
fiscal 2026, Baltimore City and county governments are required to reimburse SDAT for 
90% of the costs associated with real property valuation, business personal property 
valuation, and information technology. Reimbursements are paid on a quarterly basis 
beginning July 1 of each fiscal year. Prior to enactment of Chapter 604 of 2025 (Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025), local governments were required to reimburse 
SDAT for 50% of these costs. 
 
Background:  At the beginning of each fiscal year (July 1) SDAT charges Baltimore City 
and county governments for 25% of the estimated assessment and IT costs for the 
upcoming fiscal year, as well as any corrections to the previous year’s estimate. SDAT 
reports that the department does not know the true cost of the previous year’s services by 
July 1; the actual costs are determined at the fiscal year end closeout. This bill would begin 
the billing and repayment schedule in October to give the department’s accounting team 
time to calculate the true cost of the previous year’s estimate so that the first bill of the year 
requires no additional corrections. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 122 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 292/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Local 
Reimbursement for Administration Costs - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 292 
 
PREPARED BY:  Joshua Greenberg 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
Theis agency estimates that the proposed bill 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
 
OR 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 3