START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 255

M1 6lr0134
(PRE–FILED) CF SB 164

By: Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee (By Request –
Departmental – Natural Resources)
Requested: September 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Natural Resources – Pamela J. Kelly Tree–Mendous Maryland Program
3 – Alterations

4 FOR the purpose of altering the stated purpose of the Pamela J. Kelly Tree–Mendous
5 Maryland Program to include the advancement of forest health and resilience
6 through the promotion and maintenance of native trees and shrubs; and generally
7 relating to the Pamela J. Kelly Tree–Mendous Maryland Program.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Natural Resources
10 Section 5–435
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Natural Resources

16 5–435.

17 (a) There is a Pamela J. Kelly Tree–Mendous Maryland Program in the
18 Department.

19 (b) The Program is established for the purpose of ADVANCING FOREST HEALTH
20 AND RESILIENCE BY PROMOTING, planting, AND MAINTAINING native trees and shrubs
21 on public lands, community open spaces, school grounds, and rights–of–way.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0255*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 255

1 (c) The Department shall administer the Program.

2 (d) The Department may adopt regulations to carry out this part.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2