START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 274 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 274 
(Chair, Health Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Environmental Health Specialists - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date of the State Board of Environmental 
Health Specialists by five years to July 1, 2032, subject to the evaluation and 
reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures are maintained through FY 2032 for 
the State Board of Environmental Health Specialists. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Environmental Health Specialists is 
responsible for licensing environmental health specialists, administering licensing 
examinations, verifying completion of continuing education, renewing licenses, 
promulgating regulations, interpreting the scope of practice, investigating complaints, and 
disciplining licensees. The board comprises nine members:  seven licensed environmental 
health specialists and two consumer members. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 274/ Page 2 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2027; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 119 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 274/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: State Board of Environmental Health Specialists – Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 274 
 
PREPARED BY: Hillary Fasciano 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

END OF PAGE 3