START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 259 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 259 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Financial Institutions - Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund and 
Regulation of Entities - Revisions 
 
   
This departmental bill (1) makes several changes to the Maryland Community Investment 
Venture Fund (MCIV Fund), including extending by two years the authority for the Office 
of Financial Regulation (OFR) to match contributions to the fund; (2) alters the conditions 
and process for awarding annual assessment fee offset credits to banks and credit unions; 
(3) updates outdated statutory language; and (4) makes other technical changes. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $14,000 in each of 
FY 2029 and FY 2030 due to extending the deadline by which OFR may make matching 
donations to the MCIV Fund. Special fund revenues decrease by an estimated $25,000 in 
FY 2027 and by at least $52,000 in FY 2031 due to reduced assessments on financial 
institutions from a new assessment offset. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
($25,000) 
($35,000) 
($52,000) 
($52,000) 
($52,000) 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$14,000 
$14,000 
$0 
Net Effect 
($25,000) 
($35,000) 
($66,000) 
($66,000) 
($52,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) has determined 
that this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 259/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Broadly speaking, the bill: 
 
 
alters definitions in the Financial Institutions Article of State law; 
 
alters when a credit union must pay an annual assessment to OFR;  
 
alters the definitions of “branch” and “de novo branch” related to eligibility for 
assessment offset credits; 
 
requires OFR to establish a deposit growth cap for assessment offset credits; 
 
establishes a new assessment offset credit; 
 
specifies which entities may claim to do the business of banking in the State; 
 
expands the purpose of the MCIV Fund to include consumers, as specified; 
 
alters the type of investment OFR may make into the MCIV Fund and authorizes 
OFR to use existing funds for the administration of the fund; 
 
extends by two years the authority for OFR to match certain contributions to the 
MCIV Fund; 
 
authorizes money from the MCIV Fund to be distributed as a grant, among other 
means;  
 
classifies the MCIV Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund not subject to reversion to 
the general fund; and 
 
repeals obsolete OFR fees. 
 
A more detailed description of each of these changes, as well as relevant current law, is 
discussed below. 
 
Definitions, Generally 
 
For the purpose of granting the Governor emergency powers to close banking offices, 
current law specifies that an “emergency” includes one that results from fire, flood, riot, 
robbery, weather, or other cause. The bill adds a cybersecurity incident that necessitates 
the closure of a banking institution or a branch of a banking institution to the definition of 
“emergency”. 
  
In current law, a “banking institution” is an institution incorporated under the laws of the 
State, as specified. The bill repeals a redundant reference to a State banking institution.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 259/ Page 3 
Assessments 
 
Under current law, OFR is required to impose annual assessments on each State-chartered 
banking institution and credit union to cover the expenses of regulating them. The 
assessment amounts vary based on the deposit levels of the financial institution. 
 
Banking institutions that accept deposits or retain funds in deposit accounts are subject to 
a graduated annual assessment of $8,000 plus $0.12 for each $1,000 of the assets of the 
institution over $50 million but up to $250 million, $0.10 for each $1,000 of assets over 
$250 million but up to $500 million, $0.09 for each $1,000 of assets over $500 million but 
up to $1 billion, $0.08 for each $1,000 of assets over $1 billion but up to $10 billion, and 
$0.07 for each $1,000 of assets over $10 billion.  
  
Credit unions with assets of $300,000 or greater are subject to an annual assessment of 
$1,000, plus $0.08 for each $1,000 of the assets of the institution over $1 million. Credit 
unions must pay an assessment to OFR on or before the March 1 after the assessment is 
imposed. The bill changes, from March 1 to April 15, the date by which a credit union must 
pay the assessment to OFR. 
 
Assessment Offset Credits 
 
Under current law, a well-capitalized banking institution or credit union with a composite 
CAMELS rating of 1 or 2 may file with OFR a request for an assessment offset credit of: 
 
 
12 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a de novo branch located in a low- to 
moderate-income tract for the first five years after the branch opened; or 
 
6 cents for each $1,000 of deposits in a branch located in a low- to moderate-income 
tract (not to exceed the deposit growth cap). 
 
A main office is excluded from the definition of “branch,” meaning that main offices 
cannot be included in applications for assessment offset credits. A “deposit growth cap” is 
defined as the year-over-year percentage change of domestic office deposits as reported on 
December 31 each year by the relevant federal supervisory entity.  
 
The bill (1) alters the definition of “branch” such that main offices can be included; 
(2) clarifies that only de novo branches in the State qualify for an assessment offset; 
(3) repeals references to the designated sources OFR previously used to calculate the 
deposit growth cap because they are no longer published by the federal government; 
(4) requires OFR annually by December 31 to establish a deposit cap for the assessment 
offset credit; and (5) makes related technical changes. Similar changes apply to assessment 
offset credits for credit unions.   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 259/ Page 4 
The bill (1) defines a “Maryland Opportunity Account” (MOA) as a transaction account 
offered by a banking institution/credit union to customers/members that meets standards 
annually determined by OFR that promote fair and equal access to financial services and 
(2) establishes a new assessment offset credit related to MOAs. Specifically, a 
well‑capitalized banking institution or credit union with a composite CAMELS rating of 
1, 2, or 3 may file with OFR a request for an assessment offset credit of: 
 
 
$5,000 on receiving OFRs initial approval that the banking institution or credit 
union offers at least one MOA; and 
 
$3,000 for each year thereafter the banking institution or credit offers at least 
one active MOA, as determined by OFR. 
 
Representation as a Bank or Savings and Loan Association 
 
Under current law, except for a “bank”, trust company, savings bank, or savings and loan 
association that is authorized to do business in this State, a person may not use any name, 
title, or other words that represent that the person is authorized to do the business of 
banking in this State. A “bank” means any bank, trust company, or savings bank, or savings 
and loan association that is authorized to do business in the State, and any subsidiary or 
affiliate of the entity. Under the bill, a “bank” means any banking institution, national 
banking association, other-state bank, or savings and loan association that is authorized to 
do business in the State, and any subsidiary or affiliate of the entity. 
 
Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund 
 
Purpose:  In current law, the purpose of the MCIV Fund is to develop opportunities for 
banking institutions and credit unions to better serve the needs of low- to moderate-income 
tracts by: 
 
 
investing in the development of financial product (or financial product 
underwriting) innovations that enhance access to capital, funding, and other 
financial services for businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State; 
 
deploying, testing, and evaluating the innovations for providing capital and funding 
to businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State; and 
 
promoting and making the innovations available to banking institutions and credit 
unions for use in enhancing access to capital, funding, and other financial services 
for businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 259/ Page 5 
Under the bill, the purpose of the fund is to develop opportunities for banking institutions 
and credit unions to better serve the needs of low- to moderate-income tracts by: 
 
 
promoting the development of financial product (or financial product underwriting) 
innovations that enhance access to capital, funding, and other financial services for 
consumers and businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State through 
investments, grants, and other forms of financial assistance; 
 
deploying, testing, and evaluating the innovations for providing capital and funding 
to consumers and businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State; and 
 
promoting and making the innovations available to banking institutions and credit 
unions for use in enhancing access to capital, funding, and other financial services 
for consumers and businesses in low- to moderate-income tracts in the State. 
  
Administration:  In current law, OFR may provide an initial equity capital investment in 
the MCIV Fund in an amount of up to $2.5 million from the Banking Institution and Credit 
Union Regulation Fund. Further, OFR may use a total of $250,000 to cover any 
administrative expenses associated with establishing the fund. Through June 30, 2028, 
OFR may match an investment made in the fund by a banking institution or credit union 
up to the amount of the assessment credit earned by the banking institution or credit union. 
  
The bill (1) repeals the reference to the $2.5 million capital investment as an initial 
investment, indicating that the investment can be spread over time; (2) allows the $250,000 
to be used also for administering the fund; and (3) extends the deadline for OFR to match 
an investment made in the fund until June 30, 2030.  
 
Classification:  The bill classifies the MCIV Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund 
administered by the State Treasurer that is not subject to reversion requirements under  
§ 7-302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. The State Treasurer must invest 
money of the fund in the same manner as other State money is invested. Any interest 
earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund. Expenditures from the fund may only be 
made in accordance with the State budget. 
 
Office of Financial Regulation Fees 
 
The bill repeals a $25 valid charter certification fee, if requested by or on behalf of a baking 
institution, and a $20 amendment filing fee that OFR collects from a commercial bank that 
amends its charter. OFR advises that these fees are seldom requested and never collected. 
 
Background:  The financial services industry in Maryland is regulated by OFR within  
MD Labor and the Securities Division of the Office of the Attorney General. Under the 
direction and authority of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, OFR regulates 
State‑chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in Maryland. These 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 259/ Page 6 
include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank 
holding companies, and credit unions. 
 
OFR advises that the provisions of the bill are necessary to:  (1) incentivize State‑chartered 
banks and credit unions to open branches, and maintain deposits, in low- to 
moderate‑income tracts in the State; (2) improve the efficiency of the assessment offset 
credit process for State-charted banks and credit unions that maintain branches in low- to 
moderate-income tracts in the State; and (3) enhance the operational success of the MCIV 
Fund. 
 
State Revenues:  OFR assumes that 5 institutions will carry MOAs in fiscal 2027, 9 will 
carry MOAs in fiscal 2028, and 14 will carry MOAs in the three remaining fiscal years of 
the estimate. Based on these estimates and an assumption that all eligible institutions apply 
for assessment offset credits, special fund revenues decrease by $25,100 in fiscal 2027 and 
by increasing amounts thereafter before reaching at least $52,100 in fiscal 2031. To the 
extent that the number of financial institutions that open MOAs and apply for the offset 
varies from these estimates, special fund revenues similarly vary.  
 
This estimate assumes that the assessment credits granted to financial institutions are 
invested by the relevant financial institutions into the MCIV Fund and subsequently 
matched by OFR. DLS advises that, while OFR may encourage financial institutions to 
invest the assessment credits into the new fund, the bill does not require banks or credit 
unions to do so. Moreover, there is no direct financial incentive for banks or credit unions 
to reinvest their credits in the fund since all returns from the fund’s investments accrue to 
OFR, not to the investor. Thus, to the extent that the assessment credits are retained by 
financial institutions (rather than invested into the new fund), special fund matching 
expenditures may be reduced, which in turn reduces available funds in the new venture 
fund.  
 
OFR advises that the fees repealed by the bill are no longer collected, so their repeal has 
no meaningful effect on special fund revenues.   
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures increase by $14,000 in fiscal 2029 and 
2030, reflecting matching amounts paid by OFR into the MCIV Fund across  
two additional years; these amounts are assumed to correspond to the assessment credit 
revenue decrease discussed above. OFR advises that, in fiscal 2026, $14,063 was donated 
by four depository institutions. OFR anticipates similar donations across fiscal year 2029 
and 2030. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 259/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 43 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 259/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Financial Institutions - Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund 
and Regulation of Entities - Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 259 
 
PREPARED BY: Amy Hennen 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The goal of the Access to Banking Act is to utilize the tools in the Act - the annual 
assessment fee offset credit for Maryland State-chartered banks and credit unions and the 
establishment of the Maryland Community Investment Venture Fund - to expand access 
to financial services and resources in Maryland’s low- to moderate-income communities 
through greater economic participation in these areas by banks, credit unions, and 
financial technology firms. The expansion of resources and products brought to bear in 
these areas should have a meaningful and positive impact on the small businesses and 
consumers that are located in these areas. This legislation strengthens the Access to 
Banking Act by providing necessary clarification to some of its provisions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8