START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 261 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 261 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - General 
Services) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Competitive Proof of Concept Procurement 
 
   
This departmental bill establishes competitive proof of concept procurements as a method 
of source selection and expands the scope of competitive proof of concept procurements to 
include all phases, including full implementation or deployment. It further makes clarifying 
and procedural changes to current law governing proof of concept procurements. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill may create operational efficiencies for some State agencies 
that elect to use competitive proof of concept procurements, but does not materially affect 
State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of General Services (DGS) has determined that 
this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment as discussed below. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A proof of concept procurement may be used when the head of a unit 
determines the process to be in the best interest of the unit. A competitive proof of concept 
procurement must be approved by the Chief Procurement Officer or designee, and, for 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 261/ Page 2 
procurements for information technology, by the Secretary of Information Technology or 
designee. All proof of concept solicitations and contract awards above the small 
procurement threshold must be posted to eMaryland Marketplace Advantage (eMMA). 
DGS, in consultation with the Department of Information Technology (DoIT), must adopt 
regulations (in addition to policies and procedures required under current law) for the 
development and implementation of competitive proof of concept procurements. 
 
In addition to the elements already required under current law, a competitive proof of 
concept procurement solicitation must include a statement of need and the factors that will 
be used at each phase of the procurement to evaluate proposals. The Minority Business 
Enterprise and Veteran-owned Small Business Enterprise participation goals, if any, must 
be established at a phase specified in the solicitation documents. A proof of concept 
procurement with a value of $1,000,000 or less may be exempt from designation for the 
Small Business Reserve program if the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs determines that the designation is not practicable. 
 
After receipt of proposals but before award of a procurement contract, a unit may receive 
clarifications from an offeror. The unit may allow any offeror reasonably susceptible of 
being selected for award to participate in all subsequent phases of the procurement, 
including submission of best and final offers. For those offerors that are reasonably 
susceptible of being selected for award, a unit may issue a contract to deliver product 
samples for testing or provide a demonstration. Any such contract does not preclude a 
vendor from continuing to participate in subsequent phases of the procurement. If a unit 
finds it is in the best interest of the State, it may award one or more contracts for full 
implementation or deployment of the good, service, or technology evaluated during the 
proof of concept. 
 
Current Law:  “Proof of concept” is a test, evaluation, demonstration, or pilot project of 
a good, service, or technology in a real-world environment to evaluate whether the good, 
service, or technology can be successfully deployed and is beneficial to the State. A 
competitive proof of concept procurement is a formal competitive procurement method 
that may be used to solicit proposals for the conduct of a proof of concept prior to full 
implementation. A competitive proof of concept procurement may be conducted using any 
method of procurement authorized in State law. 
 
Competitive proof of concept procurements may be used when the head of a unit 
determines the process to be appropriate and in the best interests of the unit, and has 
received the approval of the Secretary of Information Technology or designee. The 
Secretary of Information Technology may grant approval for a competitive proof of 
concept procurement if the unit (1) has sufficient internal resources to manage the proof of 
concept, including human capital, subject matter expertise, and technological 
infrastructure, or has the means to obtain these resources, and (2) enters into a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 261/ Page 3 
memorandum of understanding with DoIT that requires regular status updates, vendor 
capacity, and any other information necessary for DoIT to evaluate whether the proof of 
concept can be successfully deployed and is beneficial to the State. 
 
A competitive proof of concept procurement solicitation must include a statement that lists 
(1) the scope of work or project description, including the intended use, quantity, estimated 
time frame for the proof of concept, and anticipated number of proof of concept awards 
that will be made and (2) the factors, including price, that will be used in evaluating 
proposals, and the relative importance of each. A solicitation may be distributed to vendors 
known to offer goods or services within the scope of the proof of concept and, except for 
procurements under $15,000 not otherwise required by law to be posted, must be posted 
on eMMA.  
 
After receipt of proposals, a unit may conduct discussions with an offeror to ensure full 
understanding of the requirements of the procurement and the proposal submitted by the 
offeror. The procurement unit may also request product samples for testing or a 
demonstration of a product or service, which may be used in the evaluation process. A 
request for product samples or demonstrations must be issued to all offerors deemed 
reasonable at the time of request, and the unit may award one or more of the proposals a 
contract for the proof of concept. Vendors awarded a proof of concept procurement are 
eligible to bid on a procurement to fully implement a proposal related to the proof of 
concept.  
 
Background:  The State’s authority to use competitive proof-of-concept procurements was 
first established under Chapter 496 of 2024, the Artificial Intelligence Governance Act. 
Since its implementation, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) has advised DGS that 
current law limits these procurements to tests, evaluations, demonstrations, or pilot 
projects, and does not permit full implementation. Furthermore, OAG has clarified that a 
proof of concept is not its own method of source selection, and instead must follow existing 
processes such as small procurement procedures or competitive sealed proposals. As a 
result, procurement units cannot move directly from samples and demonstrations of a proof 
of concept to full implementation. Instead, the unit must conduct a separate procurement. 
DGS has proposed this legislation to streamline the competitive proof of concept 
procurement method, creating a more efficient procurement pathway that spans from initial 
testing through final deployment. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Although DGS indicates this bill has a meaningful positive impact 
on small businesses, DLS advises that the bill is primarily procedural, making adjustments 
to existing processes rather than creating new opportunities for vendors. Accordingly, DLS 
does not anticipate a meaningful impact on small businesses.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 261/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  The bill references the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and 
Women Business Affairs, which was transferred to the Department of Social and Economic 
Mobility in 2025, and renamed the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 157 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - General Services) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; University System of Maryland; Department of General Services; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 261/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Procurement - Competitive Proof of Concept Procurement 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 261 
 
PREPARED BY: Corbett Webb, corbett.webb2@maryland.gov, 443-635-7693 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
x__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This legislation will have a positive impact on small businesses. By awarding multiple 
proof of concept contracts to different businesses, it will allow more small businesses to 
showcase their abilities to the State. Even if not selected for a final award, the small 
business community has expressed that even being able to demonstrate a proof of concept 
would benefit them and could be useful in their own marketing efforts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5