START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 367

J5, J4 6lr1963
HB 974/22 – HGO CF 6lr2013

By: Delegate Kipke
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Insurance – Physical Therapy – Copayments, Coinsurance, and
3 Deductibles

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health
5 maintenance organizations from imposing a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible
6 for covered physical therapy services that is greater than the copayment,
7 coinsurance, or deductible imposed for an annual physical or wellness visit under the
8 same plan or contract; requiring insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health
9 maintenance organizations to state in each plan or contract the coverage
10 requirements, limitations, conditions, and exclusions for the provision of physical
11 therapy services; and generally relating to health insurance and physical therapy
12 services.

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Insurance
15 Section 15–864
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Insurance

21 15–864.

22 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “PHYSICAL THERAPY SERVICES” MEANS SERVICES
23 PROVIDED TO A PATIENT WITHIN THE SCOPE OF PRACTICE OF A PHYSICAL
24 THERAPIST WHO IS LICENSED BY THE STATE BOARD OF PHYSICAL THERAPY

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0367*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 367

1 EXAMINERS TO PRACTICE PHYSICAL THERAPY UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS
2 ARTICLE.

3 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

4 (1) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
5 PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR PHYSICAL THERAPY UNDER INDIVIDUAL, GROUP, OR
6 BLANKET HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES OR CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR
7 DELIVERED IN THE STATE; AND

8 (2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
9 COVERAGE FOR PHYSICAL THERAPY UNDER INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP CONTRACTS
10 THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

11 (C) FOR EACH DATE COVERED PHYSICAL THERAPY SERVICES ARE
12 PROVIDED, AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT IMPOSE A COPAYMENT,
13 COINSURANCE, OR DEDUCTIBLE AMOUNT FOR THE PHYSICAL THERAPY SERVICES
14 THAT IS GREATER THAN THE COPAYMENT, COINSURANCE, OR DEDUCTIBLE AMOUNT
15 IMPOSED FOR AN ANNUAL PHYSICAL OR WELLNESS VISIT UNDER THE SAME PLAN OR
16 CONTRACT.

17 (D) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL CLEARLY STATE IN EACH
18 PLAN OR CONTRACT THE COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS, LIMITATIONS, CONDITIONS,
19 AND EXCLUSIONS FOR THE PROVISION OF PHYSICAL THERAPY SERVICES.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
21 policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
22 after January 1, 2027.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
24 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 2