START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 352

F1 6lr1690
CF 6lr1702

By: Delegate Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Concentration of Poverty School Grant Program – Personnel and Per Pupil
3 Grants – Eligible Uses

4 FOR the purpose of repealing the limitation on the authorization to use personnel grants
5 and per pupil grants under the Concentration of Poverty School Grant Program to
6 provide certain fine arts instructional programs through a certain fiscal year; and
7 generally relating to the Concentration of Poverty School Grant Program.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 5–223(b)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 5–223(c)(9)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Education

21 5–223.

22 (b) (1) There is a Concentration of Poverty School Grant Program in the State.

23 (2) The purpose of the Program is to provide grants to eligible schools with
24 a high concentration of eligible students.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0352*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 352

1 (3) The Program consists of the:

2 (i) Personnel grant; and

3 (ii) Per pupil grant.

4 (c) (9) The personnel and per pupil grant may be used [through fiscal year
5 2027] to provide the programs required under COMAR Title 13A, Subtitle 04, including
6 13A.04.16.01.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
8 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2