START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 368

Q2 6lr1040

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Supplemental Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit –
3 Required

4 PG 412–26

5 FOR the purpose of requiring the governing body of Prince George’s County to grant a
6 certain property tax credit to supplement the State homeowners’ property tax credit;
7 providing that the State Department of Assessments and Taxation is responsible for
8 certain administrative duties with respect to the credit; requiring the county to
9 reimburse the Department for certain costs; and generally relating to a homeowners’
10 property tax credit supplement in Prince George’s County.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Tax – Property
13 Section 9–215(a)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Tax – Property
18 Section 9–318(k)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Tax – Property

24 9–215.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0368*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 368

1 (a) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 9–318 OF THIS TITLE, THE Mayor and
2 City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county may grant, by law, a local
3 supplement to the Homeowners Property Tax Credit Program provided under § 9–104 of
4 this title.

5 9–318.

6 (K) (1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
7 MEANINGS INDICATED.

8 (II) “COMBINED INCOME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–104
9 OF THIS TITLE.

10 (III) “DWELLING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–104 OF THIS
11 TITLE.

12 (IV) “HOMEOWNER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–104 OF
13 THIS TITLE.

14 (V) “NET WORTH” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–104 OF
15 THIS TITLE.

16 (VI) “TOTAL REAL PROPERTY TAX” MEANS THE SUM OF ALL
17 PROPERTY TAX RATES ON REAL PROPERTY FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR ON A DWELLING,
18 MULTIPLIED BY THE LESSER OF:

19 1. $300,000; OR

20 2. THE ASSESSED VALUE OF THE DWELLING REDUCED
21 BY THE AMOUNT OF ANY ASSESSMENT ON WHICH A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT IS
22 GRANTED UNDER § 9–105 OF THIS TITLE.

23 (2) (I) THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
24 SHALL GRANT A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT TO SUPPLEMENT THE HOMEOWNERS’
25 PROPERTY TAX CREDIT GRANTED UNDER § 9–104 OF THIS TITLE.

26 (II) PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY NOT OBTAIN
27 REIMBURSEMENT UNDER § 9–104(S) OF THIS TITLE FOR THE AMOUNT OF THE LOCAL
28 SUPPLEMENT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

29 (3) (I) THE PROPERTY TAX CREDIT GRANTED UNDER THIS
30 SUBSECTION IS THE TOTAL REAL PROPERTY TAX OF A DWELLING, LESS THE
31 PERCENTAGE OF THE COMBINED INCOME OF THE HOMEOWNER THAT IS DESCRIBED
32 IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 368 3

1 (II) THE PERCENTAGE IS:

2 1. 0% OF THE FIRST $8,000 OF COMBINED INCOME;

3 2. 4% OF THE NEXT $4,000 OF COMBINED INCOME;

4 3. 6.5% OF THE NEXT $4,000 OF COMBINED INCOME;
5 AND

6 4. 9% OF THE COMBINED INCOME OVER $16,000.

7 (4) A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE
8 GRANTED:

9 (I) IF THE HOMEOWNER’S COMBINED NET WORTH EXCEEDS
10 $200,000 AS OF DECEMBER 31 OF THE CALENDAR YEAR THAT PRECEDES THE YEAR
11 IN WHICH THE HOMEOWNER APPLIES FOR THE PROPERTY TAX CREDIT OR IF THE
12 HOMEOWNER’S COMBINED GROSS INCOME EXCEEDS $75,000 IN THAT SAME
13 CALENDAR YEAR; OR

14 (II) IF THE HOMEOWNER’S PROPERTY TAX CREDIT GRANTED
15 UNDER § 9–104 OF THIS TITLE EXCEEDS THE AMOUNT CALCULATED UNDER
16 PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

17 (5) (I) THE DEPARTMENT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
18 ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES THAT RELATE TO THE APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION
19 OF ELIGIBILITY FOR A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

20 (II) THE COUNTY SHALL REIMBURSE THE DEPARTMENT FOR
21 THE REASONABLE COST OF ADMINISTERING THE PROPERTY TAX CREDIT UNDER
22 THIS SUBSECTION.

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
24 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3