START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 393

J5 6lr1325
HB 1187/25 – HGO CF SB 272

By: Delegates Nkongolo, Arentz, Beauchamp, Behler, Boyce, Feldmark,
Hutchinson, Kaiser, Kipke, J. Long, McComas, Metzgar, T. Morgan,
Patterson, Reilly, Sample–Hughes, Schmidt, Simmons, Vogel, Wims, Woods,
and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 21, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Insurance – Scalp Cooling Systems – Required Coverage

3 FOR the purpose of requiring certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, health
4 maintenance organizations, and managed care organizations that provide coverage
5 for chemotherapy to treat cancer to provide coverage for scalp cooling systems; and
6 generally relating to the coverage of scalp cooling systems by health insurance
7 carriers.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Insurance
10 Section 15–864
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Insurance

16 15–864.

17 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “SCALP COOLING SYSTEM” MEANS A DEVICE USED TO
18 COOL THE HUMAN SCALP TO PREVENT OR REDUCE HAIR LOSS IN CONNECTION WITH
19 CHEMOTHERAPY TO TREAT CANCER THAT IS:

20 (1) DESIGNED AND INTENDED FOR REPEATED USE; AND

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0393*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 393

1 (2) PRIMARILY AND CUSTOMARILY USED TO SERVE A MEDICAL
2 PURPOSE.

3 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

4 (1) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
5 PROVIDE HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS
6 ON AN EXPENSE–INCURRED BASIS UNDER HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES OR
7 CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE; AND

8 (2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
9 HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS UNDER
10 CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

11 (C) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION THAT PROVIDES COVERAGE FOR
12 CHEMOTHERAPY TO TREAT CANCER SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR SCALP
13 COOLING SYSTEMS USED FOR THE PRESERVATION OF HAIR IN CONNECTION WITH
14 THE CHEMOTHERAPY TREATMENT.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
16 policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
17 after January 1, 2027.

18 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
19 January 1, 2027.
END OF PAGE 2