START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 367 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 367 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Physical Therapy - Copayments, Coinsurance, and 
Deductibles 
 
 
This bill prohibits a specified insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or health maintenance 
organization (collectively known as carriers), for each date covered physical therapy (PT) 
services are provided, from imposing a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible for the PT 
services that is greater than that imposed for an annual physical or wellness visit under the 
same plan or contract. A carrier must clearly state in each plan or contract the coverage 
requirements, limitations, conditions, and exclusions for the provision of PT services. The 
bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of form 
filings and complaints can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Expenditures for 
the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program increase by at least 
$1.8 million in FY 2027, and $3.6 million annually thereafter, as discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF/FF Exp. 
$1.8 
$3.6 
$3.6 
$3.6 
$3.6 
Net Effect 
($1.8) 
($3.6) 
($3.6) 
($3.6) 
($3.6)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance, expenditures for 
local governments that purchase fully insured medical plans increase. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 367/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 
10 essential health benefits, which include items and services in the following categories:  
(1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity 
and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, including 
behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services, including dental and vision care. 
 
The ACA requires most private health insurance plans to cover recommended preventive 
services without cost sharing. Most health plans cover annual physicals or wellness checks 
at no cost to enrollees.  
 
State Expenditures:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the 
one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not subject to this 
mandate. However, the program generally provides coverage for mandated health 
insurance benefits as prescribed under Maryland law. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that, in calendar 2024, the 
State covered 337,465 PT encounters for enrollees, for which members paid $3,565,744. 
In calendar 2025 (through November), the State covered 300,393 PT encounters, for which 
members paid $3,945,177. DBM notes that as it cannot charge a copayment for an annual 
or physical or wellness visit, PT services would have to be provided at no cost to members.  
 
Therefore, based on calendar 2024 PT encounters (the last full year available), State 
expenditures (general, special, and federal funds) increase by at least $1.78 million in 
fiscal 2027, reflecting the bill’s January 1, 2027 effective date, and by at least $3.57 million 
annually thereafter. Using calendar 2025 data through November, expenditures would 
increase by at least $1.97 million in fiscal 2027, and by at least $3.94 million annually 
thereafter. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Insureds in small businesses covered under nongrandfathered 
small group health benefit plans will see reduced cost sharing for PT services. However, 
health insurance costs may increase for small businesses with nongrandfathered small 
employer plans. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that 
defines the minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 367/ Page 3 
markets in Maryland) includes coverage for PT services. Thus, these plans will be subject 
to the bill’s cost-sharing requirements, in addition to large group plans and grandfathered 
individual plans that provide coverage for PT services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3