START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 374 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 374 
(Delegate White Holland) 
Health 
 
 
State Acupuncture Board - Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires the State Acupuncture Board, on renewal of a license, to make available 
proof of renewal to each licensee rather than issuing a renewal certificate. The bill prohibits 
a person from employing an individual to practice acupuncture without a license or aiding 
or abetting the unauthorized practice of acupuncture. A violator is subject to specified fines 
and/or imprisonment, as well as a civil fine of up to $10,000. The bill also defines “manual 
therapies,” clarifies the definition of “practice acupuncture,” and updates the name of the 
Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Herbal Medicine (formerly the 
Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any changes in board workload can be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. The civil/criminal penalty provisions of the bill do not have a material impact 
on State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The criminal penalty provisions of the bill do not have a material impact on 
local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Manual therapies” means treatment modalities that apply pressure or 
manipulation using hands or another part of the body along points or meridians that 
normalize electromagnetic or energetic function. “Manual therapies” include acupressure 
or other pressure treatment techniques based on East Asian medical therapies.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 374/ Page 2 
A person who violates the prohibition on employing an unlicensed individual to practice 
acupuncture or aiding or abetting the unauthorized practice of acupuncture is guilty of a 
misdemeanor (first offense) or a felony (subsequent offenses) and subject to the following:   
 
 
for a first offense, a fine of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year;  
 
for any subsequent offense, a fine of up to $5,000 per day and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years; and 
 
a civil fine of up to $10,000 assessed by the board in accordance with regulations 
adopted by the board. 
 
The board must remit any penalties collected under this provision to the general fund. 
 
Current Law:  “Practice acupuncture” means the use of East Asian medical therapies for 
the purpose of normalizing energetic physiological functions including pain control, and 
for the promotion, maintenance, and restoration of health. “Practice acupuncture” includes 
(1) stimulation of the body by the insertion of needles; (2) the application of moxibustion; 
and (3) manual, mechanical, thermal, electrical, or other East Asian medical therapies only 
when performed in accordance with the principles of East Asian medical theories and 
practices. 
 
Unless licensed by the board or otherwise permitted to do so under the 
Maryland Acupuncture Act, a person may not (1) practice, attempt to practice, or offer to 
practice acupuncture; (2) represent to the public, by description of services, methods, 
procedures, or otherwise, that the person is authorized to practice acupuncture; or (3) use 
the words or terms “acupuncturist,” “licensed acupuncturist,” or “L.Ac.” unless the person 
is authorized to practice acupuncture. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
a fine of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to three years. Practicing acupuncture 
without a license or misrepresenting to the public that an individual is authorized to practice 
acupuncture are also subject to civil fines of up to $50,000. Fines are assessed by the board 
and paid to the general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 370 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 374/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3