START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 386 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 386 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
 
 
Metro Funding Modification Act of 2026 
 
 
This bill establishes a third annual grant – beginning in fiscal 2029 – to the Washington 
Suburban Transit District (WSTD) to pay the capital costs of the Washington Metropolitan 
Areas Transit Authority (WMATA) and repeals the requirement that the standard WSTD 
grant be annually increased, as specified. The bill also requires the board of directors of 
WMATA to approve a rail signaling and automation workforce transition plan by  
July 1, 2028. The Governor must withhold 35% of the State’s capital grant to WSTD for 
any fiscal year in which the plan has not been approved or specified employees are 
terminated because of the automation of the rail system. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, 
contingent on the enactment of similar legislation by the Commonwealth of Virgina 
and the District of Columbia, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) capital 
program is generally fully subscribed each year, MDOT may be required to redirect 
funding from other projects once the bill takes effect, as the new formula increases total 
capital grant funding the State provides to WSTD for WMATA by more than  
$140.0 million annually in the near term, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a third annual capital grant to WSTD, which must 
annually be provided by MDOT from the revenues available for the State capital program 
in the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). For fiscal 2029, MDOT must provide at least 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 386/ Page 2 
$150.0 million for the State’s proportionate share of the Metrorail Operating Subsidy 
Allocation Formula. Beginning in fiscal 2030, the amount provided by MDOT must be 
equal to the amount provided for the immediately preceding fiscal year increased by 3%. 
The bill also repeals the requirement that the standard capital grant to WSTD be increased 
by 3% each fiscal year.  
 
By July 1, 2028, the board of directors for WMATA must approve a rail signaling and 
automation workforce transition plan, developed in consultation with affected collective 
bargaining units. The Governor must withhold 35% of the State’s standard capital grant to 
WSTD for any fiscal year in which the plan has not been approved or a rail or bus operator 
employed by WMATA on or after July 1, 2028, is terminated due to a reduction in force 
caused by the automation of the rail system.  
 
Current Law:  WMATA was established in 1967 through an interstate compact among 
Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia. The original purpose was construction 
and operation of a rapid rail transit system for the Washington metropolitan area. 
Maryland’s overall participation in the Washington metropolitan transit system consists of 
the provision of annual funding to WMATA for capital and operating costs of the 
Metrorail, Metrobus, and MetroAccess systems. WMATA’s operations are funded through 
operating revenues and subsidies provided by the compact signatories:  Maryland, Virginia, 
and the District of Columbia. General parameters on capital funding levels are typically 
established in a six-year Capital Funding Agreement developed through negotiations 
between WMATA and its local funding partners.  
 
Passed in response to financial difficulties experienced by WMATA, the 
Maryland Metro/Transit Funding Act (enacted by Chapters 351 and 352 of 2018) mandates 
additional capital funding for WMATA in two ways. First, the Act requires the State’s 
standard capital subsidy to WSTD for WMATA to increase by 3% annually over the 
previous fiscal year once specified reporting requirements are met. Second, the Act 
requires the Governor to include in the State budget an additional appropriation of 
$167.0 million from the funds available in the State capital program in TTF. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Formula Funding 
 
As discussed in more detail in the Additional Comments section below, for purposes of 
this analysis, it is assumed that the three capital grants provided to WSTD by the State to 
support the capital costs of WMATA are provided by TTF through MDOT’s capital 
program. MDOT’s capital program is generally fully subscribed from year to year. 
Accordingly, modifying the State’s required capital grants for WMATA does not affect 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 386/ Page 3 
total TTF spending, but instead, may affect the combination of capital projects that receive 
funding in MDOT’s capital program in any given year. 
 
A precise estimate of the bill’s impact on MDOT’s capital program cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time because it depends on numerous unknown factors, including when 
and whether the Commonwealth of Virginia and the District of Columbia enact similar 
legislation. Nevertheless, the bill is anticipated to significantly increase the State’s capital 
grant funding for WMATA beginning in the fiscal year in which it takes effect.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, assuming that the bill takes effect in fiscal 2029, Exhibit 1 
shows the potential impact on MDOT’s capital program in that fiscal year. In this 
illustrative example, the State’s standard capital grant decreases by $4.9 million in 
fiscal 2029 (due to the elimination of the requirement for the grant to be increased by 
3% annually), but the new capital grant increases grant funding by $150.0 million in that 
fiscal year. In this example, the net effect of the two provisions is an increase of 
$145.1 million in capital grant funding for WMATA in fiscal 2029 compared to current 
law. While the amount of the new grant increases each year (due to the bill’s requirement 
that it be increased by 3% annually beginning in fiscal 2030), the net increase in total grant 
funding decreases over time due to the repeal of the requirement that the standard WSTD 
grant be increased by 3% annually.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Illustrative Example of the Bill’s Effect on WMATA Capital Grants 
Fiscal 2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
Standard 
Capital Grant 
Additional 
Capital Grant 
New Third 
Capital Grant 
 
 
 
 
Under Current Law 
$167.7 
$167.0 
$0.0 
 
 
 
 
Under the Bill 
162.8 
167.0 
150.0 
 
 
 
 
Difference  
($4.9) 
$0.0 
$150.0 
 
WMATA:  Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority 
 
Note:  The estimate for the standard capital grant for WMATA under the bill for fiscal 2029 is based on the 
Maryland Department of Transportation’s financial plan and assumes that the amount provided for 
fiscal 2029 remains at the fiscal 2028 level.   
 
Sources:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 386/ Page 4 
Rail Signaling and Automation Workforce Transition Plan 
 
The bill requires the Governor to withhold 35% of the State’s standard capital grant to 
WSTD for any fiscal year in which the required plan has not been approved or a rail or bus 
operator employed by WMATA on or after July 1, 2028, is terminated due to a reduction 
in force caused by the automation of the rail system. For purposes of this analysis, it is 
assumed that WSTD adopts the required plan and does not terminate any such employee; 
however, to the extent that the Governor is required to withhold funding in any fiscal year, 
TTF expenditures decrease accordingly.  
 
For contextual purposes only and based on the illustrative example shown above in 
Exhibit 1, the Governor would be required to withhold $57.0 million if either of these 
contingencies were met for fiscal 2029 under the bill.   
 
Additional Comments:  Since the inception of the additional capital grant for WMATA, 
general funds have been transferred to TTF to partially or fully offset the impact to TTF. 
Additionally, in fiscal 2025 and 2026, and in the 2027 budget as introduced, general 
obligation (GO) bonds were used and are planned for this purpose.  
 
Although this analysis assumes that the increased funding required to provide grants for 
WMATA under the bill is paid for using TTF, to the extent that general funds and/or  
GO bonds are used for this purpose in future fiscal years, the impact to MDOT’s capital 
program is less pronounced. In such a case, general fund expenditures and TTF revenues 
increase accordingly, and/or the use of GO bond proceeds for this purpose reduces  
GO bond funding available for other State projects, as the total capital budget is established 
annually by the Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process 
and is fixed each year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 281 (Senators Augustine and Feldman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Governor’s Office; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 386/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5