START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 381

R1 6lr2070

By: Delegates Lehman, Charkoudian, Healey, Taveras, and Terrasa
Introduced and read first time: January 21, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Highway Administration – Urban Core and Urban Center Traffic Control
3 Devices – No Turn on Red

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Highway Administration to install traffic control
5 devices prohibiting right turns on a steady red signal at certain intersections on
6 State highways in urban cores and urban centers; and generally relating to traffic
7 control devices in urban cores and urban centers.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Transportation
10 Section 8–204.3
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Transportation
15 Section 11–167 and 11–168
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Transportation
20 Section 21–202(i)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Transportation

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0381*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 381

1 8–204.3.

2 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, ON OR
3 BEFORE JULY 1, 2029, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL INSTALL A TRAFFIC CONTROL
4 DEVICE PROHIBITING A VEHICLE FROM MAKING A RIGHT TURN WHILE FACING A
5 STEADY RED SIGNAL AT EACH INTERSECTION ON A STATE HIGHWAY IN AN URBAN
6 CORE OR URBAN CENTER, AS DESCRIBED IN THE ADMINISTRATION’S CONTEXT
7 DRIVEN GUIDE, AT WHICH A TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL IS IN USE.

8 (B) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY CHOOSE NOT TO INSTALL A TRAFFIC
9 CONTROL DEVICE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AT A SPECIFIC
10 INTERSECTION IF THE ADMINISTRATION DETERMINES THAT THE INSTALLATION
11 WOULD SIGNIFICANTLY IMPAIR PUBLIC SAFETY.

12 11–167.

13 “Traffic control device” means any sign, signal, marking, or device that:

14 (1) Is not inconsistent with the Maryland Vehicle Law; and

15 (2) Is placed by authority of an authorized public body or official to
16 regulate, warn, or guide traffic.

17 11–168.

18 “Traffic control signal” means any traffic control device, whether manually,
19 electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic alternately is directed to stop and
20 permitted to proceed.

21 21–202.

22 (i) Unless a [sign] TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE prohibiting a turn is in place,
23 vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal, after stopping as required by subsection (h) of
24 this section, cautiously may enter the intersection and make:

25 (1) A right turn; or

26 (2) A left turn from a one–way street onto a one–way street.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
28 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2