START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 351

E4 6lr1852

By: Delegates Moon and Martinez
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Federal Agents – Digital Unmasking

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Office of the Attorney General or a State’s Attorney to
4 direct the Maryland State Police to gather and securely retain certain identifying
5 digital data about a certain federal agent or federal agents at a certain time;
6 authorizing a certain complainant to obtain certain identifying digital data only
7 pursuant to a court order issued in a certain case; and generally relating to law
8 enforcement officers.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Public Safety
11 Section 3–535
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Public Safety

17 3–535.

18 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
19 INDICATED.

20 (2) “FEDERAL AGENT” MEANS A FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
21 OFFICER OR A PRIVATE CONTRACTOR HIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
22 SECURITY TO ASSIST IN FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT.

23 (3) “FEDERAL AGENT MISCONDUCT” MEANS:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0351*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 351

1 (I) USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE BY A FEDERAL AGENT AGAINST A
2 MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC;

3 (II) ASSAULT OF A MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC BY A FEDERAL
4 AGENT;

5 (III) KIDNAPPING OR UNLAWFUL DETENTION OF A MEMBER OF
6 THE PUBLIC BY A FEDERAL AGENT; OR

7 (IV) ENGAGING IN ACTIONS BY A FEDERAL AGENT THAT LEAD TO
8 A CREDIBLE COMPLAINT OF A CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATION UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 1983.

9 (4) “IDENTIFYING DIGITAL DATA” MEANS DIGITAL INFORMATION
10 THAT CAN HELP CONFIRM THE IDENTITY OF A FEDERAL AGENT WHO IS THE SUBJECT
11 OF A COMPLAINT OF FEDERAL AGENT MISCONDUCT, INCLUDING:

12 (I) LICENSE PLATE DATA;

13 (II) CELL TOWER DATA;

14 (III) CELL PHONE DATA;

15 (IV) LOCATION DATA;

16 (V) IMAGE SEARCH RESULTS DATA;

17 (VI) GPS DATA;

18 (VII) STINGRAY DATA;

19 (VIII) FACIAL RECOGNITION DATA; AND

20 (IX) ANY OTHER RECOVERABLE DATA THAT MAY HELP IDENTIFY
21 FEDERAL AGENTS.

22 (B) ON RECEIPT OF A COMPLAINT OF FEDERAL AGENT MISCONDUCT, THE
23 OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR A STATE’S ATTORNEY MAY DIRECT THE
24 MARYLAND STATE POLICE TO GATHER AND SECURELY RETAIN AS MUCH
25 IDENTIFYING DIGITAL DATA AS POSSIBLE ABOUT THE FEDERAL AGENT OR FEDERAL
26 AGENTS WHO ARE THE SUBJECT OF THE FEDERAL AGENT MISCONDUCT COMPLAINT.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 351 3

1 (C) A COMPLAINANT MAY OBTAIN ACCESS TO THE IDENTIFYING DIGITAL
2 DATA RELEVANT TO THE COMPLAINANT’S COMPLAINT ONLY PURSUANT TO A COURT
3 ORDER ISSUED IN:

4 (1) A 42 U.S.C. § 1983 CIVIL RIGHTS CASE; OR

5 (2) A CRIMINAL PROCEEDING INVOLVING THE SUBJECT OF THE
6 FEDERAL AGENT MISCONDUCT COMPLAINT.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3