START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 396

O4 6lr1324
CF 6lr1715

By: Delegates Pasteur, Acevero, Addison, Alston, Amprey, Boyce, Conaway,
Crutchfield, Ebersole, Embry, Forbes, Hill, Holmes, Lewis, J. Long,
Martinez, McCaskill, Mireku–North, Patterson, Phillips, Pruski, Ruff,
Schmidt, Simmons, Stein, Stinnett, Taveras, Toles, White Holland, Williams,
Wilson, Wims, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Residential Child Care Programs – Education of Children and Training of Child
3 and Youth Care Practitioners

4 FOR the purpose of requiring operators of certain residential child care programs to provide
5 certain educational opportunities to the children for whom they have legal custody
6 or care and control; requiring that applicants to be child and youth care practitioners
7 undergo certain training; and generally relating to residential child care programs.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 7–309
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Health Occupations
15 Section 20–302.1
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
19 Article – Human Services
20 Section 8–704(8), (10), and (11)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0396*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 396

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 7–309.

5 (a) (1) In this section, “residential child care program” means a program that:

6 (i) Provides care for children 24 hours a day within a structured set
7 of services and activities designed to achieve objectives related to the needs of the children
8 served; and

9 (ii) Is licensed by the Maryland Department of Health, the
10 Department of Human Services, or the Department of Juvenile Services.

11 (2) A “residential child care program” includes:

12 (i) Group homes;

13 (ii) Alternative living units; and

14 (iii) Emergency shelter care.

15 (b) Each licensed operator of a residential child care program who has legal
16 custody or care and control of a child who is at least 5 years old and under the age of 16
17 years and receives State funding as provided in § 5–526 of the Family Law Article:

18 (1) Shall enroll the child in the local school system where the residential
19 child care program is located unless the residential child care program operates an
20 approved educational program in accordance with the licensing regulations that govern the
21 residential child care program;

22 (2) Shall expeditiously initiate and monitor the transfer of the academic
23 records of a child in the operator’s care from the transferring school to [insure] ENSURE
24 that the academic records are transferred to the school that the child will be attending
25 while living in the operator’s care;

26 (3) (i) May request a meeting with the child’s teachers; [and]

27 (ii) Shall meet the child’s teachers at the time of enrollment and at
28 any other time the school or a teacher requests TO DETERMINE THE BEST WAYS TO
29 SUPPORT THE CHILD; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 396 3

1 (III) SHALL CONTACT THE CHILD’S TEACHER WITH ANY
2 QUESTIONS ABOUT SCHOOL ASSIGNMENTS, THE CHILD’S BEHAVIOR AT SCHOOL, AND
3 EXTRACURRICULAR OPPORTUNITIES TO SUPPORT THE CHILD;

4 (4) Shall sign the child’s report card, [insure] ENSURE that the report card
5 is returned to school, and include a copy of the report card in the child’s case record; AND

6 (5) SHALL ENSURE THAT THE CHILD IS PROVIDED:

7 (I) REGULARLY SCHEDULED TIME TO STUDY TO SUPPORT THE
8 CHILD’S ACADEMIC WORK;

9 (II) ASSISTANCE WITH HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENTS, PROJECTS,
10 AND TEST PREPARATION IN ORDER TO REINFORCE EDUCATIONAL CONCEPTS
11 TAUGHT TO THE CHILD;

12 (III) ENCOURAGEMENT AND SUPPORT FOR PARTICIPATION IN
13 EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES;

14 (IV) FOR A CHILD WITH AN INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION
15 PROGRAM UNDER THE FEDERAL INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES EDUCATION ACT
16 OR A 504 PLAN UNDER § 504 OF THE FEDERAL REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973,
17 APPLICABLE EDUCATIONAL GOALS TO COMPLETE WITHIN THE RESIDENTIAL CHILD
18 CARE PROGRAM THAT ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE CHILD’S PROGRAM OR PLAN;

19 (V) FOR A CHILD WITH A BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTION PLAN
20 UNDER SUBTITLE 11 OF THIS TITLE, BEHAVIORAL SUPPORTS AND GOALS THAT
21 REINFORCE THE GOALS OF THE CHILD’S PLAN IN THE SCHOOL SETTING; AND

22 (VI) FOR CHILDREN DUALLY ENROLLED IN A HIGH SCHOOL AND
23 AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION, ACCESS TO A COMPUTER IN ORDER TO
24 COMPLETE ASSIGNMENTS THAT REQUIRE COMPUTER SOFTWARE OR THE INTERNET.

25 Article – Health Occupations

26 20–302.1.

27 (a) To qualify for a certificate as a residential child and youth care practitioner,
28 an applicant shall be an individual who meets the requirements of this section.

29 (b) The applicant shall be of good moral character.

30 (c) The applicant shall have completed:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 396

1 (1) A State and national criminal history records check; and

2 (2) Unless waived by the Board under § 20–303(d) of this subtitle, a child
3 protective services background clearance.

4 (d) The applicant shall be:

5 (1) At least 21 years old; or

6 (2) At least 18 years old and have earned at least an associate’s or
7 bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university.

8 (e) The applicant shall have:

9 (1) A high school diploma or equivalent and have successfully completed
10 an approved training program; and

11 (2) (i) At least 2 years’ experience in the human service field; or

12 (ii) An associate’s or bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or
13 university.

14 (f) (1) (I) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the
15 applicant shall have successfully completed a training program approved by the Board.

16 (II) THE BOARD’S PROGRAM SHALL INCLUDE TRAINING ON:

17 1. THE ROLE OF THE RESIDENTIAL CHILD AND YOUTH
18 CARE PRACTITIONER;

19 2. CHILD DEVELOPMENT;

20 3. CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS;

21 4. RECOGNIZING DIFFERENCES IN PROCESSING
22 INFORMATION AND THE DIVERSE WAYS CHILDREN LEARN;

23 5. RECOGNIZING BEHAVIORS THAT IMPACT A CHILD’S
24 ABILITY TO LEARN AND PRACTICE SOCIAL NORMS;

25 6. CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT IDENTIFICATION AND
26 REPORTING;

27 7. SUICIDE RISK ASSESSMENT AND PREVENTION;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 396 5

1 8. APPROVED FORMS OF DISCIPLINE AND BEHAVIORAL
2 MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES, INCLUDING THE USE OF BEHAVIORAL INTERVENTION
3 PLANS UNDER TITLE 7, SUBTITLE 11 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE;

4 9. COMMUNICATION SKILLS;

5 10. PARENTING ISSUES, COLLABORATION WITH
6 FAMILIES, AND THE SUPPORT OF CHILDREN;

7 11. THE PSYCHOSOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL NEEDS OF
8 CHILDREN, FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIPS, AND THE IMPACT OF SEPARATION;

9 12. EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND SAFETY
10 PRACTICES;

11 13. ANNUAL FIRST AID TRAINING, INCLUDING
12 CERTIFICATION IN CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION;

13 14. MEDICATION MANAGEMENT;

14 15. INFECTION CONTROL; AND

15 16. IF APPLICABLE, FOOD PREPARATION AND
16 NUTRITION.

17 (2) (i) An applicant who has an associate’s or bachelor’s degree from an
18 accredited college or university may be waived from the training program requirement, if
19 the applicant passes an examination and meets other requirements established by the
20 Board under this subtitle.

21 (ii) The Board shall establish requirements and procedures for
22 waiving the training program requirement for an applicant under subparagraph (i) of this
23 paragraph.

24 (g) The applicant shall pass an examination given by the Board under this
25 subtitle.

26 (h) The Board shall waive the education, experience, training, and examination
27 requirements of this section for an applicant who:

28 (1) Applies for certification on or before October 1, 2015; and

29 (2) Presents to the Board satisfactory evidence that the applicant worked
30 as a residential child and youth care practitioner in the State for at least 2 years before
31 October 1, 2015.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 396

1 Article – Human Services

2 8–704.

3 A contract awarded or renewed between an agency and a provider for a residential
4 child care program shall:

5 (8) require the provider to comply with § 7–309 of the Education Article;

6 (10) require the residential child care program to have certified residential
7 child and youth care practitioners, as required under § 20–301 of the Health Occupations
8 Article; and

9 (11) require the residential child care program to have a certified program
10 administrator as required under § 20–301 of the Health Occupations Article.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
12 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6