START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 393 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 393 
(Delegate Nkongolo, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Scalp Cooling Systems - Required Coverage 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) that provide coverage for chemotherapy to 
treat cancer to provide coverage for scalp cooling systems used for the preservation of hair 
in connection with the chemotherapy treatment. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, 
and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or 
renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
filings and complaints can likely be handled with existing budgeted resources. State 
Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program expenditures increase by an 
indeterminate but likely minimal amount beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in health care expenditures for local governments that 
purchase fully insured plans. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that specified carriers must provide to their enrollees, including the following 
coverage regarding cancer chemotherapy, hair prosthesis, and standard fertility 
preservation procedures: 
 
 
Carriers that provide coverage for both oral and intravenous or injectable cancer 
chemotherapy are prohibited from imposing dollar limits, copayments, deductibles, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 393/ Page 2 
or coinsurance requirements on coverage for orally administered cancer 
chemotherapy that are less favorable to an enrollee than those that apply to cancer 
chemotherapy administered intravenously or by injection. Carriers may not 
reclassify cancer chemotherapy or increase a copayment, deductible, coinsurance 
requirement, or other out-of-pocket expense imposed on cancer chemotherapy to 
achieve compliance with these prohibitions. 
 
For an enrollee or insured whose hair loss results from chemotherapy or radiation 
treatment for cancer, certain carriers must cover one hair prosthesis costing up 
to $350. The prosthesis must be prescribed by the oncologist in attendance. 
 
Certain carriers must provide coverage for standard fertility preservation procedures 
that are (1) performed on a policyholder or subscriber or on the covered dependent 
of a policyholder or subscriber and (2) medically necessary to preserve fertility due 
to a need for medical treatment that may directly or indirectly cause iatrogenic 
infertility, including that caused by chemotherapy. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the 
State benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must 
be the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits.  
 
Effective January 1, 2026, Medicare covers mechanical scalp cooling, including 
reimbursement for the initial fitting of the scalp cooling cap and patient education, 
pre-infusion cooling, and post-infusion cooling (in 30-minute increments). Coverage 
applies only to automated scalp cooling systems that are approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA). Some private insurance companies cover or reimburse for 
these systems. Manual cold caps are not regulated or FDA-approved and, thus, are unlikely 
to be covered by insurance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 393/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program is largely self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, with the exception of 
the one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not subject to this 
mandate. However, the program generally provides coverage for mandated health 
insurance benefits. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that the program does not currently 
provide coverage for scalp cooling systems and that there are very few durable medical 
equipment providers who offer the devices, which means all claims would be subject to 
out-of-network plan provisions. Program expenditures are likely to increase by a nominal 
amount under the bill (estimated between a low of $11,600 to as much as $302,800), 
depending on the number of cancer patients who elect to use a scalp cooling system. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, 
the State would be required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies 
to the individual and small group ACA plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1187 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 272 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  American Cancer Society, Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 393/ Page 4 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third‑party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 393/ Page 5 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one‑third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense‑incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 393/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 393/ Page 7 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 393/ Page 8 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8