START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 302

R1 6lr0916
HB 679/25 – ENT

By: Delegate Grammer
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Transportation Authority – Patapsco River Toll Bridge – Design

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Transportation Authority to design and locate
4 the entrances and exits to the new bridge over the Patapsco River to ensure that a
5 vehicle that does not cross the bridge is not required to pay a toll; and generally
6 relating to toll bridges.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 4–101(a) and (b)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY adding to
13 Article – Transportation
14 Section 4–408
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Transportation

20 4–101.

21 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (b) “Authority” means the Maryland Transportation Authority.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0302*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 302

1 4–408.

2 THE AUTHORITY SHALL DESIGN AND LOCATE THE ENTRANCES, EXITS, AND
3 THE ASSOCIATED ROADS OF THE NEW BRIDGE OVER THE PATAPSCO RIVER THAT
4 WILL REPLACE THE COLLAPSED FRANCIS SCOTT KEY BRIDGE TO ENSURE THAT A
5 VEHICLE THAT WILL NOT CROSS THE BRIDGE IS NOT REQUIRED TO PAY A TOLL.

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
7 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2