START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 304 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 304 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Information Act - Data Manipulation 
 
 
This bill establishes that providing a public record in response to a request that requires 
specified data manipulation that the records database program is capable of performing 
does not constitute the creation of a new public record under the Maryland Public 
Information Act (PIA).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information 
about the affairs of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. 
Each governmental unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom 
a member of the public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG) must post all such contact information on its website and in any 
Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 304/ Page 2 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Copies of Public Records 
 
A custodian must provide an applicant who is authorized to inspect a public record with a 
copy, printout, or photograph of the public record, or provide the applicant with access to 
the public record to make the copy, printout, or photograph, upon the applicant’s request. 
A custodian must provide the copy in a searchable and analyzable electronic format if the 
public record is in that format, the applicant requests the copy in that format, and the 
custodian is able to provide a copy in that format without disclosing confidential or 
protected information or information that the custodian has decided should not be 
inspected.  
 
If a public record exists in a searchable and analyzable electronic format, the act of a 
custodian providing a portion of the public record in a searchable and analyzable electronic 
format does not constitute creating a new public record. 
 
Public Information Act Compliance Board  
 
The Public Information Act Compliance Board (PIACB), a five-member board appointed 
by the Governor, receives, reviews, and resolves complaints from applicants alleging that 
a custodian of a public record charged an unreasonable fee of more than $350. The board 
must issue a written opinion as to whether a violation occurred and, if it finds that a 
custodian charged an unreasonable fee, order the custodian to reduce the fee and refund the 
difference, as specified.  
 
Chapter 658 expands the jurisdiction of the board to include receiving, reviewing, and 
resolving additional types of PIA disputes and institutes an integrated PIA compliant 
resolution process that includes the Public Access Ombudsman. Under the Act, an 
applicant, an applicant’s designee, or a custodian may file a written complaint with PIACB 
if (1) the complainant has attempted to resolve the dispute through the Office of the Public 
Access Ombudsman and (2) the ombudsman has issued a final determination stating that 
the dispute was not resolved. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 304/ Page 3 
Among other things, the board recommended in its September 2025 annual report that PIA 
be altered to clarify that, so long as a database has the capability to do so, compiling and 
analyzing data does not constitute the creation of a new record.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Most agencies and local governments advise that the bill does not 
have a material fiscal or operational effect on them. However, several agencies responded 
that the bill increases workloads associated with responding to PIA requests and that they 
require additional staff and other resources to handle the increased workload. As noted 
below, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with these responses.  
 
The Comptroller advises that the bill expands what they must produce in response to PIA 
requests and that more custom data queries will be demanded as part of those requests. The 
Comptroller also advises that it must hire one full-time administrator at a cost of 
approximately $97,200 beginning in fiscal 2027 to facilitate those anticipated requests. The 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) advises that the bill could result in 
potentially unlimited data manipulation tasks for PIA requests. MSDE further advises that 
it must hire one full-time data analyst and upgrade its software capabilities at a cost of 
approximately $199,700, which includes a salary and one-time technology costs, beginning 
in fiscal 2027. The University System of Maryland advises that the bill will result in an 
indeterminate but potentially significant impact for the University of Maryland, 
College Park, as the bill may result in the university incurring additional software expenses 
in order to comply with additional PIA requests at a cost of at least $100,000 in fiscal 2027. 
 
DLS disagrees. The bill does not require custodians to conduct additional forms of data 
manipulation when creating public records; instead, the bill merely establishes that 
specified forms of data manipulation that can be (and are) already performed by existing 
database programs do not constitute the creation of a new public record under PIA. Current 
law already specifies that a custodian is not required to create, compile, or program a new 
public record in response to a request. Therefore, the bill is not anticipated to materially 
affect State operations or finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s 
counties; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; 
Maryland Cannabis Administration; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 304/ Page 4 
Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4