START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 341

J1 6lr1114

By: Delegates Wims, Kaiser, Kaufman, J. Long, Pruski, Schindler, Spiegel,
Stinnett, and Tomlinson
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Health – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Health in
4 the Maryland Department of Health; and generally relating to the Maryland
5 Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Health.

6 BY adding to
7 Article – Health – General
8 Section 13–2401 through 13–2409 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 24.
9 Maryland Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Health”
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 Preamble

13 WHEREAS, Boys and men in Maryland experience disproportionately high rates of
14 chronic disease, suicide, substance use overdose deaths, and other causes of premature
15 mortality; and

16 WHEREAS, These outcomes are influenced by social determinants such as housing
17 instability, unemployment, and limited educational attainment; and

18 WHEREAS, Targeted, evidence–based interventions are needed to promote health
19 equity, strengthen families, and improve life expectancy for boys and men in Maryland;
20 and

21 WHEREAS, Improving the health and well–being of boys and men in Maryland is
22 essential to family and community stability, economic productivity, and public health; now,
23 therefore,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0341*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 341

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Health – General

4 SUBTITLE 24. MARYLAND COMMISSION FOR BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH.

5 13–2401.

6 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND COMMISSION FOR
7 BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH.

8 13–2402.

9 THERE IS A MARYLAND COMMISSION FOR BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH IN THE
10 DEPARTMENT.

11 13–2403.

12 (A) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF 18 MEMBERS.

13 (B) (1) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE
14 APPOINTED FROM AMONG APPLICANTS WHO HAVE BEEN NOMINATED AND
15 RECOMMENDED FOR APPOINTMENT BY ORGANIZATIONS LOCATED IN THE STATE
16 WHOSE INTERESTS RELATE TO BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH OR FAMILY INVOLVEMENT:

17 (I) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR;

18 (II) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
19 SENATE; AND

20 (III) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE
21 HOUSE.

22 (2) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE
23 APPOINTED FROM APPLICANTS APPLYING ON THEIR OWN BEHALF:

24 (I) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR;

25 (II) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
26 SENATE; AND

27 (III) THREE MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE
28 HOUSE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 341 3

1 (C) (1) A MEMBER SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE APPOINTING
2 AUTHORITY.

3 (2) THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

4 (3) AT THE END OF A TERM, THE MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE
5 UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

6 (4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
7 ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM AND UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
8 QUALIFIES.

9 (5) THE APPOINTING AUTHORITY MAY AUTHORIZE A MEMBER TO
10 SERVE A SECOND CONSECUTIVE TERM WITHOUT GOING THROUGH THE FORMAL
11 APPOINTMENT PROCESS.

12 (6) A MEMBER MAY NOT SERVE MORE THAN TWO CONSECUTIVE
13 TERMS.

14 (D) A MEMBER:

15 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
16 COMMISSION; BUT

17 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
18 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

19 (E) THE COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST 10 TIMES EACH YEAR.

20 (F) A MEMBER WHO FAILS TO ATTEND AT LEAST 50% OF THE REGULARLY
21 SCHEDULED MEETINGS DURING A 12–MONTH PERIOD SHALL BE CONSIDERED TO
22 HAVE RESIGNED.

23 (G) THE COMMISSION SHALL MAKE EACH VACANCY ON THE COMMISSION
24 KNOWN TO THE PUBLIC.

25 13–2404.

26 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL ELECT A CHAIR AND A VICE CHAIR FROM
27 AMONG ITS MEMBERS.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 341

1 (B) THE COMMISSION MAY APPOINT ANY OFFICERS THAT IT CONSIDERS
2 NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES.

3 13–2405.

4 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL:

5 (1) PERIODICALLY REVIEW HEALTH DATA TO INFORM STRATEGIES
6 AIMED AT REDUCING NEGATIVE HEALTH OUTCOMES OF BOYS AND MEN FOR
7 SPECIFIC HEALTH CONDITIONS, INCLUDING PROSTATE AND TESTICULAR CANCER,
8 ORAL CANCER, CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE, DEPRESSION, DIABETES, AND
9 SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS;

10 (2) COLLABORATE WITH PARTNERS TO SHAPE AND ADVISE ON
11 POLICIES AND PROGRAMS, INCLUDING COMMUNITY OUTREACH AND
12 PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS, DESIGNED TO:

13 (I) RAISE PUBLIC AWARENESS OF BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH
14 ISSUES, INCLUDING HEALTH PROBLEMS THAT DISPROPORTIONATELY AFFECT BOYS
15 AND MEN AND THE IMPORTANCE OF PATERNAL INVOLVEMENT IN THE FAMILY;

16 (II) SUPPORT BOYS’ AND MEN’S PARTICIPATION IN
17 HEALTH–PROMOTING ACTIVITIES FOR THEMSELVES AND THEIR FAMILIES,
18 INCLUDING REGULAR PHYSICIAN CHECKUPS, EARLY DETECTION AND PREVENTIVE
19 HEALTH SCREENINGS, AND HEALTHY LIFESTYLE PRACTICES; AND

20 (III) IDENTIFY AND PROMOTE STRATEGIES TO REDUCE OR
21 ELIMINATE HEALTH DISPARITIES RELATED TO MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY AMONG
22 BOYS AND MEN;

23 (3) PROMOTE GENDER AND CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE CARE ACROSS
24 THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IN THE STATE; AND

25 (4) MONITOR FEDERAL AND STATE POLICY AND LEGISLATION THAT
26 MAY AFFECT THE AREAS OF BOYS’ AND MEN’S HEALTH AND FAMILY INVOLVEMENT.

27 (B) THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER POPULATION DIVERSITY WHEN
28 CARRYING OUT THE DUTIES ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
29 SECTION.

30 13–2406.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 341 5

1 (A) THE COMMISSION, SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE SECRETARY,
2 MAY ACCEPT:

3 (1) FEDERAL FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

4 (2) PRIVATE GIFTS AND DONATIONS FROM INDIVIDUALS, PRIVATE
5 ORGANIZATIONS, OR FOUNDATIONS.

6 (B) THE ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF FEDERAL FUNDS MAY NOT BE
7 CONSIDERED A COMMITMENT OF STATE FUNDS AND PLACES NO OBLIGATION ON
8 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO CONTINUE THE PURPOSE FOR WHICH THE FUNDS ARE
9 AVAILABLE.

10 13–2407.

11 EACH UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT SHALL FULLY COOPERATE WITH THE
12 COMMISSION IN THE PERFORMANCE OF THE COMMISSION’S DUTIES.

13 13–2408.

14 (A) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 30 EACH YEAR, THE COMMISSION SHALL
15 SUBMIT RECOMMENDATIONS FOR POLICY CHANGES THAT WILL FURTHER THE
16 GOALS OF THE COMMISSION TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
17 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE
18 AND THE HOUSE HEALTH COMMITTEE.

19 (B) THE REPORT SUBMITTED IN 2028 AND EVERY 2 YEARS THEREAFTER
20 SHALL INCLUDE PROGRESS INDICATORS AND DATA TRENDS BASED ON THE
21 COMMISSION’S ACTIVITIES.

22 13–2409.

23 THE COMMISSION MAY NOT ADOPT REGULATIONS.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in making appointments
25 under this Act, the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House
26 shall ensure to the extent practicable geographic, demographic, and professional diversity
27 among the membership of the Maryland Commission for Boys’ and Men’s Health.

28 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5