START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 377 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 377 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health 
 
 
Physician Assistants - Parity With Other Health Care Practitioners 
 
 
This bill (1) authorizes a physician assistant (PA) to perform numerous additional duties, 
as specified; (2) requires that health maintenance organization (HMO) quality of care 
standards include a requirement that each HMO member has an opportunity to select a PA 
as a primary care provider from among those available to the HMO; (3) adds a PA member 
to the Statewide Advisory Commission on Immunizations; and (4) excludes a PA from the 
definition of “health care practitioner” with respect to health care staffing agencies. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect governmental operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Expansion of Authorized Duties 
 
The bill generally authorizes a PA to perform additional duties in specified areas of law, as 
discussed below. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 377/ Page 2 
Correctional Services – Involuntary Placement of Pregnant Incarcerated Individual in 
Restrictive Housing:  Generally, a pregnant incarcerated individual may not be 
involuntarily placed in restrictive housing (including involuntary medical isolation or 
infirmary). However, a pregnant incarcerated individual who is deemed to need infirmary 
care must be admitted to the infirmary on the order of a primary care nurse practitioner or 
obstetrician. 
 
Under the bill, a pregnant incarcerated individual must also be admitted to the infirmary 
on order of a PA. 
 
Guardian of a Disabled Person:  On petition and after any notice or hearing, a court may 
appoint a guardian of the person of a disabled person. A guardian of the person must be 
appointed if the court determines from clear and convincing evidence that a person lacks 
sufficient understanding or capacity to make or communicate responsible personal 
decisions (including provisions for health care, food, clothing, or shelter) because of any 
mental disability, disease, habitual drunkenness, or addiction to drugs and no less 
restrictive form of intervention is available that is consistent with the person’s welfare and 
safety. 
 
A petition for guardianship of a disabled person must include signed and verified 
certificates of competency from the following licensed health care professionals who have 
each examined or evaluated the disabled person:  (1) two physicians; or (2) one physician 
and either one psychologist, one certified social worker-clinical (LCSW-C), or one nurse 
practitioner. An examination or evaluation by at least one of these health care professionals 
must occur within 21 days before filing a petition for guardianship of a disabled person. 
 
Under the bill, a PA may sign a certificate of competency with a physician. 
 
Health Care Decisions:  Prior to providing, withholding, or withdrawing treatment for 
which authorization has been obtained or will be sought, the attending physician and a 
second physician or nurse practitioner, one of whom must have examined the patient within 
two hours before making the certification, must certify in writing that the patient is 
incapable of making an informed decision regarding the treatment. The certification must 
be based on a personal examination of the patient. If a patient is unconscious, or unable to 
communicate by any means, the certification of a second physician or nurse practitioner is 
not required. When authorization is sought for treatment of a mental illness, the 
second physician or nurse practitioner may not be otherwise currently involved in the 
treatment of the person assessed. 
 
A health care provider may not withhold or withdraw life-sustaining procedures on the 
basis of an advance directive where no agent has been appointed or on the basis of the 
authorization of a surrogate, unless (1) the patient’s attending physician and a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 377/ Page 3 
second physician or nurse practitioner have certified that the patient is in a terminal 
condition or has an end-stage condition or (2) two physicians, one of whom is a neurologist, 
neurosurgeon, or other physician who has special expertise in the evaluation of cognitive 
functioning, certify that the patient is in a persistent vegetative state. 
 
Under the bill, a PA may be the second health care provider to certify that an individual is 
incapable of making an informed decision regarding treatment. If authorization is sought 
for treatment of a mental illness, the PA may not be otherwise currently involved in the 
treatment of the person assessed. A PA may also be one of two health care practitioners 
who may certify that a patient is in a terminal condition or has an end-stage condition; 
however, a PA may not certify that a patient is in a persistent vegetative state. 
 
Voluntary Admission of a Minor for the Treatment of a Mental Disorder:  A parent or 
guardian may apply, on behalf of a minor, for the minor’s voluntary admission to (1) any 
facility that is not a State facility; (2) a regional institute for children and adolescents; and 
(3) the child or adolescent unit of a State facility for the treatment of a mental disorder. A 
facility may not admit an individual unless:   
 
 
the individual has a mental disorder; 
 
the mental disorder is susceptible to care or treatment; 
 
the applicant understands the nature of a request for admission; and 
 
specified health care professionals assent to the admission. 
 
For admission to a child or adolescent unit of a State facility, assent to admission may be 
given by (1) a physician and a psychologist; (2) two physicians; (3) a physician and a 
psychiatric nurse practitioner; (4) a physician and an LCSW-C; and (5) a physician and a 
licensed clinical professional counselor (LCPC). 
 
Under the bill, a PA, in conjunction with a physician, may assent to the voluntary admission 
of a minor to the child or adolescent unit of a State facility. 
 
Voluntary Admission of a Disabled Person:  A disabled person may apply for voluntary 
admission to a facility for the treatment of a mental disorder if the person submits the 
required written application and certification that the person has the capacity to execute the 
application and understands the criteria for voluntary admission and the procedure for 
requesting discharge from the facility. Certification may be given by (1) a physician and a 
psychologist; (2) two physicians; or (3) a physician and a psychiatric nurse practitioner. 
 
A certificate for voluntary admission of a disabled person must be in the required form and 
based on the personal examination of the health care practitioner who signs the certificate. 
A certificate may not be used for admission if the underlying examination was conducted 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 377/ Page 4 
more than one week before the certificate was signed or if the health care practitioner who 
signed the certificate has a financial interest in the facility at which admission is sought or 
is related to the disabled person or the guardian of the person of the disabled person. 
 
Under the bill, a PA, in conjunction with a physician, may certify a disabled person for 
voluntary admission. The PA must have personally examined the disabled person within 
one week of signing the certificate. 
 
Involuntary Admission Process:  Under the Health-General Article, application for the 
involuntary admission of an individual to a facility or Veteran’s Administration (VA) 
hospital may be made by any person who has a legitimate interest in the welfare of the 
individual. An application for involuntary admission for the treatment of a mental disorder 
must (1) be in writing; (2) be dated; (3) be on the required form; (4) state the relationship 
of the applicant to the individual for whom admission is sought; (5) be signed by the 
applicant; (6) be accompanied by the certificates of either a physician and a psychologist, 
two physicians, a physician and a psychiatric nurse practitioner, a physician and an 
LCSW-C, or a physician and an LCPC; and (7) contain any other required information. 
 
A certificate for involuntary admission must be based on the personal examination of the 
health care provider who signs the certificate. The certificate must contain:  (1) a diagnosis 
of a mental disorder of the individual; (2) an opinion that the individual needs inpatient 
care or treatment; and (3) an opinion that admission to a facility or VA hospital is needed 
for the protection of the individual or another. A certificate may not be used for admission 
if the examination was done more than one week before the certificate was signed or more 
than 30 days before the facility or the VA hospital receives the application for admission 
or if the health care provider who signed the certificate has a financial interest in the facility 
at which admission is sought or is related to the individual or applicant. 
 
Under the bill, a PA, in conjunction with a physician, may certify an individual for 
involuntary admission to a facility or a VA hospital. 
 
Emergency Evaluation:  An emergency evaluation petition is a legal process that enables 
the petitioner to have a person who is suffering from mental illness or is in serious mental 
crisis taken into custody and examined by a medical professional in a designated 
emergency facility. A petition for an emergency evaluation may be made by a peace officer 
who has personally observed the individual or the individual’s behavior. Specified health 
care providers may also petition for an emergency evaluation and must give any such 
petition to a peace officer, including a physician, psychologist, LCSW-C, LCPC, clinical 
nurse specialist in psychiatric and mental health nursing, psychiatric nurse practitioner, 
licensed clinical marriage and family therapist, or health officer or designee (who has 
examined the individual). Any other interested person may also petition for an emergency 
evaluation and must present any such petition to the court for immediate review. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 377/ Page 5 
Under the bill, a PA may petition for an emergency evaluation and must give any such 
petition to a peace officer. 
 
Emergency and Allergy Treatment Program:  The Emergency and Allergy Treatment 
Program within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) authorizes a certificate holder 
or their agent to administer life-saving treatment to individuals who have severe adverse 
reactions to allergens or insect stings when physician or emergency medical services are 
not immediately available in a youth camp. A licensed physician or nurse practitioner may 
prescribe and dispense, and a licensed pharmacist may dispense, emergency use 
epinephrine to a certificate holder. A certificate holder may receive, possess, and store 
emergency use epinephrine. A cause of action may not arise against any physician or nurse 
practitioner for any act or omission if the physician prescribes or dispenses emergency use 
epinephrine and the necessary paraphernalia for administration of emergency use 
epinephrine, in good faith, to a person certified by MDH under statute. 
 
Under the bill, a PA may prescribe and dispense emergency use epinephrine to a certificate 
holder. A PA is also granted the same immunity from liability as a licensed physician or 
nurse practitioner. 
 
Department of Disabilities Attendant Care Program:  The purpose of the Attendant Care 
Program is to provide financial assistance to eligible individuals for attendant care services 
and ongoing additional supports. An “eligible individual” is an individual who is between 
18 and 65 years of age and has a severe chronic or permanent disability that precludes or 
significantly impairs the individual’s independent performance of essential activities of 
daily living, self-care, or mobility. The program must ensure that, at any given time,  
at least 50% of eligible individuals receiving financial assistance under the program are 
either gainfully employed, actively seeking employment, or attending an institution of 
postsecondary or higher education. The remainder of eligible individuals receiving 
financial assistance under the program must be individuals who (1) reside in a nursing 
facility or similar institution licensed to provide chronic or intermediate care and will be 
deinstitutionalized as a result of the program or (2) are certified by an attending physician 
or certified nurse practitioner as being at risk of placement in a nursing facility or similar 
institution if attendant care services are not received in the community. 
 
Under the bill, a PA may certify an eligible individual as being at risk of placement in a 
nursing facility or similar institution. 
 
State Employees – Certificates of Illness or Disability:  In general, a State employee who 
uses sick leave for five or more consecutive workdays is prohibited from receiving sick 
leave pay unless the employee gives the employee’s immediate supervisor an original 
certificate of illness or disability, which must be signed by a medical doctor, chiropractor, 
clinical psychologist, dentist, LCSW-C, nurse midwife, nurse practitioner, oral surgeon, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 377/ Page 6 
optometrist, physical therapist, podiatrist, LCPC, accredited Christian Science practitioner, 
or health care provider as defined by the federal Family Medical Leave Act. 
 
Under the bill, a PA may sign an original certificate of illness or disability. 
 
Health Maintenance Organization – Standard of Quality of Care 
 
The Secretary of Health must adopt regulations that set out reasonable standards of quality 
of care that an HMO must provide to its members. The standards must include a 
requirement that each member have an opportunity to select a primary physician or a 
certified nurse practitioner from among those available to the HMO. This provision does 
not require an HMO to include certified nurse practitioners on the HMO’s provider panel 
as primary care providers. 
 
Under the bill, each HMO member must have the opportunity to select a PA from among 
those available to the HMO. 
 
Statewide Advisory Commission on Immunizations 
 
The Statewide Advisory Commission on Immunizations determines where vaccine 
shortages exist in Maryland and which vaccines are in short supply. The commission also 
makes recommendations on immunization requirements for children entering school; the 
elimination of disparities in vaccine distribution; options for the purchasing of vaccines; 
and plans to increase the availability and affordability of vaccines in the State. The advisory 
commission currently includes a nurse practitioner, a pharmacist, and several physicians 
with specified membership or experience. 
 
Under the bill, one PA who is a member of the Maryland Academy of Physician Assistants 
is added as a term-limited member of the advisory commission. 
 
Definition of Health Care Practitioner – Health Care Staffing Agencies 
 
With respect to health care staffing agencies, a “health care practitioner” means any 
individual licensed or certified under the Health Occupations Article who is a licensed 
practical nurse, registered nurse, certified nursing assistant, or practices in an allied health 
care field. “Health care practitioner” does not include (1) an acupuncturist; (2) a dentist; 
(3) a nurse anesthetist; (4) a nurse midwife; (5) a nurse practitioner; (6) a pharmacist; (7) a 
physician; or (8) a podiatrist. 
 
Under the bill, a PA is added to the list of practitioners who are not included in this 
definition of “health care practitioner.” 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 377/ Page 7 
Small Business Effect:  PAs may perform additional specified duties under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 722 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 326 (Senators Lam and Carozza) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7