START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 370 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 370 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George's County - Income Tax - Credit for Employers Providing Parental 
Engagement Leave  
PG 419-26 
 
 
This bill creates a refundable credit against the State income tax for employers in 
Prince George’s County that provide parental engagement leave to qualified employees. 
The credit equals the qualified employee’s hourly wage rate times the number of parental 
leave hours used by the employee during the taxable year, up to $800 per qualified 
employee. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), in consultation with the 
Comptroller, must develop and make available a certification form to be used in claiming 
the credit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease significantly, potentially by more than 
$720,000 annually, beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. To the extent credits are 
claimed against the corporate income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) 
revenues and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures are also affected. 
General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by $40,200 in FY 2027; 
future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
  
Local Effect:  Local Highway User Revenues (HUR) decrease beginning in FY 2027 to 
the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures are 
likely not affected, although the Prince George’s County Board of Education may incur an 
administrative burden. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 370/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Parental engagement leave is leave away from work that is:   
 
 
provided at the discretion of an employer for the benefit of a qualified employee; 
 
used for allowing the qualified employee to attend school-related meetings or events 
at the school in which the student of the qualified employee is enrolled; 
 
established by written policy; 
 
at least 10 but not more than 20 hours of leave per qualified employee; 
 
paid at the same wage rate as the qualified employee normally earns; and 
 
supplemental to any other leave or benefits provided by the employer to the 
qualified employee. 
 
A qualified employee is an individual who is the parent (or guardian with legal custody) of 
a school student and uses parental engagement leave in accordance with an employer 
policy. “School” is defined as a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school in 
Prince George’s County, including a charter school. 
 
The bill specifies employer prohibitions of parental engagement leave and the certification 
process, which includes requiring qualified employees to obtain proof of attendance from 
the school principal and a member of the Prince George’s County Board of Education 
representing the public school or another administrator if it is a nonpublic school. 
 
Current Law:  No State income tax credit of this type exists for employers providing leave 
to attend school functions, but the State previously provided a tax credit to small businesses 
that provided paid sick and safe leave. Chapter 571 of 2018 created a refundable credit 
against the State income tax for a small business that employed 14 or fewer employees and 
provided paid sick and safe leave in accordance with the Maryland Healthy Working 
Families Act to a qualified employee. A qualified employee was one who earned 250% or 
less of the annual federal poverty guidelines for a single-person household. The credit was 
the lesser of $500 for each qualified employee or the total amount of qualified employer 
benefits accrued by qualified employees. The Department of Commerce was authorized to 
issue tax certificates not exceeding $5 million annually. Chapter 717 of 2024 repealed the 
tax credit. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may decrease significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2027 due to credits claimed against the State income tax. To the extent credits are 
claimed against the corporate income tax, a portion of foregone tax revenues will reduce 
HEIF and TTF revenues. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 370/ Page 3 
The Maryland Department of Planning projects school enrollment to be over 
129,000 students in Prince George’s County in 2027. Assuming 2% of these students have 
a parent or guardian with an employer in Prince George’s County that participates in the 
program, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) estimates that revenues decrease 
by approximately $720,000 annually, based on employees earning the median hourly rate 
of $27.91 and taking 10 hours of parental engagement leave. 
 
However, DLS advises that there is considerable uncertainty regarding the number of 
businesses that will opt to provide parental engagement leave and claim the credit as there 
is little data available on this type of leave. Thus, the bill’s precise impact on general fund, 
HEIF, and TTF revenues cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that one additional full-time 
revenue examiner is needed in order to review and verify tax credit claims under the bill. 
However, given the low utilization rate by small businesses of the previous paid sick and 
safe leave tax credit and the limited scope of taxpayers eligible to claim the credit, DLS 
assumes that the Comptroller’s Office likely only needs one additional part-time 
revenue examiner. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $40,157 in fiscal 2027, 
which reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$32,058 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$40,157 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that claims are 
higher than anticipated, the Comptroller’s Office may need additional revenue examiners. 
 
MSDE can create, in consultation with the Comptroller’s Office, and distribute a 
certification form with existing budgeted resources. 
 
A portion of TTF revenues from the corporate income tax is used to provide capital 
transportation grants to local governments (local HUR). Thus, TTF expenditures for HUR 
grants to local governments decrease beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent credits are 
claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local HUR decrease beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent credits are 
claimed against the corporate income tax. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 370/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures:  The Prince George’s County Board of Education may incur an 
administrative burden from certifying and documenting parental or guardian involvement 
in school-related meetings and events. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in Prince George’s County may be meaningfully 
affected to the extent that they are eligible to claim credits against the State income tax for 
providing parental engagement leave. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 377 of 2025 and HB 818 and SB 721 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Prince George’s County 
Public Schools; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland Department of Planning; U.S. Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4