START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 339

A2 6lr2165
HB 410/25 – ECM CF 6lr1613

By: Delegates Simmons and Pruski
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Board of License Commissioners – Chief Inspector –
3 Compensation

4 FOR the purpose of increasing the minimum and maximum salary amounts for the chief
5 inspector employed by the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
6 County; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages and the Board of License
7 Commissioners for Anne Arundel County.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
10 Section 11–102
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
15 Section 11–204(b)(2)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

21 11–102.

22 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

23 11–204.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0339*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 339

1 (b) (2) The Board shall employ:

2 (i) a full–time executive director whose annual salary shall be fixed
3 by the Board as in a general county classified salary schedule, within pay grade 17;

4 (ii) a full–time administrator whose annual salary shall be fixed by
5 the Board as in a general county classified salary schedule, within pay grade 16;

6 (iii) two full–time secretaries whose annual salaries shall be fixed by
7 the Board as in a general county classified salary schedule, within pay grade 13;

8 (iv) a full–time chief inspector whose annual salary shall be fixed by
9 the Board as in a general county classified salary schedule, within non–represented pay
10 schedule [NR–05] NR–15; and

11 (v) an attorney at an annual salary of $60,000.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
13 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2