START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 329 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 329 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - School Resource Officers - Prohibition on Sexual Activity with 
Students 
 
 
This bill expands existing statutory prohibitions on specific sexual activity for law 
enforcement officers to include sexual contact, vaginal intercourse, a sexual act with a 
student enrolled in a school where the officer serves as a “school resource officer.” The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
School Resource Officers 
 
A “school resource officer” is (1) a law enforcement officer who has been assigned to a 
school in accordance with a memorandum of understanding between the chief law 
enforcement agency and local school system; or (2) a Baltimore City school police officer. 
 
A Baltimore City school police officer is a person who, when acting in an official capacity, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 329/ Page 2 
is a member of the Baltimore City School Police Force established in statute and who is 
authorized by law to make arrests. 
 
In general, a Baltimore City school police officer may act in an official capacity only on 
the premises of a Baltimore City school or under other specified circumstances. When 
acting in an official capacity, a Baltimore City school police officer has all the powers of a 
law enforcement officer in the State. Members of the Baltimore City School Police Force 
are employees of and appointed by the Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners. 
During school days, Baltimore City school police officers are authorized to carry weapons 
on the premises of a school to which they are assigned only before or after regular school 
hours; they are also authorized to carry weapons on the premises of a school to which they 
are assigned on days other than school days. 
 
Prohibited Sexual Acts by Law Enforcement 
 
Generally, existing statutory provisions prohibit a law enforcement officer from engaging 
in sexual contact, vaginal intercourse, or a sexual act with a person (1) who is a victim, 
witness, or suspect in an open investigation that the law enforcement officer is conducting, 
supervising, or assisting with if the law enforcement officer knew or should have known 
that the person is a victim, witness, or suspect in the investigation; (2) requesting assistance 
from or responding to the law enforcement officer in the course of the law enforcement 
officer’s official duties; or (3) in the custody of the law enforcement officer. Violators are 
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $3,000 
maximum fine. A sentence imposed for a violation of these prohibitions may be separate 
from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence imposed for an offense under Title 3, 
Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article (sexual crimes), as specified.  
 
Sexual Offense in the Fourth Degree 
 
A “person in a position of authority” is a person who is (1) at least age 21 and works for 
remuneration or as a volunteer for a public or private preschool, elementary school, or 
secondary school or (2) at least age 22 and works for remuneration or as a volunteer for a 
“program” and exercises supervision over or works or interacts with one or more minors 
who attend the school or participate in the program. A person in a position of authority 
includes a principal, vice principal, teacher, coach, or school counselor at a public or private 
preschool, elementary school, or secondary school. 
 
A “program” means an individual, a business, a religious or faith-based institution, or an 
organization that provides, on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, instructional, coaching, 
recreational, spiritual, character-building, or supervisory services or activities for minors, 
including (1) sports, music, dance, art, or martial arts coaching or instruction; (2) tutoring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 329/ Page 3 
or academic enrichment; (3) day care or after school care; (4) scouting; or (5) day or 
overnight camping. “Program” also means any unit of local, State, or federal government. 
 
The fourth-degree sexual offense statute prohibits a person from (1) engaging in sexual 
contact with another without the consent of the other or (2) except as prohibited under the 
third-degree sexual offense statute, engaging in a sexual act or vaginal intercourse with a 
victim who is age 14 or 15 and the person performing the act is at least 4 years older than 
the victim. 
 
Except as prohibited under the third-degree sexual offense statute or the prohibitions above, 
a person in a position of authority may not engage in a sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse with a minor who, at the time of the sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse (1) is a student enrolled at a school where the person in a position of authority 
works or (2) is participating in a program for which the person in a position of authority 
works and is at least six years younger than the person in a position of authority. 
 
Fourth-degree sexual offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. However, an increased penalty of imprisonment 
for up to three years and/or a $1,000 maximum fine applies to a person who has been 
convicted on a prior occasion not arising from the same incident of violations of specified 
sexual crimes under State law. The specified crimes are:  first-degree rape; 
second‑degree rape; third-degree sexual offense; fourth-degree sexual offense; attempted 
rape in the first degree; attempted rape in the second degree; attempted sexual offense in 
the first-degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); attempted sexual offense in the 
second degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); continuing course of conduct with a 
child; and sexual abuse of a minor. 
 
Imposition of the subsequent offender penalty is subject to specified procedural 
requirements. Unless specifically charged by the State, a violation of the fourth-degree 
sexual offense statute may not be considered a lesser included crime of any other crime. 
There is a three-year statute of limitations for prosecution of a fourth-degree sexual offense 
involving a person in a position of authority or sexual contact with a minor without the 
consent of the minor.  
 
Sexual Offense in the Third Degree 
 
Among other things, the third-degree sexual offense statute prohibits (1) sexual contact 
between a victim who is younger than age 14 and a person who is at least 4 years older 
than the victim; (2) a sexual act between a victim who is 14 or 15 years old and a person 
who is at least 21 years old; and (3) vaginal intercourse involving a victim who is 14 or 
15 years old and a person who is at least 21 years old. Third-degree sexual offense is a 
felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 329/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 81 (Senator Folden) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ 
Association; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4