START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 344

C2 6lr0811
CF 6lr0810

By: Delegate Rosenberg
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Business Regulation – Sale of Motor Fuel – Pricing Signage

3 FOR the purpose of altering the requirements for certain signs of motor fuel prices at retail
4 service stations; authorizing the Comptroller to assess certain penalties under
5 certain circumstances; and generally relating to motor fuel price signs at retail
6 service stations.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Business Regulation
9 Section 10–315
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Business Regulation

15 10–315.

16 (a) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “CONDITIONAL PRICE” MEANS A PRICE THAT IS AVAILABLE TO A
19 CUSTOMER ONLY IF A CONDITION IS MET, INCLUDING A SERVICE LEVEL,
20 ENROLLMENT IN A MEMBERSHIP PROGRAM, A REQUIRED PURCHASE, A PAYMENT
21 METHOD, OR ANY OTHER CONDITION MODIFYING THE STANDARD PRICE.

22 (3) “STANDARD PRICE” MEANS THE OFFERING PRICE AVAILABLE TO
23 ALL CUSTOMERS WITHOUT CONDITIONS.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0344*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 344

1 (B) This section supersedes any inconsistent provision of local law.

2 [(b)] (C) A person who sells motor fuel at retail shall display signs in accordance
3 with this section.

4 [(c)] (D) (1) All dispensing equipment for motor fuel shall be marked
5 conspicuously to show in numerals of equal size the price, including taxes, of a gallon of the
6 motor fuel offered for sale.

7 (2) If numerals that show a fractional cent are used, the combined height
8 and width of the numerator and denominator shall equal the height and width of the other
9 numerals used.

10 (E) (1) (I) EACH RETAIL SERVICE STATION DEALER SHALL KEEP A
11 SIGN ON THE PREMISES THAT:

12 1. PROMINENTLY DISPLAYS CLEARLY AND VISIBLY THE
13 STANDARD PRICE FOR A WHOLE MEASUREMENT UNIT OF REGULAR GASOLINE SOLD
14 ON THE PREMISES;

15 2. STATES THE UNIT OF MEASUREMENT USED; AND

16 3. IS READABLE BY PASSING MOTORISTS.

17 (II) A SIGN UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH
18 MAY PROMINENTLY DISPLAY CLEARLY AND VISIBLY THE STANDARD PRICE FOR A
19 WHOLE MEASUREMENT UNIT OF DIESEL AND OTHER MOTOR FUEL PRODUCTS SOLD
20 ON THE PREMISES.

21 (III) IF A SIGN REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
22 PARAGRAPH DISPLAYS A CONDITIONAL PRICE, THE CONDITIONAL PRICE MAY NOT
23 BE DISPLAYED MORE PROMINENTLY THAN THE STANDARD PRICE.

24 (2) ALL NUMERALS ON A SIGN SHALL:

25 (I) BE UNIFORM;

26 (II) BE THE SAME SIZE;

27 (III) BE AT LEAST 8 INCHES HIGH AND 3.5 INCHES WIDE; AND

28 (IV) HAVE A BRUSH STROKE OF AT LEAST 1 INCH.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 344 3

1 (3) A NUMERAL IN A FRACTION OR A LETTER ON A PRICING SIGN OR
2 OTHER MEANS SHALL BE AT LEAST ONE–THIRD THE HEIGHT OF A NUMERAL THAT
3 INDICATES A WHOLE NUMBER.

4 (4) IF A NEW SIGN IS REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH THIS SUBSECTION,
5 THE SUPPLIER OF THE GASOLINE SHALL PROVIDE THE SIGN AND NUMERALS
6 WITHOUT COST TO THE RETAIL SERVICE STATION DEALER.

7 [(d)] (F) (1) A sign or other means on the premises and approaches to a retail
8 outlet that advertises the retail price of motor fuel:

9 (i) may list the price and each tax separately if the listing of the
10 total of the price and all taxes is the same size as the separate listing of the price; but

11 (ii) shall list the total of the price and all taxes by numerals of
12 uniform size.

13 (2) In the listing of the total of the price and all taxes, a denominator need
14 not be used to indicate a fraction, but:

15 (i) if a denominator is used, the numerator and denominator
16 combined shall be the same size as the numeral that indicates the whole number; or

17 (ii) if a denominator is not used, the numerator shall be the same
18 size as the numeral that indicates the whole number.

19 [(e)] (G) If the retail price of motor fuel is advertised on a sign or by other means
20 on the premises of and approaches to the retail outlet, the grade designation displayed for
21 any motor fuel in the advertisement shall be the same as the grade designation that is
22 required to be displayed for that motor fuel on the retail dispensing pump as specified by
23 the Comptroller.

24 [(f) (1) (i) Each retail service station dealer shall keep a sign on the
25 premises that:

26 1. prominently displays clearly and visibly, for a whole
27 measurement unit of regular gasoline sold on the premises:

28 A. the credit and debit price, if higher than the cash price; or

29 B. the credit and debit price and the cash price;

30 2. states the unit of measurement used; and

31 3. is readable by passing motorists.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 344

1 (ii) The sign required under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph also
2 may prominently display clearly and visibly, for a whole measurement unit of diesel and
3 other motor fuel products sold on the premises:

4 1. the credit and debit price, if higher than the cash price; or

5 2. the credit and debit price and the cash price.

6 (2) All numerals on the sign shall:

7 (i) be uniform;

8 (ii) be the same size;

9 (iii) be at least 8 inches high and 3.5 inches wide; and

10 (iv) have a brush stroke of at least 1 inch.

11 (3) A numeral in a fraction or a letter shall be at least one–third the height
12 of a numeral that indicates a whole number.

13 (4) If a new or additional sign is required to comply with this subsection,
14 the supplier of the gasoline shall provide the sign and numerals without cost to the retail
15 service station dealer.]

16 [(g)] (H) A sign required at a service station by this section or any other State or
17 federal law is exempt from the provisions of a local law, ordinance, or regulation for the
18 purpose of determining:

19 (1) the total number of signs permitted; and

20 (2) the area of signs permitted.

21 (I) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
22 COMPTROLLER MAY ASSESS AGAINST A PERSON THAT VIOLATES THIS SECTION:

23 (I) FOR THE FIRST VIOLATION, A FINE OF UP TO $100; AND

24 (II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, A FINE OF UP
25 TO THE AMOUNT OF THE MAXIMUM FINE UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH
26 MULTIPLIED BY THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VIOLATIONS.

27 (2) PRIOR TO ASSESSING A FINE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
28 SUBSECTION, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 344 5

1 (I) ISSUE A WRITTEN WARNING TO THE PERSON EXPLAINING
2 THE VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION;

3 (II) PROVIDE THE PERSON A REASONABLE OPPORTUNITY IN
4 THE COMPTROLLER’S DISCRETION TO CURE THE VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION; AND

5 (III) CONSIDER:

6 1. THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE VIOLATION;

7 2. THE HARM CAUSED BY THE VIOLATION;

8 3. THE GOOD FAITH OF THE PERSON; AND

9 4. ANY HISTORY OF PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS BY THE
10 PERSON.

11 (3) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL PAY ANY FINE COLLECTED UNDER
12 THIS SUBSECTION INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

13 (4) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY REPORT A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION TO
14 THE COMPTROLLER USING A PROCESS ESTABLISHED BY THE COMPTROLLER.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
16 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5