START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 333

G1, P5 6lr2135
HB 237/25 – W&M

By: Delegates Palakovich Carr and Griffith
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Assembly Vacancy – Political Party Central Committee – Procedures

3 FOR the purpose of establishing requirements for the filling of a vacancy in the office of
4 Senator or Delegate in the General Assembly by a central committee of a political
5 party under the Maryland Constitution relating to applications, public notice, public
6 meetings, and voting; and generally relating to the procedures of a central committee
7 of a political party for filling a vacancy in the General Assembly.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Election Law
10 Section 4–101
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Election Law
15 Section 4–206
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Election Law

21 4–101.

22 Except as to a matter of compelling State interest OR WITH RESPECT TO A
23 CONFLICT WITH § 4–206 OF THIS TITLE, if any provision of this title relating to party

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0333*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 333

1 governance conflicts with the constitution and bylaws of a political party, the constitution
2 and bylaws shall apply to the extent of the conflict.

3 4–206.

4 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO THE PROCESS OF FILLING A VACANCY
5 IN THE OFFICE OF SENATOR OR DELEGATE IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY UNDER
6 ARTICLE III, § 13 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

7 (B) (1) THE APPLICATION PERIOD TO APPLY TO A CENTRAL COMMITTEE
8 TO FILL A VACANCY SHALL BE:

9 (I) OPEN FOR AT LEAST 7 DAYS; AND

10 (II) ADVERTISED IN A CONSPICUOUS MANNER BY THE CENTRAL
11 COMMITTEE FILLING THE VACANCY BY A PUBLIC NOTICE THAT INCLUDES:

12 1. THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE’S INTENT TO MEET TO FILL
13 THE VACANCY;

14 2. THE TIME AND PLACE OF ANY MEETINGS TO BE HELD
15 TO DISCUSS OR VOTE ON THE FILLING OF THE VACANCY;

16 3. THE PROCESS FOR FILLING THE VACANCY; AND

17 4. THE MANNER IN WHICH INDIVIDUALS MAY APPLY TO
18 FILL THE VACANCY.

19 (2) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS
20 SUBSECTION SHALL BE TRANSLATED INTO A LANGUAGE OTHER THAN ENGLISH IF
21 THE LOCAL BOARD FOR THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE IS
22 LOCATED IS REQUIRED TO TRANSLATE ELECTION MATERIALS INTO THAT LANGUAGE
23 UNDER § 203 OF THE FEDERAL VOTING RIGHTS ACT.

24 (C) (1) ALL APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED TO A CENTRAL COMMITTEE TO
25 FILL A VACANCY SHALL:

26 (I) BE POSTED ONLINE PROMPTLY AFTER THE APPLICATION
27 DEADLINE BY THE COUNTY CENTRAL COMMITTEE OR THE STATE CENTRAL
28 COMMITTEE OF THE POLITICAL PARTY; AND

29 (II) REMAIN POSTED ONLINE UNTIL AT LEAST 30 DAYS AFTER
30 THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE VOTES ON AN INDIVIDUAL TO FILL THE VACANCY.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 333 3

1 (2) THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE MAY REDACT PERSONAL
2 INFORMATION FROM THE APPLICATIONS POSTED ONLINE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
3 OF THIS SUBSECTION.

4 (D) THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE SHALL HOLD A PUBLIC MEETING TO
5 INTERVIEW THE INDIVIDUALS WHO APPLIED TO FILL THE VACANCY.

6 (E) A MEETING HELD BY A CENTRAL COMMITTEE TO DISCUSS OR VOTE ON
7 FILLING A VACANCY SHALL BE:

8 (1) OPEN TO THE PUBLIC; AND

9 (2) ANNOUNCED AT LEAST 3 DAYS BEFORE THE MEETING.

10 (F) (1) THE VOTE BY A CENTRAL COMMITTEE TO CHOOSE AN INDIVIDUAL
11 TO FILL A VACANCY SHALL BE:

12 (I) BY ROLL CALL VOTE OR BY SIGNED BALLOTS; AND

13 (II) IN A MEETING OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.

14 (2) A MEMBER OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE WHO HAS APPLIED TO
15 FILL THE VACANCY SHALL RECUSE THEMSELVES FROM:

16 (I) ADMINISTERING THE PROCESS OF FILLING THE VACANCY,
17 INCLUDING ADVERTISING THE VACANCY, REVIEWING APPLICATIONS, AND
18 INTERVIEWING CANDIDATES; AND

19 (II) VOTING ON THE INDIVIDUAL TO FILL THE VACANCY.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
21 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3