START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 325

F1 6lr1692

By: Delegate Guyton
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board –
3 Composition

4 FOR the purpose of altering the composition of the Professional Standards and Teacher
5 Education Board by removing a member who is a certified nonpublic school
6 classroom teacher and increasing the number of members of the Maryland
7 Association of Nonpublic Special Education Facilities; and generally relating to the
8 composition of the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Education
11 Section 6–703
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 6–703.

18 (a) (1) The Board consists of the following members:

19 (i) Eight public school classroom teachers, as follows:

20 1. Six chosen from a list of nominees provided by the
21 statewide teachers’ organization representing a majority of teachers in the State for
22 collective bargaining purposes; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0325*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 325

1 2. Two chosen from a list of nominees provided by a
2 statewide teachers’ organization representing teachers in at least one jurisdiction within
3 the State for collective bargaining purposes other than the majority organization provided
4 for in item 1 of this item;

5 (ii) [One certified nonpublic school classroom teacher, chosen from a
6 list of nominees provided by the Association of Independent Schools;

7 (iii)] Six teacher education faculty members from colleges of the State,
8 chosen from a list of nominees provided by:

9 1. The Maryland Association of Teacher Educators; and

10 2. The Maryland Association of Colleges of Teacher
11 Education;

12 [(iv)] (III) Four administrative or supervisory staff members of
13 public schools, as follows:

14 1. Two chosen from a list of nominees provided by the Public
15 School Superintendents’ Association of Maryland;

16 2. One chosen from a list of nominees provided by the
17 Maryland Association of Secondary Principals; and

18 3. One chosen from a list of nominees provided by the
19 Maryland Association of Elementary School Administrators;

20 [(v)] (IV) One administrative or supervisory staff of the approved
21 nonpublic schools of the State, chosen from a list of nominees provided by the Association
22 of Independent Schools;

23 [(vi)] (V) One member of a local board of education, chosen from a
24 list of nominees provided by the Maryland Association of Boards of Education;

25 [(vii)] (VI) [One member] TWO MEMBERS of the Maryland
26 Association of Nonpublic Special Education Facilities, chosen from a list of nominees
27 provided by the Maryland Association of Nonpublic Special Education Facilities;

28 [(viii)] (VII) Two representatives of the general public, as follows:

29 1. One chosen from a list of nominees provided by the
30 Speaker of the House of Delegates of Maryland; and

31 2. One chosen from a list of nominees provided by the
32 President of the Senate of Maryland; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 325 3

1 [(ix)] (VIII) The State Superintendent or a designee of the State
2 Superintendent.

3 (2) The Board shall include all the members of the Professional Standards
4 and Teacher Education Advisory Board serving on July 1, 1991.

5 (b) (1) The Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate of Maryland,
6 shall appoint the members of the Board described in subsection (a)(1)(i) through [(viii)]
7 (VII) of this section.

8 (2) In making the appointments required under this subsection, the
9 Governor shall ensure that the Board is representative of:

10 (i) The geographic regions of the State; and

11 (ii) Minority populations of the State as defined in § 9–301 of the
12 State Government Article.

13 (c) (1) The term of an appointed member is 3 years.

14 (2) The terms of the appointed members are staggered as required by the
15 terms provided for members of the Board on October 1, 1991.

16 (3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
17 appointed.

18 (4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
19 remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

20 (d) The Governor may remove a member for incompetence or misconduct.

21 (e) From among its members, the Board annually shall elect a chairman.

22 (f) A majority of the members of the Board then serving on the Board is a quorum.

23 (g) The staff for the Board shall be provided by the State Board.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3