START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 354

R2, P1, L1 6lr2552
CF SB 53

By: Delegates Kipke, Chisholm, and Nkongolo
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Port Administration – Acquisition of Land in Anne Arundel County –
3 Notice of Public Hearing

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Port Administration to provide written notice
5 to the Anne Arundel County Delegation to the General Assembly prior to a public
6 hearing on the acquisition of land or improvements on land in Anne Arundel County;
7 and generally relating to land acquisition by the Maryland Port Administration in
8 Anne Arundel County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Transportation
11 Section 6–309(a)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Transportation
16 Section 6–309(b)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Transportation

22 6–309.

23 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, this section controls as to
24 Anne Arundel County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0354*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 354

1 (b) (1) (I) The Administration may not acquire any interest in land or
2 improvements on land in Anne Arundel County without the prior approval of the county,
3 given after a public hearing.

4 (II) AT LEAST 2 WEEKS BEFORE THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF A
5 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
6 ADMINISTRATION SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE HEARING TO THE ANNE
7 ARUNDEL COUNTY DELEGATION TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

8 (2) This subsection does not affect the right of the Administration to
9 acquire an option for later acquisition of the property or improvements once the approval
10 required by this subsection is obtained.

11 (3) If the Administration makes a written request for approval of the
12 county, the approval required by this subsection is deemed to be given unless the
13 Administration is notified in writing to the contrary within 90 days after it makes the
14 request.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
16 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2