START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 324 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 324 
(Delegates Simpson and Taylor) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Child Support - Assignment of Rights 
 
 
This bill specifies that only in limited circumstances, where the Social Services 
Administration (SSA) (or its designee within the Department of Human Services (DHS)) 
finds it appropriate, may action be taken to secure an assignment to the State of any rights 
to support on behalf of a child receiving foster care maintenance payments. It may also 
take action, when appropriate, to discontinue an assignment of rights to support and 
terminate existing support orders for a child receiving foster care maintenance payments. 
The Secretary of Human Services must adopt rules and regulations to implement these 
provisions. Finally, the bill requires the court to terminate a child support order that was 
previously established or assigned for a child receiving a foster care maintenance payment, 
without a showing of material change of circumstances, on the filing for a termination by 
specified entities after SSA (or its designee) determines that the order is no longer 
appropriate. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/federal fund expenditures for DHS increase by $98,500 in 
fiscal 2027 only for one‑time programming costs. Federal fund matching revenues increase 
by an estimated $49,300. Special fund revenues decrease by approximately $120,000 in 
FY 2027 and $160,000 on an annual basis. Operational efficiencies are likely to be realized, 
as discussed below. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the workload of the 
Judiciary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 324/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Modifications of Child Support Awards  
 
Generally, in a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite or 
permanent, the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child support 
obligation is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The schedule 
uses the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and the number of 
children for whom support is required to determine the basic child support obligation. 
 
The court may modify a child support award subsequent to the filing of a motion for 
modification and upon a showing of a material change of circumstance. The court may not 
retroactively modify a child support award prior to the date of the filing of the motion for 
modification. 
 
Out‑of‑Home Placement and Foster Care – Generally 
 
The local department of social services must provide 24 hour per day care and supportive 
services for a child who is committed to its custody or guardianship in an out‑of‑home 
placement on a short‑term basis or placed in accordance with a voluntary placement 
agreement. A child may not be committed to the custody or guardianship of a local 
department of social services and placed in an out‑of‑home placement solely because the 
child’s parent or guardian lacks shelter or has a disability or solely because the child’s 
parents are financially unable to provide treatment or care for a child with developmental 
disability or mental illness. 
 
Unless a court orders otherwise, reasonable efforts must be made to preserve and unify 
families (1) prior to the placement of a child in an out‑of‑home placement, to prevent or 
eliminate the need for removing the child from the child’s home, and (2) to make it possible 
for a child to safely return to the child’s home.  
 
Foster Care Assistance/Maintenance Payments and Child Support  
 
As a condition of receiving certain Title IV‐E federal funds, states must have an approved 
plan that satisfies numerous requirements. This includes a requirement for a state’s plan to 
provide, where appropriate, that all steps will be taken to secure an assignment to the state 
of any rights to support on behalf of each child receiving foster care maintenance payments, 
as specified 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 324/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect: General and federal fund expenditures increase by a total of $98,520 
in fiscal 2027 only for necessary programming updates at DHS; federal fund matching 
revenues correspondingly increase by an estimated $49,260 
 
DHS advises that as of January 2026, there were a total of 2,428 out‑of‑home cases referred 
to the Child Support Administration (CSA) for child support enforcement. In federal 
fiscal 2025, CSA collected approximately $160,000 in child support payments from 
parents of children in out‑of‑home care; as these payments are assigned to the State, they 
are special fund revenues. Assuming a constant rate of collection, special fund revenues 
therefore decrease by approximately $120,000 in fiscal 2027, which reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date, and by $160,000 annually thereafter. 
 
However, DHS also notes significant challenges in collecting child support payments from 
these parents and taking effective enforcement actions. Therefore, operational efficiencies 
are likely realized due to reduced staff time and effort needed for these cases. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, similar provisions have been considered. For example, see HB 218 
and SB 195 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 319 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3