START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 357

G1, L3 6lr1910

By: Delegate Palakovich Carr
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Municipalities – Election Dates – Reporting Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of requiring each municipality to report municipal election dates to the
4 State Board of Elections; requiring the State Board, each local board of elections, and
5 certain municipalities to display certain information relating to municipal elections
6 on their websites; and generally relating to the reporting of election dates by
7 municipalities.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Local Government
10 Section 4–108.5
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Local Government

16 4–108.5.

17 (a) In this section, “State Board” means the State Board of Elections.

18 (B) (1) NOT LESS THAN 6 MONTHS BEFORE EACH REGULAR MUNICIPAL
19 ELECTION, THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL REPORT TO THE STATE BOARD THE DATE OF
20 THE ELECTION.

21 (2) WITHIN 5 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER A SPECIAL MUNICIPAL
22 ELECTION IS SCHEDULED, THE MUNICIPALITY SHALL REPORT TO THE STATE BOARD
23 THE DATE OF THE ELECTION.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0357*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 357

1 (C) (1) THE STATE BOARD SHALL PROMINENTLY DISPLAY ON THE STATE
2 BOARD’S WEBSITE:

3 (I) A LIST OF ALL UPCOMING REGULAR AND SPECIAL
4 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS REPORTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION THAT
5 INCLUDES:

6 1. THE NAME OF THE MUNICIPALITY;

7 2. THE ELECTION DATE; AND

8 3. WHETHER THE ELECTION IS A REGULAR OR SPECIAL
9 MUNICIPAL ELECTION; AND

10 (II) A LIST INDICATING WHICH MUNICIPALITIES HAVE NOT YET
11 REPORTED UPCOMING REGULAR AND SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS UNDER
12 SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

13 (2) EACH LOCAL BOARD OF ELECTIONS SHALL PROMINENTLY
14 DISPLAY ON THE LOCAL BOARD’S WEBSITE A LIST OF ALL UPCOMING REGULAR AND
15 SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS IN THE COUNTY REPORTED UNDER SUBSECTION
16 (B) OF THIS SECTION, INCLUDING:

17 (I) THE NAME OF THE MUNICIPALITY;

18 (II) THE ELECTION DATE; AND

19 (III) WHETHER THE ELECTION IS A REGULAR OR SPECIAL
20 MUNICIPAL ELECTION.

21 (3) EACH MUNICIPALITY THAT MAINTAINS A WEBSITE SHALL
22 PROMINENTLY DISPLAY ON THE MUNICIPALITY’S WEBSITE A LIST OF ALL UPCOMING
23 REGULAR AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS IN THE MUNICIPALITY, INCLUDING:

24 (I) THE ELECTION DATE; AND

25 (II) WHETHER THE ELECTION IS A REGULAR OR SPECIAL
26 MUNICIPAL ELECTION.

27 [(b)] (D) (1) The State Board shall, immediately after a municipality submits
28 its election results, publish the election results on the State Board’s website.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 357 3

1 (2) The election results published under paragraph (1) of this subsection
2 shall be organized by election year and the name of the municipality.

3 [(c)] (E) Within 30 days after the results of a municipal election are certified,
4 the municipality shall submit to the State Board an electronic copy of the election results
5 for each office or question voted on at the election, including:

6 (1) vote totals for each office or question reported separately by each of the
7 following voting methods, if applicable:

8 (i) in–person early voting;

9 (ii) mail–in voting or vote–by–mail;

10 (iii) provisional voting; and

11 (iv) in–person election day voting; and

12 (2) if the municipality conducts partisan elections, the party affiliation of
13 each candidate.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
15 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3