START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 359 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 359 
(Delegate Roberson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Property Tax Credit - Urban Agricultural Property - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters a local option property tax credit for specified urban agricultural property. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease by a minimal 
amount beginning in FY 2027 to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax 
credit and the changes to existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals 
becoming eligible for the property tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses involved in urban 
agricultural activities could benefit from reduced property taxes if they receive the property 
tax credit. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters the definition of urban agricultural property by repealing 
the requirement that urban agricultural property (1) be at least one-eighth of an acre and 
not more than five acres and (2) be located in a specified priority funding area. Instead, the 
bill specifies that urban agricultural property is real property that is not assessed as 
specified agricultural land. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 359/ Page 2 
The bill expands the definition of urban agricultural purposes to include indoor and outdoor 
crop production activities, production of value-added agricultural products, beekeeping, 
raising livestock, composting, pollinator habitat creation and maintenance, and agricultural 
education and agritourism activities. The bill also includes all produce stands; under current 
law, only temporary produce stands are eligible. 
 
The bill requires a jurisdiction that determines the tax credit to be ineffective and moves to 
terminate the tax credit to provide the public with notice of the termination at least one year 
in advance and the opportunity for comment and appeal. 
 
Jurisdictions may prioritize renewals of the tax credit based on the specific priorities of the 
individual jurisdiction. 
 
Current Law:  Local governments are authorized to grant, by law, a tax credit against the 
county or municipal property tax imposed on urban agricultural property. Urban 
agricultural property is defined as real property that is (1) at least one-eighth of an acre and 
not more than five acres; (2) located in a specified priority funding area; and (3) used for 
urban agricultural purposes. Urban agricultural purposes is defined as (1) crop production 
activities, including the use of mulch or cover crops to ensure maximum productivity and 
minimize runoff and weed production; (2) environmental mitigation activities, including 
stormwater abatement and groundwater protection; (3) community development activities, 
including recreational activities, food donations, and food preparation and canning classes; 
(4) economic development activities, including employment and training opportunities, 
and direct sales to restaurants and institutions; and (5) temporary produce stands used for 
the sale of produce raised on the premises. 
 
The credit must be granted for five years. However, the jurisdiction granting a tax credit 
must evaluate the effectiveness of the credit after three years. If the jurisdiction determines 
that the tax credit is ineffective in promoting urban agricultural purposes, the jurisdiction 
may terminate the tax credit. The jurisdiction granting a tax credit may extend the tax credit 
for an additional five years. 
 
Local governments may provide, by law, for (1) the amount of the tax credit; (2) additional 
eligibility criteria for the tax credit; (3) regulations and procedures for the application and 
uniform processing of requests for the tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to 
carry out the tax credit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease beginning 
in fiscal 2027, to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the 
changes to existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming 
eligible for the property tax credit. Due to the limited number of existing property tax credit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 359/ Page 3 
recipients under the existing program, any potential revenue decrease under the bill is 
expected to be minimal. 
 
Three jurisdictions (Baltimore City, Montgomery County, and Prince George’s County) 
have enacted the property tax credit. Baltimore City did not provide any property tax credits 
in fiscal 2024 or 2025, but is providing one property tax credit for $3,900 in fiscal 2026. 
Montgomery County has provided property tax credits to seven property owners in the 
following amounts:  $24,411 in fiscal 2023, $21,801, in fiscal 2024, and $22,457 in 
fiscal 2025. Prince George’s County did not provide any property tax credits in fiscal 2024, 
but provided one individual with a $4,400 property tax credit in fiscal 2025.  
 
The Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority provides an overview on each county 
government’s statutory authority to establish property tax credits and exemptions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 907 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery County; Prince George’s County; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3