START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 323 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 323 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Credit for Income Taxes and Penalties Due to Financial 
Exploitation 
 
   
This bill allows a nonrefundable credit against the State income tax for the amount of 
specified income tax or penalties attributable to an early withdrawal of retirement funds 
due to financial exploitation. The credit is equal to the lesser of (1) the State income tax 
attributable to the early withdrawal or (2) federal tax penalties paid in accordance with 
Internal Revenue Code (IRC) § 72(t) that are attributable to the early withdrawal. To claim 
the credit, an eligible taxpayer must provide specified documentation of the financial loss 
and penalties. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and 
beyond.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Financial exploitation,” as it applies to the bill, has the meaning stated in 
§13-601 of the Estates and Trusts Article. Thus, financial exploitation includes (1) breach 
of a fiduciary relationship resulting in the unauthorized appropriation, sale, or transfer of 
property; (2) unauthorized taking of personal assets; (3) misappropriation, misuse, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 323/ Page 2 
transfer of assets belonging to a susceptible or older adult from a personal or joint account; 
and (4) intentional failure to effectively use a susceptible or older adult’s income and assets 
for the necessities required for the susceptible or older adult’s support and maintenance. It 
does not include an individual’s good-faith use of a susceptible or older adult’s assets, 
including for the purposes of establishing and implementing an estate plan intended to 
reduce taxes or to maximize eligibility for public benefits in order to preserve assets for an 
identified or identifiable person.  
 
When claiming a credit under the bill, an eligible taxpayer must provide information 
demonstrating a loss resulting from financial exploitation and an affidavit attesting that 
federal tax penalties were incurred as a result of early withdrawal of retirement funds due 
to financial exploitation.  
 
Current Law:  IRC § 72(t) imposes a 10% additional tax on early distributions from a 
qualified retirement plan, subject to specified exceptions. The additional tax does not apply 
to distributions made on or after the date on which the taxpayer attains age 59 and a half. 
Maryland does not offer a State income tax credit to offset tax or penalties attributable to 
early withdrawals of retirement funds due to financial exploitation. 
 
Maryland does conform to the federal personal casualty loss deduction under § 165 of the 
IRC. However, pursuant to provisions of the federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and 
the One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025, net personal theft losses not attributable to a 
federally or State declared disaster are disallowed for tax years after 2017. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 due to credits claimed against the personal income tax. Due to 
data limitations, the bill’s precise revenue effect cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
It is unknown how many taxpayers will potentially be eligible for the tax credit and the 
amount of their financial losses and penalties. The Department of Legislative Services 
notes that the bill limits eligibility for the tax credit to individuals who are subject to early 
withdrawal penalties under IRC §72(t); thus, it is assumed that individuals age 59 and  
a half or older are ineligible for the credit, as they are not subject to these penalties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 291 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 323/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of State Police; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3