START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 378 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 378 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George's County - Income Tax Credit for Parent and Guardian 
Volunteers in Elementary and Secondary Schools  
PG 420-26 
 
 
This bill establishes a refundable credit against the State income tax for a parent or legal 
guardian of an elementary or secondary school student in Prince George’s County who 
volunteers at the school in which the student is enrolled. To receive the tax credit, an 
eligible taxpayer must apply to the county board of education member who represents the 
school or, if the student is enrolled in a nonpublic school, the administrator of the school. 
On application by an eligible taxpayer, a county board member or school administrator 
must issue a tax credit certificate in an amount equal to $20 per volunteer hour. An eligible 
taxpayer may claim up to $500 in credit in any tax year. In consultation with the 
Comptroller, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must develop and 
make available an application and tax credit certificate to be used in accordance with the 
bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by potentially more than $2.5 million 
annually beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for the 
Comptroller’s Office increase by $40,200 in FY 2027; future years reflect annualization 
and ongoing costs. MSDE can implement the bill’s provisions with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County Public Schools can likely absorb any related 
administrative costs within existing budgeted resources. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 378/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “School,” as it applies in the bill, means a public or nonpublic elementary 
or secondary school in Prince George’s County, including a charter school. For any 
tax year, an eligible taxpayer may apply for and receive more than one tax credit certificate, 
regardless of whether another eligible taxpayer has received a tax credit certificate for the 
same student. 
 
A county board member or school administrator who issues a tax credit certificate under 
the bill must keep a record of the number of volunteer hours accrued by each eligible 
taxpayer that receives a credit. 
 
Current Law:  State law does not provide for a credit against the State income tax for 
hours volunteered at elementary or secondary schools in the State or in 
Prince George’s County, specifically, as contemplated under the bill. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease significantly beginning in fiscal 2027 
due to credits claimed against the State income tax. Assuming at least 50% of eligible 
taxpayers with creditable volunteer hours claim the credit, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) estimates that annual general fund revenue losses may exceed $2.5 million 
annually based on an analysis of national volunteering statistics published by the 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Maryland volunteer statistics published by AmeriCorps, 
and the Maryland Department of Planning school enrollment projections. 
 
However, DLS advises that there is considerable uncertainty regarding the number of 
taxpayers who will be eligible for and ultimately claim the credit and their average 
creditable volunteer hours. Thus, the bill’s precise impact on general fund revenues cannot 
be reliably estimated. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that one additional full-time 
revenue examiner is needed in order to review and verify tax credit claims under the bill. 
However, given the relatively limited scope of taxpayers eligible to claim the credit, DLS 
assumes that the Comptroller’s Office likely only needs one additional part-time revenue 
examiner. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $40,157 in fiscal 2027, which 
reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$32,058 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$40,157 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 378/ Page 3 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that claims are 
higher than anticipated, the Comptroller’s Office may need additional revenue examiners. 
 
MSDE can create, in consultation with the Comptroller’s Office, and distribute an 
application with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 404 of 2025 and HB 1246 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland 
Department of Planning; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; U.S. Census Bureau; 
AmeriCorps; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
caw/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3