START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 309

D1, D3 6lr0909

By: Delegate Stewart
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Judicial Facilities – Stops, Detentions, and Arrests – Limitations

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting an individual from being stopped, detained, or arrested for
4 certain civil offenses under certain circumstances; establishing that evidence
5 obtained in violation of this Act is inadmissible in certain proceedings; authorizing
6 an individual stopped, detained, or arrested in violation of this Act to bring a civil
7 action; authorizing the Attorney General to bring a civil action to enjoin an
8 individual from committing a violation of this Act; and generally relating to stops,
9 detentions, and arrests at judicial facilities.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
12 Section 13–801 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8. Judicial Facilities” and the
13 amended title “Title 13. Court Supporting Agencies, Records, and Judicial
14 Facilities”
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

20 Title 13. Court Supporting Agencies, RECORDS, AND JUDICIAL FACILITIES.

21 SUBTITLE 8. JUDICIAL FACILITIES.

22 13–801.

23 (A) (1) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0309*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 309

1 INDICATED.

2 (2) (I) “JUDICIAL FACILITY” MEANS A COURTHOUSE, AN
3 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING FACILITY, OR OTHER LOCATION OR SPACE, WHETHER
4 OWNED OR LEASED BY A STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, USED FOR
5 JUDICIAL OR QUASI–JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.

6 (II) “JUDICIAL FACILITY” INCLUDES ANY PATHWAY, HALLWAY,
7 PARKING LOT OR STRUCTURE, GROUNDS, OR OTHER AREA WITHIN 1,000 FEET OF A
8 COURTHOUSE, AN ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING FACILITY, OR OTHER LOCATION USED
9 FOR JUDICIAL OR QUASI–JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.

10 (3) “PERSON” INCLUDES A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, LAW
11 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, AND ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCY OR GOVERNMENT
12 AGENT.

13 (B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A STOP, DETENTION, OR ARREST:

14 (1) RELATING TO A SUSPECTED CRIMINAL OFFENSE;

15 (2) MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH A VALID WARRANT;

16 (3) MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 3–814, 3–821, AND 3–8A–26 OF
17 THIS ARTICLE;

18 (4) FOR CONTEMPT OF COURT;

19 (5) MADE IN ORDER TO CONDUCT AN EXAMINATION UNDER § 3–105
20 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE;

21 (6) MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 10–613 THROUGH 10–619 OF THE
22 HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE; OR

23 (7) OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED UNDER STATE LAW.

24 (C) A PERSON MAY NOT STOP, DETAIN, OR ARREST AN INDIVIDUAL FOR AN
25 ALLEGED OR ADJUDICATED OFFENSE THAT IS SUBJECT ONLY TO A CIVIL PENALTY
26 WHILE THE INDIVIDUAL IS IN A JUDICIAL FACILITY OR IS TRAVELING WITHIN 1 MILE
27 OF A JUDICIAL FACILITY FOR THE PURPOSE OF ATTENDING A MEETING, A HEARING,
28 OR ANOTHER OFFICIAL PROCEEDING IN THE JUDICIAL FACILITY UNLESS THE
29 PERSON:

30 (1) PROVIDES PRIOR NOTICE TO THE PRESIDING JUDGE OR COURT
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 309 3

1 ADMINISTRATOR THAT A STOP, DETENTION, OR ARREST MAY OCCUR; AND

2 (2) MAKES THE STOP, DETENTION, OR ARREST IN A MANNER THAT
3 DOES NOT DISRUPT PROCEEDINGS OR DETER ACCESS TO JUSTICE BY ANY
4 INDIVIDUAL.

5 (D) EVIDENCE OBTAINED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS
6 INADMISSIBLE AGAINST THE INDIVIDUAL STOPPED, DETAINED, OR ARRESTED IN
7 ANY PROCEEDING OVER WHICH A STATE COURT OR STATE OR LOCAL ENTITY HAS
8 JURISDICTION.

9 (E) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL STOPPED, DETAINED, OR ARRESTED IN
10 VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION MAY BRING AN ACTION AGAINST A PERSON
11 RESPONSIBLE FOR THE STOP, DETENTION, OR ARREST IN A COURT OF COMPETENT
12 JURISDICTION.

13 (2) IN AN ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COURT MAY AWARD:

14 (I) DAMAGES;

15 (II) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; AND

16 (III) ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COURT COSTS.

17 (F) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION TO ENJOIN A
18 PERSON FROM COMMITTING A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intention of the
20 General Assembly that this Act shall supplement the protections provided under Chapter
21 718 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025.

22 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3