START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 380

J2 6lr1033
CF SB 186

By: Delegate S. Johnson
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Examiners in Optometry – Examination Requirements and Time
3 Period for Inactive Status

4 FOR the purpose of clarifying that applicants for licensure as an optometrist and certain
5 applicants for reinstatement are required to pass all sections of each part of a
6 licensure examination; repealing the requirement that the State Board of Examiners
7 in Optometry give examinations to licensure applicants; repealing the requirement
8 that a licensure applicant pay to the Board a reexamination fee set by the Board for
9 each reexamination; prohibiting the Board from placing a licensee on inactive status
10 for more than a certain period of time; and generally relating to the State Board of
11 Examiners in Optometry.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Health Occupations
14 Section 11–302(e), 11–304, 11–305, and 11–310
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Health Occupations

20 11–302.

21 (e) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant shall pass ALL
22 SECTIONS OF EACH PART OF an examination [given] AS REQUIRED by the Board under
23 this subtitle.

24 11–304.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0380*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 380

1 (a) An applicant who otherwise qualifies for a license is entitled to be examined
2 as provided in this section.

3 [(b) Periodically, but not more often than once every 6 months, the Board shall
4 give examinations to applicants at the times and places that the Board determines.

5 (c) The Board shall notify each qualified applicant of the time and place of
6 examination.]

7 [(d)] (B) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the Board shall
8 determine the subjects, scope, form, and passing [score for examinations administered]
9 SCORES FOR ALL SECTIONS OF EACH PART OF AN EXAMINATION under this subtitle.

10 (2) The subjects examined shall include:

11 (i) The anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the human eye; and

12 (ii) The use of all instruments used for examination of the human
13 eye.

14 (3) The examination may include any subject that relates to optics and
15 optometry:

16 (i) Contained in any textbook; or

17 (ii) Taught at any accredited educational institution that teaches
18 optics, optometry, and other related subjects.

19 [(e)] (C) [(1)] An applicant who fails the examination may take the next
20 regularly scheduled examination.

21 [(2) The applicant shall pay to the Board a reexamination fee set by the
22 Board for each reexamination.]

23 11–305.

24 (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Board may waive the examination
25 requirements of this title for an individual who is licensed to practice optometry in any
26 other state.

27 (b) The Board may grant a waiver under this section only if the applicant:

28 (1) Pays the application fee required by the Board under § 11–303 of this
29 subtitle;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 380 3

1 (2) Provides adequate evidence that the applicant:

2 (i) Meets the qualifications otherwise required by this title,
3 including, for 3 years before applying, the continuing education requirements of the other
4 state in which the applicant has been practicing optometry, or, if the other state does not
5 have any continuing education requirement, the applicant shall meet the equivalent of 3
6 years of the continuing education requirements of this subtitle in courses approved by the
7 Board;

8 (ii) Meets the terms and conditions that the Board establishes in
9 subsections (c) and (d) of this section;

10 (iii) At the time the applicant was licensed in the other state, was
11 qualified to take the examination that then was required by the laws of this State; and

12 (iv) Qualified for a license in the other state by passing an
13 examination given by the board of optometry in that state;

14 (3) Presents a copy of the license, certified by the issuing board; and

15 (4) Has not failed an examination [given] REQUIRED by the Board within
16 the previous 5 years.

17 (c) (1) The Board may waive the examination requirements of this subtitle for
18 an applicant who:

19 (i) If so required by the Board under subsection (d) of this section,
20 passes an examination [administered] REQUIRED by the Board; and

21 (ii) For 3 years immediately before applying, has practiced
22 optometry actively.

23 (2) The Board may waive the requirement of practicing optometry actively
24 for an applicant who for 3 years:

25 (i) Was teaching optometry;

26 (ii) Was a uniformed services optometrist;

27 (iii) Was a supervisor or administrative optometrist; or

28 (iv) Was a researcher in optometry.

29 (d) (1) Within 1 year of receipt of an application, the Board may require that
30 the applicant pass an examination.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 380

1 (2) The Board shall determine the scope, form, and passing score for
2 examinations under this section.

3 11–310.

4 (a) (1) The Board shall place a licensee on inactive status, if the licensee
5 submits to the Board:

6 (i) An application for inactive status on the form required by the
7 Board; and

8 (ii) The inactive status fee set by the Board.

9 (2) THE BOARD MAY NOT PLACE A LICENSEE ON INACTIVE STATUS
10 FOR MORE THAN 6 CONSECUTIVE YEARS.

11 [(2)] (3) The Board shall issue a license to an individual who is on inactive
12 status if the individual:

13 (i) Meets any continuing education requirements set by the Board;
14 and

15 (ii) Pays to the Board the reinstatement fee set by the Board.

16 (b) The Board may reinstate the license of an optometrist whose license has been
17 expired for less than 5 years and who has not been put on inactive status, if the optometrist:

18 (1) Has met the continuing education requirements set by the Board;

19 (2) Meets the renewal requirements of § 11–308 of this subtitle; and

20 (3) Pays to the Board the reinstatement fee set by the Board.

21 (c) The Board may not reinstate the license of an optometrist whose license has
22 been expired for 5 years or more and who has not been put on inactive status, unless the
23 optometrist:

24 (1) Passes ALL SECTIONS OF EACH PART OF an examination
25 [administered] AS REQUIRED by the Board; and

26 (2) Otherwise meets the requirements of subsection (b) of this section.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4