START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 399 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 399 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Transfers Between Systems - Workgroup 
- Extension 
 
   
This bill extends the date by which the State Retirement Agency (SRA) must submit a 
report on the findings and recommendations of a workgroup to study the transfer of 
member service between State and local retirement and pension systems from  
December 1, 2025, to October 1, 2026. The bill also extends the termination date for the 
workgroup by one year to June 30, 2027, and specifies that the report must be submitted to 
the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations Committee, and the 
Joint Committee on Pensions. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Extending the date for the report does not affect governmental 
operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 768 and 769 of 2025 required SRA to convene and staff a 
workgroup of stakeholders to study the requirements and processes for transfers of member 
service between State and local retirement and pension systems, and to make 
recommendations to improve the process of transfers. The report of the workgroup was 
required to be submitted to the Governor and General Assembly by December 1, 2025, and 
the workgroup was scheduled to terminate June, 30, 2026. After convening multiple 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 399/ Page 2 
meetings, the workgroup determined that it required more time to research the issues raised 
by its members and requested an extension to complete its work. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 338 (Senator Lewis Young)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2