START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 360

E2 6lr1994
CF 6lr2087

By: Delegates Moon, Davis, Phillips, and Williams
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Procedure – Automated Expungement
3 (Clean Slate Act of 2026)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
5 and the Judiciary to expunge all cases meeting certain criteria on or before a certain
6 date; requiring the Department and the Judiciary to expunge certain newly eligible
7 cases on a monthly basis; and generally relating to expungement.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Criminal Procedure
10 Section 10–112.1
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Criminal Procedure

16 10–112.1.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
18 INDICATED.

19 (2) (I) “DISPOSITION” MEANS THE OUTCOME OF A CRIMINAL
20 CHARGE OR CASE RECORDED IN ELECTRONIC COURT RECORDS.

21 (II) “DISPOSITION” INCLUDES AN ACQUITTAL, A DISMISSAL, A
22 NOLLE PROSEQUI, A FINDING OF GUILTY, A PROBATION BEFORE JUDGMENT, A PLEA

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0360*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 360

1 OF GUILTY, A PLEA OF NOLO CONTENDERE, MARKING THE CHARGE “STET” ON THE
2 DOCKET, AND AN ORDER OF AN APPELLATE COURT ENDING A CRIMINAL CASE.

3 (III) “DISPOSITION” DOES NOT REFER TO THE OUTCOME OF A
4 CRIMINAL SENTENCE.

5 (3) “EXPUNGE” MEANS TO:

6 (I) REMOVE ALL REFERENCES TO A SPECIFIED CRIMINAL CASE
7 FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY; AND

8 (II) REMOVE FROM PUBLIC VIEW ALL ELECTRONIC COURT
9 RECORDS RELATING TO THE CASE, WITHOUT NEEDING TO REDACT PHYSICAL OR
10 ELECTRONIC DOCUMENTS, RECORDINGS, OR AUDIO OR VISUAL MEDIA.

11 (B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT AND THE JUDICIARY
12 SHALL EXPUNGE ALL CASES IN WHICH:

13 (1) (I) ALL CHARGES OR DISPOSITIONS IN THE CASE ARE LISTED
14 UNDER § 10–105(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

15 (II) THE CASE IS ELIGIBLE UNDER § 10–107 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
16 AND

17 (III) AT LEAST 3 YEARS HAVE PASSED SINCE THE DATE OF THE
18 DISPOSITION OF THE CASE; OR

19 (2) (I) ANY CONVICTIONS IN THE CASE ARE MISDEMEANOR
20 CONVICTIONS LISTED UNDER § 10–110(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE, OTHER THAN:

21 1. ASSAULT IN THE SECOND DEGREE UNDER § 3–203 OF
22 THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

23 2. ANY CHARGE MARKED IN ELECTRONIC COURT
24 RECORDS AS A DOMESTICALLY RELATED CRIME UNDER § 6–233 OF THIS ARTICLE;

25 (II) THE CASE IS ELIGIBLE UNDER §§ 10–107 AND 10–110(D)(2)
26 AND (3) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

27 (III) AT LEAST 7 YEARS HAVE PASSED SINCE THE DISPOSITION OF
28 THE CASE, EXCEPT THAT IF THE PERSON IS CONVICTED OF A NEW CRIME DURING
29 THE 7–YEAR PERIOD, THE ORIGINAL CONVICTION OR CONVICTIONS ARE NOT
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 360 3

1 ELIGIBLE FOR EXPUNGEMENT UNLESS THE NEW CONVICTION BECOMES ELIGIBLE
2 FOR EXPUNGEMENT.

3 (C) (1) BEGINNING AUGUST 1, 2028, THE JUDICIARY SHALL, ONCE PER
4 MONTH, IDENTIFY ALL CASES THAT ARE NEWLY ELIGIBLE FOR EXPUNGEMENT
5 BASED ON THE CRITERIA SET FORTH IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

6 (2) PROMPTLY AFTER MAKING EACH DETERMINATION REQUIRED
7 UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE JUDICIARY SHALL
8 ELECTRONICALLY NOTIFY THE DEPARTMENT OF ALL CASES THAT ARE NEWLY
9 ELIGIBLE FOR EXPUNGEMENT.

10 (3) WITHIN ONE MONTH OF THE NOTIFICATION REQUIRED UNDER
11 PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT AND THE JUDICIARY
12 SHALL EXPUNGE ALL NEWLY ELIGIBLE CASES.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3