START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 387

P3, P2 6lr1574
HB 961/25 – APP CF SB 41

By: Delegates Embry, Behler, Boyce, Crutchfield, Forbes, Kaufman, Pasteur, Ruff,
Ruth, Stinnett, Toles, Wolek, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 21, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Commissioned Public Art – Artist Rights and Registration of Art

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting an entity from including in a contract for certain State
4 public art a provision requiring artists to waive certain rights; requiring certain
5 State public art to be registered with the Maryland State Arts Council; and generally
6 relating to artist rights and State public art.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – State Finance and Procurement
9 Section 13–230
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – State Finance and Procurement

15 13–230.

16 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “STATE PUBLIC ART” MEANS PUBLIC ART
17 COMMISSIONED FOR A PROJECT THAT RECEIVES STATE FUNDING, REGARDLESS OF
18 WHETHER THE STATE FUNDING DIRECTLY PAID FOR THE PUBLIC ART.

19 (B) (1) AN ENTITY MAY NOT INCLUDE IN A CONTRACT FOR STATE PUBLIC
20 ART A REQUIREMENT THAT AN ARTIST WAIVE COPYRIGHT PROTECTIONS OR RIGHTS
21 UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 106A.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0387*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 387

1 (2) NOTWITHSTANDING PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AND
2 SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN ARTIST MAY CHOOSE TO
3 WAIVE THE ARTIST’S COPYRIGHT PROTECTIONS OR RIGHTS UNDER 17 U.S.C. § 106A
4 IN A CONTRACT FOR STATE PUBLIC ART.

5 (3) A WAIVER DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
6 MUST BE IN WRITING.

7 (C) AN ENTITY THAT COMMISSIONS STATE PUBLIC ART SHALL REGISTER
8 THE ART WITH THE MARYLAND STATE ARTS COUNCIL, INCLUDING:

9 (1) THE NAME AND CONTACT INFORMATION OF THE ARTIST;

10 (2) THE LOCATION OF THE ART;

11 (3) THE TYPE OF ART;

12 (4) THE TITLE OF THE ART; AND

13 (5) THE DATE OF INSTALLATION OR CREATION.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
15 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
16 application to any contract entered into before the effective date of this Act.

17 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
18 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2