START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 331

M3 6lr1134
HB 232/25 – ENT & ECM CF 6lr1135

By: Delegates Terrasa, Lehman, Behler, Boafo, Charkoudian, Ebersole, Edelson,
Embry, Fair, Feldmark, Foley, Forbes, Guzzone, Healey, Hill, A. Johnson,
Kaufman, Lewis, Martinez, Moreno, Palakovich Carr, Ruth, Shetty,
Simmons, Solomon, Stewart, Taveras, Watson, White Holland, Williams,
Wims, Wu, and Ziegler
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation and Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter Reduction Program

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and
4 Litter Reduction Program to increase the reuse and recycling of beverage containers
5 and reduce the litter, pollution, and costs associated with beverage containers;
6 altering the duties of the Office of Recycling; altering the contents and use of the
7 State Recycling Trust Fund; requiring the Comptroller to establish a separate
8 account within the Fund; requiring that each redeemable beverage container sold in
9 the State depict certain information beginning on a certain date; requiring the
10 wholesale price and retail price of a full redeemable beverage container to include
11 the refund value of the container, subject to a certain exception, beginning on a
12 certain date; requiring a retailer to include certain information on a customer’s sales
13 receipt; establishing a framework for the redemption of redeemable beverage
14 containers sold in the State; requiring a producer to provide a certified copy of a
15 certain contractual agreement to a certain beverage container stewardship
16 organization; prohibiting a producer from selling, offering for sale, or distributing in
17 or importing into the State a redeemable beverage container unless the producer is
18 registered with the Department of the Environment, pays a certain fee, and is part
19 of the beverage container stewardship organization; establishing a framework for
20 the beverage container stewardship organization to represent producers in fulfilling
21 the requirements of this Act; requiring the beverage container stewardship
22 organization to submit a certain beverage container stewardship plan to the
23 Department for approval; requiring the beverage container stewardship
24 organization to implement and administer the beverage container stewardship plan
25 within a certain time after the plan is approved; requiring the Department to
26 establish a process for a county or municipal corporation to create a redemption
27 facility; authorizing redeemable beverage containers redeemed at a redemption

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0331*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 331

1 facility managed by a county or municipal corporation to be credited toward meeting
2 certain recycling rates; establishing the Beverage Container Recycling Refund Grant
3 Program to evaluate the investments and policies necessary to achieve a certain
4 performance target, increase the reuse and recycling of beverage containers in the
5 State, increase the availability of public water fountains and refill stations in the
6 State, and reduce the volume of litter from beverage containers in the State;
7 requiring the Chesapeake Bay Trust to administer the Grant Program; requiring the
8 beverage container stewardship organization to provide certain payments to certain
9 facilities for a certain period of time for managing unredeemed beverage containers
10 in accordance with certain requirements; establishing the Redeemable Beverage
11 Container Recycling Refund Advisory Council to review certain reports, make
12 certain recommendations, and advise the Department on certain matters; providing
13 immunity from liability to a certain person under certain circumstances; and
14 generally relating to the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter
15 Reduction Program.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Environment
18 Section 9–1701(a) and (q) and 9–1702(a)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 Article – Environment
23 Section 9–1702(d) and 9–1707(f)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 BY adding to
27 Article – Environment
28 Section 9–1737 through 9–1756 to be under the new part “Part VI. Maryland
29 Beverage Container Recycling Refund and Litter Reduction Program”
30 Annotated Code of Maryland
31 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

32 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
33 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

34 Article – Environment

35 9–1701.

36 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

37 (q) “Recycling” means any process in which recyclable materials are collected,
38 separated, or processed and returned to the marketplace in the form of raw materials or
39 products.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 331 3

1 9–1702.

2 (a) There is an Office of Recycling created within the Department.

3 (d) The Office shall:

4 (1) Assist the counties in developing an acceptable recycling plan required
5 under § 9–1703 of this subtitle and § 9–505 of this title, including technical assistance to
6 the local governments;

7 (2) Coordinate the efforts of the State to facilitate the implementation of
8 the recycling goals at the county level;

9 (3) Review all recycling plans submitted as part of a county plan as
10 required under § 9–505 of this title and advise the Secretary on the adequacy of the
11 recycling plan;

12 (4) Administer the Statewide Electronics Recycling Program under Part IV
13 of this subtitle;

14 (5) Promote the development of markets for recycled materials and
15 recycled products in the State in accordance with § 9–1702.1 of this subtitle;

16 (6) Review and approve plans and annual reports, including the paint
17 stewardship assessment, submitted in accordance with a Paint Stewardship Program
18 established under Part V of this subtitle; [and]

19 (7) Review and approve, in consultation with the producer responsibility
20 advisory council established under § 9–2503 of this title, producer responsibility plans and
21 annual reports submitted in accordance with Subtitle 25 of this title; AND

22 (8) ADMINISTER THE MARYLAND BEVERAGE CONTAINER
23 RECYCLING REFUND AND LITTER REDUCTION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER §
24 9–1739 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

25 9–1707.

26 (f) (1) There is a State Recycling Trust Fund.

27 (2) The Fund shall consist of:

28 (i) The newsprint recycling incentive fee;

29 (ii) The telephone directory recycling incentive fee collected under §
30 9–1709 of this subtitle;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (iii) The covered electronic device manufacturer registration fee
2 collected under § 9–1728 of this subtitle;

3 (iv) The Paint Stewardship Program plan and annual report review
4 fees collected under § 9–1733(b) and (h) of this subtitle;

5 (v) Any fees collected from producer responsibility organizations
6 under § 9–1702.2 of this subtitle or Subtitle 25 of this title;

7 (VI) FEES AND PENALTIES TRANSFERRED TO THE FUND UNDER
8 §§ 9–1744 AND 9–1755 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

9 [(vi)] (VII) All fines and penalties collected under this subtitle and §
10 9–2512 of this title;

11 [(vii)] (VIII) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

12 [(viii)] (IX) Any other money from any other source accepted for the
13 benefit of the Fund.

14 (3) The Secretary shall administer the Fund.

15 (4) The Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately and the Comptroller shall
16 account for the Fund.

17 (5) (I) [At] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
18 PARAGRAPH, AT the end of each fiscal year, any unspent or unencumbered balance in the
19 Fund that exceeds $2,000,000 shall revert to the General Fund of the State in accordance
20 with § 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

21 (II) THE FUNDS TRANSFERRED TO THE FUND UNDER
22 PARAGRAPH (2)(VI) OF THIS SUBSECTION ARE NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE
23 STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND MAY NOT REVERT TO THE
24 GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

25 (6) In accordance with the State budget, the Fund shall be used only:

26 (i) To provide grants to the counties to be used by the counties to
27 develop and implement local recycling plans;

28 (ii) To provide grants to counties that have addressed methods for
29 the separate collection and recycling of covered electronic devices in accordance with §
30 9–1703(c)(1) of this subtitle;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 331 5

1 (iii) To provide grants to municipalities to be used by the
2 municipalities to implement local covered electronic device recycling programs;

3 (iv) To cover the costs of the Paint Stewardship Program plan review
4 under § 9–1733(b) of this subtitle, the annual report review under § 9–1733(h) of this
5 subtitle, and associated costs for Program compliance oversight;

6 (v) In accordance with paragraph (7) of this subsection, to cover the
7 costs of a statewide recycling needs assessment conducted under § 9–1702.2 of this subtitle;

8 (vi) In accordance with paragraph (7) of this subsection, to cover the
9 costs of producer responsibility plan review, oversight, and enforcement under Subtitle 25
10 of this title; [and]

11 (VII) IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (8) OF THIS
12 SUBSECTION, TO COVER THE COSTS OF ADMINISTERING, MONITORING,
13 EVALUATING, AND ENFORCING THE MARYLAND BEVERAGE CONTAINER
14 RECYCLING REFUND AND LITTER REDUCTION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER §
15 9–1739 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

16 [(vii)] (VIII) To carry out the purposes of the land management
17 administration.

18 (7) (i) There is a separate account within the Fund[.

19 (ii) The separate account shall consist] CONSISTING of:

20 1. Any fees collected from producer responsibility
21 organizations under § 9–1702.2 of this subtitle or Subtitle 25 of this title; and

22 2. All fines and penalties collected under § 9–2512 of this
23 title.

24 [(iii)] (II) The separate account shall be used only for the costs of
25 statewide recycling needs assessments conducted under § 9–1702.2 of this subtitle and
26 producer responsibility plan review, oversight, and enforcement under Subtitle 25 of this
27 title.

28 (8) (I) THERE IS A SEPARATE ACCOUNT WITHIN THE FUND
29 CONSISTING OF THE FUNDS SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (2)(VI) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

30 (II) THE SEPARATE ACCOUNT SHALL BE USED ONLY:

31 1. TO COVER THE COSTS OF ADMINISTERING,
32 MONITORING, EVALUATING, AND ENFORCING THE MARYLAND BEVERAGE
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 331

1 CONTAINER RECYCLING REFUND AND LITTER REDUCTION PROGRAM
2 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–1739 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

3 2. TO COMPENSATE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN
4 ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–1748 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

5 3. TO MEET OR EXCEED THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS
6 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7 [(8)] (9) (i) The Treasurer shall invest the money in the Fund in the
8 same manner as other State money may be invested.

9 (ii) Any investment earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the
10 General Fund of the State.

11 9–1735. RESERVED.

12 9–1736. RESERVED.

13 PART VI. MARYLAND BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING REFUND AND LITTER
14 REDUCTION PROGRAM.

15 9–1737.

16 (A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (B) (1) “ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM” MEANS A
19 PROGRAM THAT:

20 (I) UTILIZES A SYSTEM OF CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS AND A
21 MECHANISM TO ASSOCIATE REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WITH
22 THE APPROPRIATE CUSTOMER ACCOUNT;

23 (II) CONSOLIDATES THE REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
24 CONTAINERS FOR BULK SORTING WHILE COLLECTING DATA ABOUT THE
25 CONTAINERS;

26 (III) FULLY PREPARES REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
27 CONTAINERS FOR SALE TO RECYCLERS; AND

28 (IV) COLLECTS DATA TO SUPPORT AN ACCOUNTING OF THE
29 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS, INCLUDING THE DEPOSITS, FEES, AND
30 POUNDS OF MATERIAL PRODUCED THAT ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THE REDEEMABLE
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 331 7

1 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

2 (2) “ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM” INCLUDES A
3 BAG DROP PROGRAM IF THE BAG DROP PROGRAM IS A COMPONENT OF THE
4 ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM.

5 (C) “ADVISORY COUNCIL” MEANS THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
6 CONTAINER RECYCLING REFUND ADVISORY COUNCIL ESTABLISHED UNDER §
7 9–1753 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

8 (D) “BAG DROP PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT ALLOWS A CUSTOMER
9 TO:

10 (1) DROP OFF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN A BAG
11 OR OTHER RECEPTACLE AT ONE OR MORE LOCATIONS FOR A REFUND; AND

12 (2) HAVE THE CORRESPONDING REFUND PLACED INTO AN ACCOUNT
13 HELD FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE CUSTOMER IN A MANNER THAT ALLOWS THE
14 CUSTOMER TO OBTAIN THE REFUND OR REFUND RECEIPT WITHIN A SPECIFIED
15 NUMBER OF DAYS AFTER THE DROP–OFF.

16 (E) (1) “BEVERAGE” MEANS ANY DRINKABLE LIQUID INTENDED FOR
17 HUMAN ORAL CONSUMPTION.

18 (2) “BEVERAGE” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

19 (I) DRUGS REGULATED UNDER THE FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG,
20 AND COSMETIC ACT; AND

21 (II) INFANT FORMULA.

22 (F) (1) “BEVERAGE CONTAINER” MEANS A BOTTLE, CAN, OR OTHER
23 CONTAINER THAT:

24 (I) HAS BEEN SEALED BY A MANUFACTURER;

25 (II) IS MADE OF GLASS, METAL, OR PLASTIC; AND

26 (III) AT THE TIME OF SALE, CONTAINS 3 LITERS OR LESS OF A
27 BEVERAGE.

28 (2) “BEVERAGE CONTAINER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (I) A CARTON;

2 (II) A POUCH; OR

3 (III) ASEPTIC PACKAGING.

4 (G) “BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEMPTION AND PROCESSING METHOD”
5 MEANS A MANUAL OR TECHNOLOGICAL METHOD FOR PROPERLY COLLECTING,
6 IDENTIFYING, COUNTING, OR PROCESSING EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
7 CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION.

8 (H) “BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION” MEANS A
9 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT IS:

10 (1) EXEMPT FROM TAXATION UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL
11 REVENUE CODE;

12 (2) CREATED BY PRODUCERS TO IMPLEMENT A BEVERAGE
13 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN; AND

14 (3) APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–1745
15 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

16 (I) “BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN” MEANS A PLAN
17 SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1746 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

18 (J) “CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST” MEANS THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST
19 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–1902 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE.

20 (K) “DEPOSIT INITIATOR” MEANS THE FIRST DISTRIBUTOR TO COLLECT A
21 DEPOSIT ON A BEVERAGE CONTAINER SOLD IN THE STATE.

22 (L) (1) “DISTRIBUTOR” MEANS A PERSON THAT SELLS BEVERAGES IN
23 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TO A RETAILER IN THE STATE.

24 (2) “DISTRIBUTOR” INCLUDES A PERSON THAT MANUFACTURES AND
25 SELLS BEVERAGES IN REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TO A RETAILER IN THE
26 STATE.

27 (3) “DISTRIBUTOR” DOES NOT INCLUDE AIRLINES OR SHIPPING
28 COMPANIES THAT TRANSPORT REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

29 (M) “GRANT PROGRAM” MEANS THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 331 9

1 REFUND GRANT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–1750 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

2 (N) “LINE BREAKAGE” MEANS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT:

3 (1) BECOMES DEFECTIVE OR DAMAGED DURING MANUFACTURING;

4 (2) IS NOT INTENDED TO BE SOLD; AND

5 (3) IS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR REDEMPTION.

6 (O) “MARYLAND–SPECIFIC UPC BARCODE” MEANS A UNIVERSAL PRODUCT
7 CODE THAT IS:

8 (1) UNIQUE TO BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE; AND

9 (2) USED TO DETER FRAUD AND ENSURE THE LEGITIMATE
10 REDEMPTION OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

11 (P) “MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY” MEANS A FACILITY LOCATED IN THE
12 STATE THAT COLLECTS, COMPACTS, REPACKAGES, SORTS, OR PROCESSES
13 SOURCE–SEPARATED MATERIALS FOR TRANSPORTATION AND RECYCLING.

14 (Q) (1) “ON–PREMISES SELLER” MEANS A PERSON THAT SELLS FILLED
15 AND UNOPENED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR ON–PREMISES
16 CONSUMPTION.

17 (2) “ON–PREMISES SELLER” INCLUDES:

18 (I) BARS;

19 (II) HOTELS;

20 (III) RESTAURANTS;

21 (IV) SPORTING VENUES;

22 (V) ENTERTAINMENT VENUES; AND

23 (VI) GAMING VENUES.

24 (R) “PERFORMANCE TARGETS” MEANS THE TARGETS ESTABLISHED UNDER
25 § 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (S) (1) “PRODUCER” MEANS A PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR COMPLYING
2 WITH THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS PART.

3 (2) “PRODUCER” INCLUDES A FRANCHISOR OF A FRANCHISE
4 LOCATED IN THE STATE.

5 (3) “PRODUCER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

6 (I) THE STATE, A COUNTY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, OR
7 ANY OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE;

8 (II) A CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION THAT IS TAX–EXEMPT
9 UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE;

10 (III) A SOCIAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION THAT IS TAX–EXEMPT
11 UNDER § 501(C)(4) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE;

12 (IV) A FRANCHISEE THAT OPERATES A FRANCHISE IN THE
13 STATE;

14 (V) A PERSON THAT ANNUALLY SELLS, OFFERS FOR SALE,
15 DISTRIBUTES, OR IMPORTS INTO THE COUNTRY FOR SALE IN THE STATE FEWER
16 THAN 1,000 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS; OR

17 (VI) A PERSON THAT ANNUALLY SELLS, OFFERS FOR SALE, OR
18 DISTRIBUTES IN THE STATE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT IN
19 AGGREGATE GENERATE LESS THAN $5,000,000 EACH YEAR IN GLOBAL REVENUE.

20 (T) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND BEVERAGE CONTAINER
21 RECYCLING REFUND AND LITTER REDUCTION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER §
22 9–1739 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

23 (U) “RECYCLING RATE” MEANS THE NUMBER OF NONREFILLABLE
24 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE THAT ARE RECYCLED
25 SHOWN AS A PERCENTAGE OF ALL NONREFILLABLE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
26 CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE.

27 (V) “REDEEM” MEANS THE RETURN OF AN EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
28 CONTAINER IN EXCHANGE FOR A REFUND, A VOUCHER FOR A REFUND, OR A CREDIT
29 TO AN ACCOUNT FOR NOT LESS THAN THE REFUND VALUE.

30 (W) “REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER” MEANS A BEVERAGE
31 CONTAINER THAT, AT THE TIME OF SALE:
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 331 11

1 (1) CONTAINS 3 LITERS OR LESS OF A BEVERAGE;

2 (2) BEARS A UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE; AND

3 (3) MAY BEAR A MARYLAND–SPECIFIC UPC BARCODE FOR THE
4 PURPOSE OF ENSURING LEGITIMATE REDEMPTION AND DETERRING FRAUD.

5 (X) “REDEMPTION FACILITY” MEANS A FACILITY THAT:

6 (1) ACCEPTS EMPTY BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FROM A CONSUMER, A
7 RETAILER, OR BOTH;

8 (2) COLLECTS, SORTS, AND COUNTS EMPTY BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

9 (3) REFUNDS THE REFUND VALUE OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE
10 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN CASH, WITH A VOUCHER, OR AS A CREDIT TO AN
11 ACCOUNT FOR NOT LESS THAN THE REFUND VALUE OF THE REDEEMABLE
12 BEVERAGE CONTAINER; AND

13 (4) IS LICENSED UNDER § 9–1742 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

14 (Y) “REDEMPTION RATE” MEANS THE PERCENTAGE OF REDEEMABLE
15 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE THAT ARE REDEEMED FOR THE
16 DEPOSIT VALUE.

17 (Z) “REFILLABLE” MEANS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT IS DESIGNED AND
18 INTENDED TO BE REUSED AS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER AFTER BEING USED BY A
19 CONSUMER WITHOUT THE NEED FOR REMANUFACTURING.

20 (AA) (1) “RETAILER” MEANS A PERSON THAT ENGAGES IN THE SALE OF
21 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE.

22 (2) “RETAILER” INCLUDES A PERSON THAT ENGAGES IN THE SALE OF
23 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS:

24 (I) THROUGH A VENDING MACHINE; OR

25 (II) ONLINE FOR HOME OR OFFICE DELIVERY.

26 (BB) “REVERSE VENDING MACHINE” MEANS AN AUTOMATED DEVICE THAT:

27 (1) ACCEPTS ONE OR MORE TYPES OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 331

1 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

2 (2) USES A LASER SCANNER, AN OPTICAL SENSOR, A
3 MICROPROCESSOR, OR OTHER TECHNOLOGY TO ACCURATELY RECOGNIZE A
4 BEVERAGE CONTAINER’S UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE
5 CONTAINER IS A REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER;

6 (3) ISSUES A REDEEMABLE CREDIT SLIP FOR THE REDEEMABLE
7 BEVERAGE CONTAINER’S REFUND VALUE;

8 (4) SEPARATES REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FROM
9 CONTAINERS THAT ARE NOT REDEEMABLE;

10 (5) USES MECHANICAL COMPACTION TO CANCEL REDEEMABLE
11 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT HAVE BEEN REDEEMED; AND

12 (6) COMPILES INFORMATION REGARDING THE REDEEMABLE
13 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT HAVE BEEN REDEEMED, INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF
14 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS REDEEMED.

15 (CC) (1) “UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE” OR “UPC” MEANS A STANDARD
16 BARCODE THAT ENCODES A NUMBER UNIQUELY ASSIGNED TO A PRODUCT FOR
17 IDENTIFICATION OF THE PRODUCT.

18 (2) “UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE” OR “UPC” INCLUDES:

19 (I) ANY INDUSTRY–ACCEPTED BARCODE USED FOR PRODUCT
20 IDENTIFICATION PURPOSES; AND

21 (II) A EUROPEAN ARTICLE NUMBER.

22 9–1738.

23 IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO:

24 (1) REDUCE THE VOLUME OF LITTER AND PLASTIC POLLUTION FROM
25 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN THE STATE BY ACHIEVING A REDEMPTION RATE OF AT
26 LEAST 90% FOR THE APPROXIMATELY 5,500,000,000 SINGLE–USE BEVERAGE
27 CONTAINERS SOLD ANNUALLY IN THE STATE;

28 (2) PROVIDE A SOURCE OF HIGH–QUALITY, FOOD–GRADE MATERIALS
29 FOR USE AS RECYCLED CONTENT IN BEVERAGE AND FOOD CONTAINERS;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 331 13

1 (3) REDUCE THE VOLUME OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT ARE
2 LANDFILLED OR INCINERATED IN THE STATE;

3 (4) REDUCE THE COSTS OF LITTER AND BEVERAGE CONTAINER
4 COLLECTION, RECYCLING, AND DISPOSAL INCURRED BY TAXPAYERS, COUNTIES,
5 AND MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS BY MAKING PRODUCERS OF BEVERAGE
6 CONTAINERS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE RECOVERY, RECYCLING, AND REUSE OF
7 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

8 (5) PROVIDE INCENTIVES FOR INCREASING THE USE OF REUSABLE
9 AND REFILLABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS; AND

10 (6) REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
11 PRODUCTION, TRANSPORTATION, PROCESSING, AND WASTE DISPOSAL OF
12 SINGLE–USE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE.

13 9–1739.

14 THERE IS A MARYLAND BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING REFUND AND
15 LITTER REDUCTION PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

16 9–1740.

17 PERFORMANCE TARGETS FOR THE PROGRAM ARE AS FOLLOWS:

18 (1) A 70% REDEMPTION RATE BY DECEMBER 31, 2030;

19 (2) A 90% REDEMPTION RATE BY DECEMBER 31, 2033;

20 (3) BY DECEMBER 31, 2028, ATTAINMENT OF ALL CONVENIENCE
21 STANDARDS IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1752 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
22 AND

23 (4) BY DECEMBER 31, 2038, AT LEAST 10% OF ALL BEVERAGE
24 CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE ARE RETURNED AND REFILLED.

25 9–1741.

26 (A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
27 BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2029, EACH REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SOLD IN
28 THE STATE SHALL INCLUDE A DEPICTION OF THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

29 (I) THE WORD “MARYLAND” OR THE LETTERS “MD”; AND
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (II) 1. FOR REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WITH A
2 VOLUME OF 24 FLUID OUNCES OR LESS, A REFUND VALUE OF 10 CENTS; OR

3 2. FOR REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WITH A
4 VOLUME OF MORE THAN 24 FLUID OUNCES, A REFUND VALUE OF 15 CENTS.

5 (2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADJUST THE REFUND VALUES SPECIFIED
6 IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

7 (I) IF THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES ALTERING THE REFUND
8 VALUES IS NECESSARY TO MEET OR EXCEED PERFORMANCE TARGETS; OR

9 (II) AT THE REQUEST OF A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
10 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION.

11 (3) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2034, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
12 INCREASE THE REFUND VALUES SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
13 BY 5 CENTS IF THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT FOR 2 CONSECUTIVE
14 CALENDAR YEARS THE REDEMPTION RATE WAS LESS THAN 90% OF THE TOTAL
15 NUMBER OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE.

16 (B) A BEVERAGE CONTAINER DEPICTING THE INFORMATION SPECIFIED IN
17 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE SOLD TO A CONSUMER BEFORE
18 JANUARY 1, 2029.

19 (C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
20 BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2029:

21 (I) THE WHOLESALE PRICE AND THE RETAIL PRICE OF A FULL
22 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SHALL INCLUDE THE REFUND VALUE OF THE
23 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER; AND

24 (II) A RETAILER SHALL INCLUDE ON A CUSTOMER’S SALES
25 RECEIPT THE REFUND VALUE OF A REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SOLD BY
26 THE RETAILER TO THE CUSTOMER.

27 (2) THE RETAIL PRICE OF A FULL REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
28 CONTAINER SOLD BY AN ON–PREMISES SELLER MAY NOT INCLUDE THE REFUND
29 VALUE OF THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER.

30 9–1742.
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 331 15

1 (A) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE A RANGE OF OPTIONS FOR
2 CUSTOMERS TO CONVENIENTLY REDEEM EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
3 CONTAINERS FOR THE FULL REFUND VALUE, INCLUDING:

4 (I) AT A RETAILER’S PLACE OF BUSINESS THROUGH DIRECT
5 TAKE–BACK BY THE RETAILER, REVERSE VENDING MACHINES, A BAG DROP
6 PROGRAM, OR OTHER REDEMPTION METHODS;

7 (II) DEDICATED AND CONVENIENTLY LOCATED REDEMPTION
8 FACILITIES OPERATED BY RETAILERS, PUBLIC ENTITIES, OR THE BEVERAGE
9 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION; AND

10 (III) PLACING REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
11 REDEMPTION AND PROCESSING METHODS, SUCH AS REVERSE VENDING MACHINES,
12 BAG DROP PROGRAMS, AND ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAMS, IN
13 AREAS:

14 1. WITH A HIGH NUMBER OF PEDESTRIANS; AND

15 2. WHERE INDIVIDUALS PURCHASE OR USE BEVERAGE
16 CONTAINERS.

17 (2) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE A RANGE OF OPTIONS FOR
18 ON–PREMISES SELLERS TO CONVENIENTLY REDEEM EMPTY REDEEMABLE
19 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR THE FULL REFUND VALUE, INCLUDING:

20 (I) AN ACCOUNT–BASED REFUND ISSUED BY THE BEVERAGE
21 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS AGENTS FOLLOWING THE
22 COLLECTION OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS BY THE BEVERAGE
23 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS AGENTS FROM THE ON–PREMISES
24 SELLER; OR

25 (II) AN ACCOUNT–BASED REFUND ISSUED BY THE OPERATOR OF
26 A BAG DROP PROGRAM.

27 (B) (1) A PERSON SHALL APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A LICENSE TO
28 OPERATE A REDEMPTION FACILITY IN THE STATE.

29 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP STANDARDS AND A
30 LICENSING PROCESS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF REDEMPTION
31 FACILITIES.

32 (C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A REDEMPTION
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 331

1 FACILITY SHALL ACCEPT ALL TYPES OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
2 CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION.

3 (D) A RETAILER OR REDEMPTION FACILITY MAY REFUSE TO ACCEPT AN
4 EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT:

5 (1) IS DIRTY;

6 (2) IS BROKEN;

7 (3) CONTAINS MATERIAL FOREIGN TO THE NORMAL CONTENTS OF
8 THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER; OR

9 (4) THE RETAILER OR REDEMPTION FACILITY BELIEVES WAS NOT
10 SOLD IN THE STATE.

11 (E) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A RETAILER WITH AT LEAST 3,000
12 SQUARE FEET OF SALES FLOOR SPACE AND AT LEAST 150 SQUARE FEET OF SHELF
13 SPACE DEDICATED TO THE DISPLAY OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

14 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A RETAILER
15 SHALL:

16 (I) ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN A DEDICATED AREA AT THE
17 RETAILER’S PLACE OF BUSINESS TO ACCEPT EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
18 CONTAINERS;

19 (II) ACCEPT AT THE RETAILER’S PLACE OF BUSINESS ANY
20 EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS RETURNED FOR REDEMPTION
21 DURING THE RETAILER’S BUSINESS HOURS; AND

22 (III) PAY TO THE REDEEMER THE REFUND VALUE FOR EACH
23 EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEEMED.

24 (3) RETAILERS MAY MEET THE REQUIREMENTS IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF
25 THIS SUBSECTION THROUGH VARIOUS METHODS, INCLUDING:

26 (I) SUPPLEMENTING THE MANUAL COLLECTION AND STORING
27 OF REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WITH A REVERSE VENDING
28 MACHINE, A BAG DROP PROGRAM, OR OTHER COUNTING AND SORTING METHODS;
29 AND

30 (II) GROUPING BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEMPTION AND
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 331 17

1 PROCESSING METHODS WITH THOSE OF OTHER RETAILERS IF:

2 1. THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
3 ORGANIZATION APPROVES THE PROPOSAL; AND

4 2. THE RETAILERS PARTICIPATING IN THE GROUPED
5 METHODS PROVIDE CONSISTENT SERVICE, MARKETING, AND SITE REDEMPTION
6 LOCATIONS THAT COMPLY WITH DISTANCE PROVISIONS DETERMINED BY THE
7 DEPARTMENT.

8 (4) A RETAILER WITHIN AN AREA THAT MEETS THE CONVENIENCE
9 STANDARDS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1752 OF THIS
10 SUBTITLE MAY BE EXEMPT FROM THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE
11 RETAILER:

12 (I) IS LOCATED IN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO A REDEMPTION
13 FACILITY IN THAT AREA; AND

14 (II) SHARES THE COST OF THE OPERATION OF THE
15 REDEMPTION FACILITY WITH THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
16 ORGANIZATION.

17 (5) THE DEPARTMENT MAY:

18 (I) SET STANDARDS FOR THE NUMBER OF REVERSE VENDING
19 MACHINES REQUIRED FOR RETAILERS LOCATED IN UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES;
20 AND

21 (II) ESTABLISH A CAP FOR THE NUMBER OF EMPTY
22 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT MAY BE REDEEMED PER VISIT AT
23 SMALL RETAILERS.

24 (F) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A RETAILER WITH LESS
25 THAN 3,000 SQUARE FEET OF SALES FLOOR SPACE OR LESS THAN 150 SQUARE FEET
26 OF SHELF SPACE DEDICATED TO THE DISPLAY OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
27 CONTAINERS SHALL:

28 (1) PROVIDE ON–SITE CASH REFUNDS FOR THE REDEMPTION OF ANY
29 EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT IS OF THE SAME MATERIAL AND
30 SIZE AS THOSE THAT ARE SOLD BY THE RETAILER IF THE EMPTY REDEEMABLE
31 BEVERAGE CONTAINER BEING REDEEMED IS NOT ACCEPTED BY A REVERSE
32 VENDING MACHINE; AND
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (2) POST AT THE RETAILER’S ENTRANCE THE ADDRESS OF THE
2 NEAREST REVERSE VENDING MACHINE OR OTHER REDEMPTION METHOD THAT
3 PROVIDES AN IMMEDIATE CASH REFUND FOR REDEEMING EMPTY REDEEMABLE
4 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

5 (G) (1) A PERSON THAT PROVIDES A REVERSE VENDING MACHINE FOR
6 THE REDEMPTION OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SHALL:

7 (I) PROVIDE AN OPTION FOR REDEEMING EMPTY REDEEMABLE
8 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WHEN THE REVERSE VENDING MACHINE IS FULL, BROKEN,
9 OR UNDER REPAIR; AND

10 (II) PROVIDE AN OPTION FOR REDEEMING ANY EMPTY
11 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS NOT ACCEPTED BY THE REVERSE VENDING
12 MACHINE.

13 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR
14 SUBMITTING FOR REVIEW, APPROVING, AND MONITORING AN ACCOUNT–BASED
15 BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM THAT:

16 1. ENSURES THAT THE PROGRAM WILL ACCURATELY
17 REFUND DEPOSITS AND MAINTAIN AND REPORT DATA FROM EACH TRANSACTION;
18 AND

19 2. IDENTIFIES THE INFORMATION THAT MUST BE
20 SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR APPROVAL OF THE PROGRAM.

21 (II) A PERSON THAT INTENDS TO PROVIDE AN ACCOUNT–BASED
22 BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM FOR THE REDEMPTION OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE
23 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SHALL SUBMIT INFORMATION IDENTIFIED UNDER
24 SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR APPROVAL OF
25 THE PROGRAM.

26 (H) (1) REFUNDS PROVIDED FOR AN EMPTY REDEEMED REDEEMABLE
27 BEVERAGE CONTAINER SHALL BE:

28 (I) IN CASH;

29 (II) IN THE FORM OF A RECEIPT FROM A REVERSE VENDING
30 MACHINE OR ACCOUNT–BASED REDEMPTION SYSTEM, IF:

31 1. THE RECEIPT CAN BE EXCHANGED FOR CASH WITHIN
32 60 DAYS AFTER THE RECEIPT IS ISSUED; AND
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 331 19

1 2. THERE IS NO REQUIREMENT THAT OTHER GOODS BE
2 PURCHASED TO RECEIVE THE CASH REFUND; OR

3 (III) CREDITED TO AN ACCOUNT BY THE RECEIVER OF THE
4 EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SO THAT THE CONSUMER CAN
5 RECEIVE THE REFUND OR A REFUND RECEIPT WITHIN A SPECIFIED NUMBER OF
6 DAYS, AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT, AFTER REDEEMING THE EMPTY
7 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER.

8 (2) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
9 SHALL REIMBURSE A RETAILER FOR THE VALUE OF VALID RECEIPTS REDEEMED BY
10 CONSUMERS.

11 (I) (1) A REDEMPTION FACILITY, RETAILER, OR ANY OTHER PERSON
12 THAT ACCEPTS REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION SHALL BE
13 REIMBURSED BY THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS
14 AGENT FOR THE HANDLING OF EACH EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
15 REDEEMED.

16 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET A HANDLING FEE TO BE PAID
17 BY THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS AGENT TO A
18 REDEMPTION FACILITY, RETAILER, OR ANY OTHER PERSON THAT ACCEPTS EMPTY
19 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION.

20 (II) 1. THE HANDLING FEE SHALL BE SET AT AN AMOUNT
21 THAT COVERS THE COSTS OF COLLECTING, SORTING, PROCESSING, AND
22 TRANSPORTING EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR RECYCLING,
23 REUSE, OR REFILLING.

24 2. THE DEPARTMENT MAY INCREASE THE HANDLING
25 FEE IF THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES AN INCREASE IS NECESSARY TO ENCOURAGE
26 THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MORE REDEMPTION FACILITIES.

27 (J) (1) AN ON–PREMISES SELLER THAT PROVIDES EMPTY REDEEMABLE
28 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION SHALL BE REIMBURSED BY THE
29 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS AGENT FOR:

30 (I) THE REFUNDS PAID BY THE ON–PREMISES SELLER FOR THE
31 EMPTY REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS; AND

32 (II) THE HANDLING OF EACH EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
33 CONTAINER REDEEMED.
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET A MATERIAL HANDLING FEE
2 TO BE PAID BY THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS
3 AGENT TO AN ON–PREMISES SELLER THAT PROVIDES EMPTY REDEEMABLE
4 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION.

5 (II) THE HANDLING FEE SHALL BE SET AT AN AMOUNT THAT
6 COVERS THE COSTS OF TEMPORARY STORAGE, PRELIMINARY SORTING, AND
7 PREPARING EACH REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEEMED FOR
8 COLLECTION.

9 (3) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION OR ITS
10 AGENT SHALL PROVIDE TO AN ON–PREMISES SELLER:

11 (I) ANY RECEPTACLES OR BAGS REQUIRED FOR THE
12 PRELIMINARY SORTING OF REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS BY
13 THE ON–PREMISES SELLER; AND

14 (II) ANY LABELS NECESSARY FOR ATTRIBUTING THE
15 REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TO THE ON–PREMISES SELLER.

16 (K) A DEPOSIT INITIATOR THAT COLLECTS A DEPOSIT FROM A RETAILER,
17 REDEMPTION FACILITY, OR ANY OTHER PERSON THAT ACCEPTS REDEEMABLE
18 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR REDEMPTION SHALL ACCOUNT FOR ANY DEPOSITS IN
19 ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–1743 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

20 (L) REDEEMED EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SHALL BE
21 COLLECTED FOR RETURN TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
22 ORGANIZATION FOR SALE AS SCRAP MATERIAL TO FINANCE THE PROGRAM.

23 9–1743.

24 (A) A DEPOSIT INITIATOR SHALL DEPOSIT ANY DEPOSITS COLLECTED
25 UNDER § 9–1742 OF THIS SUBTITLE INTO A DEPOSIT COLLECTION ACCOUNT THAT IS
26 MAINTAINED SEPARATELY FROM ALL OTHER REVENUES.

27 (B) THE FUNDS IN THE DEPOSIT COLLECTION ACCOUNT MAY BE USED ONLY
28 TO PAY THE REFUND VALUE OF AN EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
29 BEING REDEEMED.

30 (C) A DEPOSIT INITIATOR SHALL REPORT TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
31 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION, AT A FREQUENCY DETERMINED BY THE
32 DEPARTMENT, THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
HOUSE BILL 331 21

1 (1) THE NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD
2 AND EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS REDEEMED SINCE THE LAST
3 REPORT WAS SUBMITTED TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
4 ORGANIZATION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

5 (2) THE FUNDS DEPOSITED INTO THE DEPOSIT COLLECTION
6 ACCOUNT AND THE REFUNDS ISSUED FROM THE DEPOSIT COLLECTION ACCOUNT
7 SINCE THE LAST REPORT WAS SUBMITTED TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
8 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

9 (3) ANY INCOME EARNED ON THE FUNDS IN THE DEPOSIT
10 COLLECTION ACCOUNT SINCE THE LAST REPORT WAS SUBMITTED TO THE
11 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

12 (4) THE BALANCE OF THE DEPOSIT COLLECTION ACCOUNT; AND

13 (5) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

14 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DETERMINE THE POINT AT WHICH A
15 DEPOSIT BECOMES AN UNCLAIMED DEPOSIT.

16 (2) UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS ARE CALCULATED AS THE AMOUNT OF
17 FUNDS TRANSFERRED TO A DEPOSIT COLLECTION ACCOUNT THAT ARE IN EXCESS
18 OF THE SUM OF:

19 (I) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS ON THE DEPOSIT COLLECTION
20 ACCOUNT DURING THE TIME FOR WHICH UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS ARE BEING
21 CALCULATED; AND

22 (II) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THE REFUND VALUE RECEIVED FOR
23 THE EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS REDEEMED DURING THE TIME
24 FOR WHICH THE UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS ARE BEING CALCULATED.

25 (3) A DEPOSIT INITIATOR SHALL TRANSFER ALL UNCLAIMED
26 DEPOSITS TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION AT A
27 FREQUENCY DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

28 (4) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
29 SHALL:

30 (I) ESTABLISH A RESERVE ACCOUNT TO MANAGE ALL
31 UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS; AND
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
22 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (II) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2030, TRANSFER 10% OF ALL
2 UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS TO THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST WITH A FREQUENCY
3 DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

4 (5) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
5 SHALL USE THE FUNDS IN THE RESERVE ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED UNDER
6 PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO:

7 (I) ACHIEVE THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY STATED
8 IN § 9–1738 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

9 (II) MEET OR EXCEED THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS
10 ESTABLISHED IN § 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

11 (6) THE UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS TRANSFERRED TO THE CHESAPEAKE
12 BAY TRUST UNDER PARAGRAPH (4)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE USED ONLY
13 FOR THE COSTS OF ADMINISTERING AND FINANCING THE GRANT PROGRAM UNDER
14 § 9–1750 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

15 9–1744.

16 (A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THIS SECTION
17 APPLIES TO A PRODUCER THAT SELLS, OFFERS FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTES
18 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN THE STATE.

19 (2) (I) IF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER IS SOLD UNDER THE
20 PRODUCER’S OWN BRAND OR LACKS IDENTIFICATION OF A BRAND, THE PRODUCER
21 IS THE PERSON THAT MANUFACTURES THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER.

22 (II) IF THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER IS
23 MANUFACTURED BY A PERSON OTHER THAN THE BRAND OWNER, THE PRODUCER IS
24 THE PERSON THAT IS THE LICENSEE OF A BRAND OR TRADEMARK UNDER WHICH A
25 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER IS SOLD, OFFERED FOR SALE, OR
26 DISTRIBUTED IN THE STATE, WHETHER OR NOT THE TRADEMARK IS REGISTERED IN
27 THE STATE, UNLESS ANOTHER RESPONSIBLE PERSON HAS CONTRACTUALLY
28 ACCEPTED RESPONSIBILITY AS THE PRODUCER AND HAS JOINED THE BEVERAGE
29 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION AS THE PRODUCER RESPONSIBLE FOR
30 THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER UNDER THIS SECTION.

31 (III) IF THERE IS NO PERSON DESCRIBED IN THIS PARAGRAPH
32 OVER WHOM THE STATE CAN CONSTITUTIONALLY EXERCISE JURISDICTION, THE
33 PRODUCER IS THE PERSON THAT IMPORTS OR DISTRIBUTES THE REDEEMABLE
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
HOUSE BILL 331 23

1 BEVERAGE CONTAINER IN THE STATE.

2 (3) IF ANOTHER PERSON CONTRACTUALLY ACCEPTS
3 RESPONSIBILITY AS A PRODUCER UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
4 THE PRODUCER MUST PROVIDE A CERTIFIED COPY OF THE CONTRACTUAL
5 AGREEMENT TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION.

6 (B) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2029, A PRODUCER MAY NOT SELL, OFFER FOR
7 SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE IN OR IMPORT INTO THE STATE A REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
8 CONTAINER UNLESS THE PRODUCER:

9 (1) IS REGISTERED WITH THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
10 THIS SECTION;

11 (2) HAS PAID THE REGISTRATION FEE UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF
12 THIS SECTION; AND

13 (3) IS PART OF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
14 ORGANIZATION THAT:

15 (I) HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER §
16 9–1745 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

17 (II) HAS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN
18 APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1746 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

19 (C) ON OR BEFORE MARCH 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2028, THE
20 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL PROVIDE TO THE
21 DEPARTMENT:

22 (1) A LIST OF EACH PRODUCER PARTICIPATING IN THE BEVERAGE
23 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION; AND

24 (2) FOR EACH PRODUCER, THE REGISTRATION FORM REQUIRED
25 UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

26 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE A REGISTRATION FORM THAT
27 REQUIRES EACH PRODUCER PARTICIPATING IN THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
28 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION TO PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

29 (I) THE NAME, PRIMARY BUSINESS ADDRESS, AND CONTACT
30 INFORMATION OF THE PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR ENSURING COMPLIANCE WITH
31 THIS PART;
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
24 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (II) A LIST OF EACH BRAND OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
2 CONTAINERS THAT THE PRODUCER INTENDS TO SELL, OFFER FOR SALE, OR
3 DISTRIBUTE IN THE STATE, INCLUDING THE SIZE AND MATERIAL OF THE
4 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR EACH BRAND;

5 (III) FOR EACH REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SPECIFIED
6 IN THE REGISTRATION, WHETHER THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER:

7 1. IS REFILLABLE; AND

8 2. DEPICTS A UPC OR MARYLAND–SPECIFIC UPC
9 BARCODE;

10 (IV) HOW EACH PRODUCER WILL PREVENT THE FRAUDULENT
11 SALE AND REDEMPTION OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT WERE NOT
12 SOLD IN THE STATE;

13 (V) THE NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
14 EACH PRODUCER SOLD IN THE STATE IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR
15 YEAR; AND

16 (VI) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE
17 DEPARTMENT.

18 (2) A PRODUCER SHALL SUBMIT A COMPLETED REGISTRATION FORM
19 TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION THAT REPRESENTS
20 THE PRODUCER.

21 (E) ON A SCHEDULE DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT, EACH PRODUCER
22 SHALL PAY A REGISTRATION FEE ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER
23 SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION.

24 (F) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH AN ANNUAL REGISTRATION
25 FEE FOR PRODUCERS THAT SELL REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN THE
26 STATE.

27 (2) THE REGISTRATION FEE SHALL BE SET IN A MANNER THAT:

28 (I) WHEN TAKEN IN COMBINATION WITH ANTICIPATED
29 REVENUES FROM PENALTIES COLLECTED UNDER § 9–1755 OF THIS SUBTITLE, WILL
30 PRODUCE FUNDS SUFFICIENT TO COVER THE DEPARTMENT’S ESTIMATED COSTS OF
31 PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, ADMINISTERING, MONITORING, ENFORCING, AND
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
HOUSE BILL 331 25

1 EVALUATING THE PROGRAM FOR THE UPCOMING YEAR;

2 (II) FOR THE FIRST YEAR OF THE PROGRAM DURING WHICH
3 REGISTRATION FEES ARE COLLECTED, SHALL COVER THE START–UP COSTS OF THE
4 PROGRAM THAT WERE INCURRED BY THE DEPARTMENT AND FINANCED FROM THE
5 GENERAL FUND; AND

6 (III) IS PROPORTIONAL TO A PRODUCER’S SHARE OF THE TOTAL
7 NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE FOR THE
8 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR.

9 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

10 (I) IF THE REVENUES FROM THE REGISTRATION FEES IN THE
11 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR EXCEED THE COSTS SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH
12 (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION, CARRY THE EXCESS REVENUES FORWARD TO REDUCE
13 REGISTRATION FEES THE FOLLOWING YEAR; AND

14 (II) IF THE REVENUES FROM THE REGISTRATION FEES IN THE
15 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR DO NOT COVER THE COSTS SPECIFIED IN
16 PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION, ADJUST REGISTRATION FEES FOR THE
17 FOLLOWING YEAR TO AN AMOUNT THAT WILL COVER THE DEPARTMENT’S ACTUAL
18 COSTS FROM THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR.

19 (4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
20 PARAGRAPH, REGISTRATION FEES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE:

21 1. TRANSFERRED TO THE STATE RECYCLING TRUST
22 FUND UNDER § 9–1707(F) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

23 2. USED ONLY TO COVER THE DEPARTMENT’S COSTS OF
24 PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, ADMINISTERING, MONITORING, ENFORCING, AND
25 EVALUATING THE PROGRAM.

26 (II) THE PORTION OF THE REGISTRATION FEES THAT COVERED
27 THE START–UP COSTS OF THE PROGRAM AND WERE FINANCED FROM THE GENERAL
28 FUND DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF THE PROGRAM FOR WHICH REGISTRATION FEES
29 ARE COLLECTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION
30 SHALL BE DEPOSITED INTO THE GENERAL FUND.

31 9–1745.

32 (A) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL APPROVE,
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
26 HOUSE BILL 331

1 FOR A PERIOD NOT TO EXCEED 10 YEARS, A SINGLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
2 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION TO REPRESENT ALL PRODUCERS IN FULFILLING THE
3 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PART, IF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
4 ORGANIZATION DEMONSTRATES THAT IT HAS:

5 (1) THE ABILITY, AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT, TO
6 ADMINISTER THE REQUIREMENTS OF A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN
7 UNDER § 9–1746 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

8 (2) A GOVERNING BOARD CONSISTING OF PRODUCERS THAT
9 REPRESENT THE DIVERSITY OF APPLICABLE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
10 IN THE MARKET;

11 (3) SET NO UNREASONABLE BARRIERS TO JOINING THE BEVERAGE
12 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION AND WILL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION
13 THE NEEDS OF SMALL PRODUCERS THAT DO NOT GENERATE A HIGH VOLUME OF
14 CONTAINERS;

15 (4) ADEQUATE FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND SAFEGUARDS,
16 INCLUDING FRAUD PREVENTION MEASURES AND AN AUDIT SCHEDULE;

17 (5) THE ABILITY TO SECURE THE CAPITAL NECESSARY FOR THE
18 INITIAL INVESTMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE, SORTING EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE,
19 TRANSPORTATION, AND OTHER START–UP EXPENSES; AND

20 (6) MET ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS SET BY THE DEPARTMENT.

21 (B) IF NO APPLICATION TO OPERATE A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
22 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION IS SUBMITTED BY PRODUCERS TO THE DEPARTMENT
23 BY OCTOBER 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

24 (1) ESTABLISH OR DESIGNATE A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
25 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION TO IMPLEMENT THIS PART; AND

26 (2) REQUIRE ALL PRODUCERS, AS A CONDITION OF SELLING OR
27 DISTRIBUTING BEVERAGES IN THE STATE, TO JOIN AND FUND THE DESIGNATED
28 ORGANIZATION.

29 (C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY RENEW THE APPROVAL OF THE BEVERAGE
30 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
31 SECTION IF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION CONTINUES
32 TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION AND ANY OTHER REQUIREMENT SET
33 BY THE DEPARTMENT.
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
HOUSE BILL 331 27

1 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REVOKE THE APPROVAL OF THE
2 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION IF THE DEPARTMENT
3 DETERMINES THAT THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION:

4 (I) FAILED TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION; OR

5 (II) FAILED TO IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER AN APPROVED
6 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–1746 OF
7 THIS SUBTITLE.

8 (2) IF THE DEPARTMENT REVOKES THE APPROVAL OF THE
9 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
10 THIS SUBSECTION:

11 (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY APPROVE ONE OR MORE
12 ADDITIONAL BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATIONS TO CARRY OUT
13 THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
14 ORGANIZATION THAT WAS REVOKED, SUBJECT TO ONE OR MORE OF THE
15 ADDITIONAL BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATIONS MEETING THE
16 REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; AND

17 (II) THE TRUSTEE OR ESCROW AGENT OF THE TRUST FUND OR
18 ESCROW ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED IN THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
19 PLAN UNDER § 9–1746(A)(3)(VI) OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL:

20 1. RECEIVE ALL PAYMENTS DIRECTLY FROM
21 PRODUCERS THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN PAID TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
22 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION;

23 2. DEPOSIT THE PAYMENTS RECEIVED UNDER ITEM 1 OF
24 THIS ITEM INTO THE TRUST FUND OR ESCROW ACCOUNT; AND

25 3. MAKE PAYMENTS FROM THE TRUST FUND OR ESCROW
26 ACCOUNT AS DIRECTED BY THE DEPARTMENT TO IMPLEMENT THE REQUIREMENTS
27 OF THIS PART.

28 9–1746.

29 (A) (1) ON OR BEFORE MARCH 1, 2028, THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
30 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL SUBMIT A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
31 STEWARDSHIP PLAN TO THE DEPARTMENT.
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
28 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (2) A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN SHALL:

2 (I) IDENTIFY AND INCLUDE THE CONTACT INFORMATION FOR
3 EACH PRODUCER INTENDED TO BE COVERED UNDER THE PLAN;

4 (II) IDENTIFY EACH BRAND OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
5 CONTAINER INTENDED TO BE SOLD UNDER THE PLAN, INCLUDING THE SIZE AND
6 MATERIAL OF THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FOR EACH BRAND AND
7 WHETHER THE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ARE REFILLABLE;

8 (III) DESCRIBE:

9 1. THE FINANCING INFORMATION SPECIFIED IN
10 PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

11 2. THE LOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
12 ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAMS, BAG DROP PROGRAMS, AND
13 REDEMPTION FACILITIES THE ORGANIZATION WILL DEVELOP, AS NECESSARY TO:

14 A. COMPLY WITH THE CONVENIENCE STANDARDS
15 ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1752 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

16 B. ACHIEVE THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS UNDER §
17 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

18 3. HOW THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS WILL BE MET OR
19 EXCEEDED FOR THE 5–YEAR PERIOD FOLLOWING THE YEAR IN WHICH THE PLAN IS
20 APPROVED;

21 4. HOW STAKEHOLDER COMMENTS WERE CONSIDERED
22 AND REFLECTED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLAN, INCLUDING THE ROLE OF
23 RETAILERS, DISTRIBUTORS, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN PLAN IMPLEMENTATION;

24 5. THE ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
25 THE PLAN, INCLUDING ANY STAFFING THAT WILL BE NECESSARY FOR THESE
26 PURPOSES;

27 6. THE ACTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN TAKEN AND THAT
28 WILL BE TAKEN FOR PUBLIC OUTREACH, EDUCATION, AND COMMUNICATION,
29 INCLUDING MESSAGING AND IDENTIFICATION OF TARGET AUDIENCES;

30 7. THE ANTICIPATED INVESTMENTS THAT WILL BE
31 MADE TO IMPROVE THE REUSE OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS, INCLUDING THE
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
HOUSE BILL 331 29

1 SOURCE OF FUNDING FOR THE INVESTMENTS; AND

2 8. THE ACTIONS THE ORGANIZATION WILL TAKE TO
3 ENSURE THE PLAN IS IMPLEMENTED IN A MANNER THAT COMPLIES WITH THE
4 REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (D)(2) OF THIS SECTION;

5 (IV) LIST THE STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED IN DEVELOPING THE
6 PLAN;

7 (V) PROVIDE THE ANTICIPATED COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE
8 PLAN FOR 5 YEARS, BROKEN DOWN BY YEAR;

9 (VI) INCLUDE A CLOSURE AND TRANSFER PLAN FOR HANDLING
10 THE AFFAIRS OF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION THAT
11 ENSURES THAT EACH PRODUCER INTENDED TO BE COVERED UNDER THE BEVERAGE
12 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN CAN FULFILL THE PRODUCER’S OBLIGATIONS IN
13 THE EVENT THAT THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
14 DISSOLVES OR HAS ITS APPROVAL REVOKED UNDER § 9–1745 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
15 AND

16 (VII) INCLUDE ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUESTED BY THE
17 DEPARTMENT.

18 (3) THE FINANCING INFORMATION INCLUDED IN A BEVERAGE
19 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN SHALL:

20 (I) EXPLAIN THE FINANCING FOR DIRECT INVESTMENTS OR
21 REIMBURSEMENTS THAT WILL IMPROVE INFRASTRUCTURE IN A MANNER THAT
22 SUPPORTS REDEMPTION SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGIES;

23 (II) ESTABLISH A FEE STRUCTURE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
24 PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR PRODUCERS PARTICIPATING IN THE
25 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION;

26 (III) DESCRIBE THE COSTS OF MEETING THE PERFORMANCE
27 TARGETS;

28 (IV) DESCRIBE THE INCENTIVES USED TO ENCOURAGE
29 PRODUCERS TO:

30 1. INVEST IN REUSABLE AND REFILLABLE BEVERAGE
31 CONTAINER SYSTEMS; AND
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
30 HOUSE BILL 331

1 2. REDESIGN BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TO BE EASIER
2 AND LESS COSTLY TO RECYCLE;

3 (V) CREATE INCENTIVES FOR PRODUCERS TO USE A
4 MARYLAND–SPECIFIC UPC BARCODE TO REDUCE FRAUDULENT REDEMPTION;

5 (VI) ESTABLISH A TRUST FUND OR AN ESCROW ACCOUNT IN THE
6 STATE INTO WHICH THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
7 SHALL DEPOSIT ALL UNEXPENDED FUNDS FOR USE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
8 SECTION IN THE EVENT THAT THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
9 ORGANIZATION DISSOLVES OR HAS ITS APPROVAL REVOKED BY THE DEPARTMENT
10 UNDER § 9–1745 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

11 (VII) MEET ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE
12 DEPARTMENT.

13 (4) (I) THE FEE STRUCTURE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF
14 THIS SUBSECTION FOR PRODUCERS PARTICIPATING IN THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
15 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL BE:

16 1. SET IN A MANNER THAT COVERS THE COSTS OF
17 ADMINISTERING THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION AND
18 IMPLEMENTING THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN; AND

19 2. BASED ON:

20 A. THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH TRANSPORTING,
21 COLLECTING, AND PROCESSING EACH TYPE OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
22 CONTAINER MATERIAL;

23 B. WHETHER A PRODUCER’S REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
24 CONTAINERS ARE REFILLABLE;

25 C. WHETHER A PRODUCER’S EMPTY REDEEMABLE
26 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ARE EASY TO RECYCLE;

27 D. WHETHER A PRODUCER’S REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
28 CONTAINERS HAVE A MARYLAND–SPECIFIC UPC BARCODE;

29 E. A PRODUCER’S PORTION, BY MATERIAL TYPE, OF
30 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE DURING THE PREVIOUS
31 CALENDAR YEAR; AND
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
HOUSE BILL 331 31

1 F. ANY OTHER FACTOR THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES
2 IS NECESSARY TO SUPPORT THE PROGRAM.

3 (II) 1. EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 9–1745(D)(2) OF THIS
4 SUBTITLE, A PRODUCER PARTICIPATING IN THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
5 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL PAY THE FEE ESTABLISHED UNDER
6 PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
7 ORGANIZATION.

8 2. THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
9 ORGANIZATION SHALL DEPOSIT FEES RECEIVED UNDER THIS SUBPARAGRAPH TO AN
10 ACCOUNT HELD BY THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION.

11 3. THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
12 ORGANIZATION MAY USE THE FEES RECEIVED UNDER THIS SUBPARAGRAPH ONLY
13 FOR IMPLEMENTING THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN.

14 (5) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
15 STEWARDSHIP PLAN TO AN INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL AUDITOR TO ENSURE THAT
16 THE FINANCING PROPOSED IN THE PLAN WILL COVER THE COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING
17 THE PLAN.

18 (B) (1) (I) WITHIN 120 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF A BEVERAGE
19 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN SUBMITTED TO THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS
20 SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL APPROVE, APPROVE WITH CONDITIONS, OR
21 DENY THE PLAN.

22 (II) IN DETERMINING WHETHER TO APPROVE, APPROVE WITH
23 CONDITIONS, OR DENY A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN, THE
24 DEPARTMENT SHALL:

25 1. CONSIDER WHETHER:

26 A. THE PLAN COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF
27 THIS SECTION; AND

28 B. THERE WAS SUFFICIENT ENGAGEMENT WITH
29 STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, RETAILERS, DISTRIBUTORS,
30 AND ON–PREMISES SELLERS, IN DEVELOPING THE PLAN; AND

31 2. CONSULT WITH THE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

32 (2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT MAY RESCIND APPROVAL OF A
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
32 HOUSE BILL 331

1 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN FOR GOOD CAUSE.

2 (II) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
3 MAY AMEND A RESCINDED BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN AND SUBMIT
4 THE AMENDED PLAN TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR APPROVAL.

5 (3) (I) A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN APPROVED
6 BY THE DEPARTMENT MAY BE AMENDED WITH APPROVAL OF THE DEPARTMENT.

7 (II) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REQUIRE THAT AN APPROVED
8 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN BE AMENDED IF THE REPORT
9 SUBMITTED UNDER § 9–1747 OF THIS SUBTITLE REFLECTS THAT THE
10 PERFORMANCE TARGETS HAVE NOT BEEN MET.

11 (C) AN APPROVED BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN EXPIRES AT
12 THE END OF 5 YEARS.

13 (D) (1) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
14 SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN
15 WITHIN 6 MONTHS AFTER THE PLAN IS APPROVED.

16 (2) IN IMPLEMENTING AND ADMINISTERING A BEVERAGE CONTAINER
17 STEWARDSHIP PLAN, THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION
18 SHALL:

19 (I) FACILITATE LOGISTICS, THE INITIATION OF DEPOSITS, AND
20 THE ISSUANCE OF REFUNDS UNDER THE PLAN;

21 (II) COORDINATE THE LOGISTICS FOR TIMELY COLLECTION OF
22 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS FROM AN ON–PREMISES SELLER;

23 (III) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR TRACKING REDEEMABLE
24 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE;

25 (IV) DESIGN AND OPERATE SERVICES FOR THE
26 TRANSPORTATION AND PROCESSING OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

27 (V) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN FOR ESTABLISHING,
28 OPERATING, AND MANAGING REDEMPTION FACILITIES THAT WILL OFFER A WIDE
29 RANGE OF CONVENIENT REDEMPTION LOCATIONS AND TECHNOLOGIES THAT ARE
30 EASY TO USE, ACCESSIBLE, AND MEET OR EXCEED THE CONVENIENCE STANDARDS
31 ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1752 OF THIS SUBTITLE;
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
HOUSE BILL 331 33

1 (VI) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN FOR THE DISTRIBUTION,
2 OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEMPTION AND
3 PROCESSING METHODS, INCLUDING REVERSE VENDING MACHINES, BAG DROP
4 PROGRAMS, AND ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAMS;

5 (VII) DEVELOP ACCOUNTING AND CONTROL STANDARDS;

6 (VIII) IMPLEMENT ACCOUNTING, AUDIT, PAYMENT, AND
7 REPORTING PROCEDURES;

8 (IX) ESTABLISH A HIGH–VOLUME VALIDATION AND AUDIT
9 SYSTEM TO PAY A BULK RATE TO AN ON–PREMISES SELLER FOR THE REDEMPTION
10 OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

11 (X) ESTABLISH AN APPLICATION PROCESS FOR LARGE
12 ON–PREMISES SELLERS TO APPLY FOR AND RECEIVE A BULK RATE FOR THE
13 REDEMPTION OF HIGH VOLUMES OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

14 (XI) MARKET REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIALS
15 FOR REUSE IN THE MANUFACTURING OF SIMILAR PRODUCTS;

16 (XII) FUND A MARKETING PROGRAM TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC
17 ABOUT THE PROGRAM;

18 (XIII) ESTABLISH A SYSTEM FOR REPORTING KEY INFORMATION
19 GATHERED BY THE PROGRAM TO THE DEPARTMENT ON A QUARTERLY BASIS; AND

20 (XIV) CREATE INCENTIVES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
21 REFILLABLE AND REUSABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SYSTEMS.

22 (3) ON REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
23 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL SUBMIT A COPY OF ITS FINANCIAL RECORDS
24 TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A FINANCIAL AUDIT.

25 9–1747.

26 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
27 ORGANIZATION THAT HAS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN APPROVED
28 BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1746 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

29 (B) (1) ON OR BEFORE APRIL 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2030, THE
30 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO
31 THE DEPARTMENT ON THE PROGRESS MADE IN THE PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
34 HOUSE BILL 331

1 TOWARD MEETING THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS AND THE GOALS OF THE PROGRAM
2 AND THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION’S BEVERAGE
3 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN.

4 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE THE ADVISORY COUNCIL
5 WITH A COPY OF EACH REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

6 (C) THE REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
7 SHALL INCLUDE, FOR THE PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR:

8 (1) THE PROGRESS MADE TOWARD ACHIEVING THE PERFORMANCE
9 TARGETS;

10 (2) IF THE PERFORMANCE TARGETS WERE NOT ACHIEVED, A
11 DESCRIPTION OF THE ACTIONS PROPOSED TO ACHIEVE THE PERFORMANCE
12 TARGETS;

13 (3) THE NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN
14 THE STATE;

15 (4) THE NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN
16 THE STATE SORTED BY MATERIAL TYPE, REFUND VALUE, AND WHETHER THE
17 CONTAINER CAN BE REFILLED OR REUSED;

18 (5) THE NUMBER OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
19 REDEEMED;

20 (6) THE NUMBER OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
21 REDEEMED AT EACH REDEMPTION FACILITY, REVERSE VENDING MACHINE, BAG
22 DROP PROGRAM, ACCOUNT–BASED BULK PROCESSING PROGRAM, OR OTHER
23 BEVERAGE CONTAINER REDEMPTION AND PROCESSING METHOD SORTED BY
24 MATERIAL TYPE, REFUND VALUE, AND WHETHER THE EMPTY REDEEMABLE
25 BEVERAGE CONTAINER CAN BE REFILLED OR REUSED;

26 (7) THE REDEMPTION RATE AND RECYCLING RATE FOR
27 NONREFILLABLE REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE
28 SORTED BY MATERIAL TYPE, NUMBER OF CONTAINERS SOLD, AND CONTAINER
29 WEIGHT;

30 (8) THE AMOUNT OF EACH TYPE OF:

31 (I) REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIAL
32 COLLECTED IN THE STATE; AND
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
HOUSE BILL 331 35

1 (II) SCRAP MATERIAL SOLD BY THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
2 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION;

3 (9) THE LOCATION OF EACH REDEMPTION FACILITY IN THE STATE
4 AND THE REDEMPTION METHOD USED AT EACH REDEMPTION FACILITY;

5 (10) A DESCRIPTION OF ANY IMPROVEMENTS MADE TO MAKE
6 RETURNING EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS EASIER AND MORE
7 CONVENIENT;

8 (11) THE IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF AREAS THAT DO NOT
9 HAVE READILY AVAILABLE OPTIONS FOR REDEEMING AN EMPTY REDEEMABLE
10 BEVERAGE CONTAINER AND ACTIONS THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
11 ORGANIZATION WILL TAKE TO IMPROVE OPTIONS IN THESE AREAS;

12 (12) THE NUMBER OF CONSUMER COMPLAINTS PER MONTH, SORTED
13 BY REDEMPTION FACILITY;

14 (13) THE NUMBER AND TYPE OF COMPLAINTS FROM ON–PREMISES
15 SELLERS PER MONTH, SORTED BY TYPE OF BUSINESS;

16 (14) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANIZATIONS WITH
17 ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED FOR THE RECEIPT OF ELECTRONIC DEPOSITS OR
18 REFUNDS;

19 (15) THE TOTAL COST OF IMPLEMENTING THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
20 STEWARDSHIP PLAN, AS DETERMINED BY AN INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL AUDITOR
21 UNDER § 9–1746(A)(5) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

22 (16) THE AVERAGE COST OF PROCESSING AN EMPTY REDEEMED
23 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER;

24 (17) A COPY OF THE AUDIT CONDUCTED UNDER § 9–1746(A)(5) OF
25 THIS SUBTITLE;

26 (18) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS DETAILING ALL DEPOSITS RECEIVED
27 AND REFUNDS ISSUED BY EACH PRODUCER COVERED UNDER THE BEVERAGE
28 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN;

29 (19) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF DEPOSITS INITIATED, REFUNDS ISSUED,
30 AND UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS COLLECTED UNDER THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
31 STEWARDSHIP PLAN;
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
36 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (20) AN ACCOUNTING OF ALL ACTIVITIES AND INVESTMENTS
2 FINANCED BY UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS;

3 (21) EXPENDITURES AND REVENUES SORTED BY SOURCE, INCLUDING
4 FEES PAID UNDER § 9–1746(A)(4) OF THIS SUBTITLE, REVENUE FROM THE SALE OF
5 SCRAP MATERIALS, AND UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS;

6 (22) SAMPLES OF ALL EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS PROVIDED TO
7 CONSUMERS, RETAILERS, AND OTHER ENTITIES;

8 (23) A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF INVESTMENTS MADE IN NEW
9 REDEMPTION FACILITIES AND REDEMPTION METHODS;

10 (24) THE LOCATION OF NEW REDEMPTION FACILITIES AND
11 REDEMPTION METHODS;

12 (25) A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF CHANGES MADE BY PRODUCERS TO
13 INCREASE THE RECYCLABILITY OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

14 (26) A DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF ANY INCIDENTS OF FRAUD AND
15 EFFORTS TAKEN TO PREVENT FRAUD; AND

16 (27) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

17 (D) THE FINANCIAL, PRODUCTION, AND SALES DATA OF INDIVIDUAL
18 PRODUCERS REPORTED TO THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
19 KEPT CONFIDENTIAL BY THE DEPARTMENT AND THE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

20 (E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL POST THE REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER THIS
21 SECTION ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE IN A MANNER THAT PROTECTS THE
22 CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DATA SPECIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
23 SECTION.

24 9–1748.

25 (A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR A COUNTY
26 OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION TO CREATE A REDEMPTION FACILITY.

27 (2) A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY NOT BE REQUIRED
28 TO HOST, OPERATE, OR PROVIDE LAND, FACILITIES, OR ANY OTHER RESOURCES FOR
29 THE ESTABLISHMENT OR OPERATION OF ANY REDEMPTION FACILITY.
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
HOUSE BILL 331 37

1 (B) EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS REDEEMED AT A
2 REDEMPTION FACILITY MANAGED BY A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
3 SHALL BE CREDITED TOWARD MEETING THE RECYCLING RATES REQUIRED UNDER §
4 9–505 OF THIS TITLE.

5 (C) (1) THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2031, A PORTION OF PROGRAM
6 REVENUES SHALL BE USED TO COMPENSATE A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL
7 CORPORATION FOR ANY NET LOSS OF REVENUE TO THE COUNTY’S OR MUNICIPAL
8 CORPORATION’S WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM THAT CAN BE DOCUMENTED AND
9 ATTRIBUTED TO THE PROGRAM.

10 (2) IN DETERMINING A NET LOSS OF REVENUE, A COUNTY OR
11 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION SHALL CONSIDER:

12 (I) THE LOSS OF REVENUE FROM THE SALE OF SCRAP
13 MATERIALS;

14 (II) FINANCIAL SAVINGS FROM A REDUCTION IN:

15 1. GLASS BOTTLES IN THE RECYCLING STREAM;

16 2. TRANSPORTATION COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
17 CURBSIDE COLLECTION OF TRASH AND RECYCLING;

18 3. PROCESSING COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH RECYCLING
19 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS;

20 4. THE COSTS OF LANDFILLING AND INCINERATING
21 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS THAT ARE NOT RECYCLED; AND

22 5. THE COSTS OF LITTER COLLECTION; AND

23 (III) FOR A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION THAT HAS A
24 TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD FOR TRASH IN A WATERWAY UNDER ITS
25 JURISDICTION, THE REDUCED COSTS AND INCREASED BENEFITS OF COMPLYING
26 WITH THE TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD DUE TO A REDUCTION IN BEVERAGE
27 CONTAINER LITTER.

28 9–1749.

29 FUNDING FOR THE PROGRAM SHALL:

30 (1) INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
38 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (I) REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
2 ORGANIZATION FEES COLLECTED UNDER § 9–1746 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

3 (II) REVENUE FROM THE SALE OF RAW MATERIALS;

4 (III) UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS COLLECTED UNDER § 9–1743 OF
5 THIS SUBTITLE;

6 (IV) REGISTRATION FEES COLLECTED UNDER § 9–1744 OF THIS
7 SUBTITLE; AND

8 (V) PENALTIES COLLECTED UNDER § 9–1755 OF THIS
9 SUBTITLE; AND

10 (2) BE USED IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 9–1707(F), 9–1743, 9–1744,
11 AND 9–1755 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

12 9–1750.

13 (A) THERE IS A BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING REFUND GRANT
14 PROGRAM.

15 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE GRANT PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR:

16 (1) AN ASSESSMENT OF THE INVESTMENTS AND POLICIES
17 NECESSARY TO ENSURE THAT, BY DECEMBER 31, 2038, AT LEAST 10% OF ALL
18 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS SOLD IN THE STATE ARE RETURNED AND REFILLED; AND

19 (2) PROJECTS THAT:

20 (I) INCREASE THE REUSE AND RECYCLING OF BEVERAGE
21 CONTAINERS IN THE STATE;

22 (II) INCREASE THE AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC WATER
23 FOUNTAINS AND REFILL STATIONS IN THE STATE; AND

24 (III) REDUCE THE VOLUME OF LITTER FROM BEVERAGE
25 CONTAINERS IN THE STATE.

26 (C) THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST SHALL ADMINISTER THE GRANT
27 PROGRAM.
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
HOUSE BILL 331 39

1 (D) THE GRANT PROGRAM SHALL BE FUNDED FROM A PORTION OF THE
2 UNCLAIMED DEPOSITS TRANSFERRED TO THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST UNDER §
3 9–1743(D)(4)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

4 (E) THE FOLLOWING ENTITIES ARE ELIGIBLE FOR A GRANT UNDER THE
5 GRANT PROGRAM:

6 (1) A SCHOOL OR AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

7 (2) A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION;

8 (3) A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

9 (4) A FOR–PROFIT ORGANIZATION; AND

10 (5) A PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP.

11 (F) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ADVISORY COUNCIL,
12 SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING:

13 (1) AN APPLICATION PROCESS FOR AN ENTITY TO APPLY FOR A
14 GRANT;

15 (2) THE CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING AND AWARDING GRANTS;

16 (3) REPORTING AND EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A GRANT
17 AWARDED UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

18 (4) ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES
19 ARE NECESSARY FOR ADMINISTERING AND IMPLEMENTING GRANTS AWARDED
20 UNDER THE GRANT PROGRAM.

21 (G) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2030, THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST SHALL
22 BEGIN AWARDING GRANTS UNDER THE GRANT PROGRAM.

23 9–1751.

24 (A) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2029, AND CONTINUING UNTIL
25 REIMBURSEMENT PAYMENTS UNDER § 9–2506 OF THIS TITLE BEGIN, THE BEVERAGE
26 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION SHALL PROVIDE PAYMENTS TO A
27 MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY TO COVER THE COSTS OF COLLECTING, SORTING,
28 PROCESSING, AND TRANSPORTING EMPTY UNREDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
29 CONTAINERS FOR RECYCLING, REUSE, OR REFILLING.
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
40 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (B) A MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY SHALL BE ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A
2 PAYMENT UNDER THIS SECTION ONLY IF:

3 (1) THE UNREDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
4 RECEIVED MEET THE APPLICABLE SPECIFICATIONS IN THE MOST RECENTLY
5 PUBLISHED GUIDELINES OF THE INSTITUTE OF SCRAP RECYCLING INDUSTRIES;

6 (2) THE MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY REPORTS TO THE BEVERAGE
7 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION THE NUMBER OF TONS OF UNREDEEMED
8 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS RECEIVED FOR PROCESSING IN THE
9 PREVIOUS MONTH, CATEGORIZED BY MATERIAL TYPE; AND

10 (3) THE MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY REPORTS TO THE BEVERAGE
11 CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION THE NUMBER OF UNREDEEMED
12 REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS TRANSFERRED TO ADDITIONAL MATERIALS
13 PROCESSING FACILITIES OR END MARKETS IN THE PREVIOUS MONTH, CATEGORIZED
14 BY MATERIAL TYPE.

15 (C) THE OPERATOR OF A MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY SHALL USE AN
16 INDUSTRY–STANDARD SCALE TO MEASURE THE WEIGHT OF ALL COVERED
17 BEVERAGE CONTAINER MATERIALS RECEIVED BY THE FACILITY.

18 (D) THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION MAY, AT ITS
19 OWN EXPENSE, CONDUCT AUDITS OF THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF MATERIALS
20 HANDLED BY A MATERIAL RECOVERY FACILITY, ON REQUEST BY THE
21 ORGANIZATION.

22 (E) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH THE PAYMENT AMOUNT
23 UNDER THIS SECTION.

24 (2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADJUST THE PAYMENT AMOUNT AS
25 NECESSARY TO ACCOUNT FOR CHANGES IN THE COSTS OF COLLECTING, SORTING,
26 PROCESSING, AND TRANSPORTING EMPTY UNREDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
27 CONTAINERS.

28 9–1752.

29 IN ADDITION TO THE DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED IN THIS PART,
30 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

31 (1) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ADVISORY COUNCIL:
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
HOUSE BILL 331 41

1 (I) ESTABLISH CONVENIENCE STANDARDS FOR THE COVERAGE
2 AND AVAILABILITY OF REDEMPTION OPTIONS ACROSS THE STATE; AND

3 (II) ENSURE THE CONVENIENCE STANDARDS PROVIDE
4 ACCESSIBLE REDEMPTION OPTIONS FOR DIFFERENTLY ABLED PEOPLE AND PEOPLE
5 WHO LIVE IN RURAL AREAS OR LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES OF COLOR;

6 (2) ESTABLISH A SYSTEM FOR LARGE ON–PREMISES SELLERS TO
7 VERIFY THE SOURCE OF THE HIGH VOLUMES OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
8 CONTAINERS REDEEMED BY THE ON–PREMISES SELLER; AND

9 (3) PERIODICALLY REVIEW AVAILABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
10 REDEMPTION AND PROCESSING METHODS TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE TYPES OF
11 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS COVERED UNDER THE PROGRAM SHOULD BE EXPANDED.

12 9–1753.

13 (A) THERE IS A REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER RECYCLING
14 REFUND ADVISORY COUNCIL.

15 (B) THE ADVISORY COUNCIL CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS,
16 DESIGNATED BY THE SECRETARY:

17 (1) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING RECYCLING PROCESSORS;

18 (2) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES
19 RESPONSIBLE FOR RECYCLING PROGRAMS;

20 (3) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING GLASS MANUFACTURERS OR A
21 GLASS MANUFACTURING TRADE ORGANIZATION;

22 (4) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING ALUMINUM MANUFACTURERS OR
23 AN ALUMINUM MANUFACTURING TRADE ORGANIZATION;

24 (5) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING PLASTIC MANUFACTURERS OR A
25 PLASTIC MANUFACTURING TRADE ORGANIZATION;

26 (6) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING BEVERAGE COMPANIES;

27 (7) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING PURCHASERS OF RECYCLED
28 CONTENT;

29 (8) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING RETAILERS;
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
42 HOUSE BILL 331

1 (9) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING RESTAURANTS OR OTHER
2 ON–PREMISES SELLERS;

3 (10) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING REVERSE VENDING MACHINE
4 BUSINESSES;

5 (11) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING ACCOUNT–BASED BULK
6 PROCESSORS;

7 (12) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING BUSINESSES INVOLVED IN REUSE
8 AND REFILL SYSTEMS;

9 (13) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING AN ENVIRONMENTAL
10 ADVOCACY ORGANIZATION;

11 (14) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING AN ENVIRONMENTAL
12 JUSTICE ADVOCACY ORGANIZATION; AND

13 (15) AT LEAST TWO MEMBERS WHO ARE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL
14 PUBLIC AND RESIDE IN THE STATE.

15 (C) THE SECRETARY SHALL DESIGNATE TWO COCHAIRS FROM AMONG THE
16 MEMBERSHIP OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

17 (D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE ADVISORY
18 COUNCIL.

19 (E) A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL:

20 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
21 ADVISORY COUNCIL; BUT

22 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
23 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

24 (F) THE ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL MEET:

25 (1) AT LEAST QUARTERLY EACH YEAR; AND

26 (2) AS REQUESTED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

27 (G) THE ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL:
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
HOUSE BILL 331 43

1 (1) ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT ON DETERMINING WHETHER TO
2 APPROVE A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLAN;

3 (2) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT ON THE
4 IMPLEMENTATION OF APPROVED BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP PLANS;

5 (3) REVIEW AND ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT ON THE ANNUAL
6 REPORTS SUBMITTED UNDER § 9–1747 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

7 (4) ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION,
8 ADMINISTRATION, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM.

9 9–1754.

10 (A) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT
11 REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS PART.

12 (B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY EXPAND THE TYPES OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
13 COVERED UNDER THE PROGRAM BY REGULATION IF, BASED ON ITS REVIEW UNDER
14 § 9–1752(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THERE ARE
15 CONVENIENT REDEMPTION OPTIONS FOR THOSE BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

16 9–1755.

17 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION,
18 THE PROVISIONS OF §§ 9–334 THROUGH 9–344 OF THIS TITLE APPLY TO ENFORCE
19 VIOLATIONS OF THIS PART.

20 (B) A PENALTY MAY NOT BE IMPOSED ON A PRODUCER FOR FAILING TO
21 PROPERLY REGISTER WITH THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–1744 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
22 INCLUDING FAILING TO IDENTIFY EACH BRAND OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
23 CONTAINER THAT THE PRODUCER INTENDS TO SELL, OFFER FOR SALE, OR
24 DISTRIBUTE IN THE STATE, UNLESS:

25 (1) THE DEPARTMENT FIRST ISSUES A WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE
26 VIOLATION TO THE PRODUCER; AND

27 (2) THE PRODUCER DOES NOT REGISTER WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER
28 RECEIVING THE WRITTEN NOTICE.

29 (C) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT REDEEM, ATTEMPT TO REDEEM, RECEIVE,
30 STORE, TRANSPORT, DISTRIBUTE, OR OTHERWISE FACILITATE OR AID IN THE
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
44 HOUSE BILL 331

1 REDEMPTION OF THE FOLLOWING MATERIALS WITH AN INTENT TO DEFRAUD:

2 (I) AN EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT WAS
3 SOLD IN ANOTHER STATE;

4 (II) AN EMPTY REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE CONTAINER THAT WAS
5 REJECTED FOR REDEMPTION;

6 (III) LINE BREAKAGE;

7 (IV) A PREVIOUSLY REDEEMED REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
8 CONTAINER; OR

9 (V) ANOTHER INELIGIBLE MATERIAL.

10 (2) A PERSON MAY NOT DISPOSE OF A REDEEMED REDEEMABLE
11 BEVERAGE CONTAINER IN A LANDFILL OR AN INCINERATOR.

12 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH ADMINISTRATIVE
13 PENALTIES FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBSECTION THAT ARE BASED ON THE
14 NUMBER OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS AND REFUND AMOUNTS INVOLVED.

15 (D) (1) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2032, IF THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER
16 STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION HAS NOT MET THE REDEMPTION RATES
17 ESTABLISHED IN § 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 2
18 YEARS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ASSESS AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY ON THE
19 BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP ORGANIZATION.

20 (2) EACH YEAR THAT THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
21 ORGANIZATION DOES NOT MEET THE REDEMPTION RATES ESTABLISHED IN § 9–1740
22 OF THIS SUBTITLE IS A SEPARATE VIOLATION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

23 (3) AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY ASSESSED UNDER THIS
24 SUBSECTION SHALL EQUAL THE TOTAL NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE BEVERAGE
25 CONTAINERS NEEDED TO BE REDEEMED TO MEET THE REDEMPTION RATES
26 ESTABLISHED IN § 9–1740 OF THIS SUBTITLE, MINUS THE NUMBER OF REDEEMABLE
27 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS ACTUALLY REDEEMED, MULTIPLIED BY THE REFUND
28 VALUE IN EFFECT AT THE TIME THE VIOLATION OCCURRED.

29 (E) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ALTER THE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
30 ASSESSED UNDER SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION AS NECESSARY TO
31 ENSURE THAT THE PENALTY AMOUNTS ASSESSED EXCEED THE COSTS OF
32 COMPLYING WITH THIS PART.
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
HOUSE BILL 331 45

1 (F) PENALTIES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE:

2 (1) TRANSFERRED TO THE STATE RECYCLING TRUST FUND UNDER §
3 9–1707(F) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

4 (2) USED ONLY TO COVER THE DEPARTMENT’S COSTS OF PLANNING,
5 IMPLEMENTING, ADMINISTERING, MONITORING, ENFORCING, AND EVALUATING
6 THE PROGRAM.

7 9–1756.

8 ANY PERSON PARTICIPATING IN A BEVERAGE CONTAINER STEWARDSHIP
9 PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE IS IMMUNE FROM LIABILITY UNDER
10 STATE LAWS CONCERNING ANTITRUST AND RESTRAINT OF TRADE FOR
11 COOPERATIVE ACTIVITIES ASSOCIATED WITH THE COLLECTION, TRANSPORT,
12 PROCESSING, RECYCLING, REUSE, AND MANAGEMENT OF EMPTY REDEEMABLE
13 BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

15 (a) The Department of the Environment shall consult with counties and
16 municipalities to assess the impacts of the Maryland Beverage Container Recycling Refund
17 and Litter Reduction Program (Program), as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, on local
18 beverage container litter and recycling operations and county and municipal budgets.

19 (b) On or before June 1, 2027, the Department of the Environment shall report to
20 the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, its
21 recommendations on ways to offset adverse impacts and enhance positive impacts of the
22 Program on beverage container litter, recycling rates, and county and municipal budgets.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
24 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 45