START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 337

C9, F1 6lr0662
CF SB 31

By: Delegates Moon, Allen, and Phillips
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 School Construction and Housing – School Zones and Adequate Public Facilities
3 Ordinances

4 FOR the purpose of requiring each county board of education to submit a certain report to
5 the Department of Planning and the Interagency Commission on School
6 Construction each year; prohibiting certain adequate public facilities ordinances
7 from delaying the processing and completion of subdivision or site development
8 plans; authorizing certain adequate public facilities ordinances to delay the issuance
9 of final permits; and generally relating to school zones, school construction, and
10 adequate public facilities ordinances.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Education
13 Section 4–148
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Land Use
18 Section 7–106
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Education

24 4–148.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0337*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 337

1 (A) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, AND EACH JULY 1 THEREAFTER, EACH
2 COUNTY BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A STUDENT RESIDENCY AND SCHOOL ZONES REPORT
3 TO THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION ON
4 SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION.

5 (B) (1) THE STUDENT RESIDENCY AND SCHOOL ZONES REPORT SHALL
6 INCLUDE:

7 (I) THE SCHOOL ZONE BOUNDARIES AND ATTENDANCE AREA
8 MAP;

9 (II) THE LOCATIONS OF EACH STUDENT’S RESIDENCE; AND

10 (III) THE STATE–RATED CAPACITY, STUDENT POPULATION, AND
11 CAPACITY PERCENTAGE OF EACH SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY.

12 (2) THE REPORT MAY NOT INCLUDE PERSONAL IDENTIFYING
13 INFORMATION OF A STUDENT.

14 (C) THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION ON SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION SHALL
15 ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING FORMATTING AND SUBMISSION
16 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE STUDENT RESIDENCY AND SCHOOL ZONES REPORT.

17 Article – Land Use

18 7–106.

19 A COUNTY’S ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES ORDINANCE THAT RESTRICTS
20 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ON THE BASIS OF SCHOOL CAPACITY:

21 (1) MAY NOT DELAY THE PROCESSING AND COMPLETION OF
22 SUBDIVISION OR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS; BUT

23 (2) MAY DELAY THE ISSUANCE OF FINAL PERMITS.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2