START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 342

C3 6lr1822

By: Delegate Behler
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Forestry Licenses – Applicant Qualifications – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of requiring that an institution from which an applicant for a forestry
4 license graduates on completion of a certain curriculum has certain approval and
5 accreditation; and generally relating to requirements for forestry licenses.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
8 Section 7–304
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

14 7–304.

15 (a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall be an individual who meets the
16 requirements of this section.

17 (b) An applicant shall have graduated on completion of a 4–year curriculum in
18 forestry from a college or university that is:

19 (1) approved by the Board [or]; AND

20 (2) accredited by:

21 (I) the Society of American Foresters; OR

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0342*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 342

1 (II) AN EQUIVALENT ACCREDITING ENTITY.

2 (c) The applicant shall have at least 2 years of experience in forestry that
3 indicates to the Board that the applicant is competent to practice forestry.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2