START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 385 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 385 
(Delegates Moon and Buckel) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings - Evidence - Rebuttable Presumption of Medical 
Bills 
 
 
This bill establishes that in an action for personal injury or wrongful death, there is a 
rebuttable presumption that a medical bill properly provided in discovery is authentic and 
the charges set forth in the medical bill are fair and reasonable. For the purposes of 
admissibility, expert testimony is not required to prove the authenticity, fairness or 
reasonableness of a medical bill. A party may overcome the presumption by proving, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that the medical bill or charge is not authentic, is unfair, or 
is unreasonable. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Depending on the bill’s overall effect on litigation against the State, the bill 
may increase expenditures for the State Insurance Trust Fund (SITF) and the 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF), as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may increase litigation‐related expenditures for local governments. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, Maryland case law requires personal injury plaintiffs seeking 
damages for the amount they paid or incurred for medical care to submit evidence that their 
medical treatment and medical bills were fair and reasonable in the amount charged, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 385/ Page 2 
necessary, and causally related to the defendant’s negligence. This typically involves the 
testimony of a medical doctor. 
 
However, § 10-104 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, which does not apply 
to medical malpractice claims, allows for a simpler process in personal injury cases in the 
District Court or personal injury cases in the circuit courts with an amount in controversy 
that does not exceed $30,000. Subject to specified notice requirements, § 10-104 allows 
medical bills or records to be admitted as evidence of the amount, fairness, and 
reasonableness of the charges for the services or materials provided without a health care 
provider’s testimony. A finder of fact may attach whatever weight to the written materials 
that the finder of fact deems appropriate. This process does not limit the right of a party to 
request a summons to compel the attendance of a witness, examine a witness who appears 
at trial, or engage in discovery. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill shifts the burden of authenticating medical bills and proving 
the fairness and reasonable of the charges in medical bills from plaintiffs to defendants, 
which may result in increased expenditures for the State to (1) engage experts to testify 
regarding the authenticity and reasonableness of medical bills and charges, and (2) address 
additional claims brought due to the lower cost of entry to bring and prove a claim under 
the bill. The extent of any such effect cannot be reliably determined without actual 
experience under the bill. Payments of claims filed against the State under the Maryland 
Tort Claims Act (MTCA) are paid out of SITF, which is administered by the State 
Treasurer’s Office. While most State agencies are covered by the liability limits of MTCA, 
the tort liability of the Maryland Transit Administration is governed by the Transportation 
Article and paid out of TTF. Unlike MTCA, the Transportation Article does not include a 
limit on liability. 
 
Local Expenditures:  For reasons similar to the ones stated above, the bill may increase 
local expenditures related to personal injury and wrongful death claims. Tort claims against 
local government employees are subject to the provisions and liability limits of the Local 
Government Tort Claims Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on attorneys who litigate 
personal injury and wrongful death cases and small businesses that are parties to these 
lawsuits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 385/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 269 (Senator Henson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Health 
Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; State Treasurer’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3