START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 340

F5 6lr1170
HB 959/25 – W&M CF SB 238

By: Delegates Mireku–North, Acevero, Addison, Amprey, Conaway, Feldmark,
Forbes, Guyton, Harrison, Hornberger, Hutchinson, Kaufman, Lehman,
Lewis, Miller, Moreno, Pasteur, Phillips, Queen, Reilly, Roberson, Ruff,
Ruth, Taylor, and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact

3 FOR the purpose of entering into the School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact for
4 the purpose of authorizing licensed school psychologists who hold multistate licenses
5 to provide school psychological services in member states; establishing requirements
6 for multistate licensure; establishing the School Psychologist Interstate Licensure
7 Compact Commission; providing for the withdrawal from the Compact; and generally
8 relating to the School Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 25–401 and 25–402 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4. School
12 Psychologist Interstate Licensure Compact”
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Education

18 SUBTITLE 4. SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT.

19 25–401.

20 THE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT IS HEREBY
21 ENACTED INTO LAW AND ENTERED INTO LAW BY THIS STATE WITH ALL STATES

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0340*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 340

1 LEGALLY JOINING IT, IN THE FORM SUBSTANTIALLY AS IT APPEARS IN § 25–402 OF
2 THIS SUBTITLE.

3 25–402.

4 SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT.

5 SECTION 1. PURPOSE.

6 THE PURPOSE OF THIS COMPACT IS TO FACILITATE THE INTERSTATE
7 PRACTICE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY IN EDUCATIONAL OR SCHOOL SETTINGS, AND
8 IN SO DOING TO IMPROVE THE AVAILABILITY OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL
9 SERVICES TO THE PUBLIC. THIS COMPACT IS INTENDED TO ESTABLISH A PATHWAY
10 TO ALLOW SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS TO OBTAIN EQUIVALENT LICENSES TO
11 PROVIDE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES IN ANY MEMBER STATE. IN THIS
12 WAY, THIS COMPACT SHALL ENABLE THE MEMBER STATES TO ENSURE THAT SAFE
13 AND EFFECTIVE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES ARE AVAILABLE AND
14 DELIVERED BY APPROPRIATELY QUALIFIED PROFESSIONALS IN THEIR
15 EDUCATIONAL SETTINGS.

16 TO FACILITATE THE OBJECTIVES DESCRIBED ABOVE, THIS COMPACT:

17 A. ENABLES SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS WHO QUALIFY FOR RECEIPT OF AN
18 EQUIVALENT LICENSE TO PRACTICE IN OTHER MEMBER STATES WITHOUT FIRST
19 SATISFYING BURDENSOME AND DUPLICATIVE REQUIREMENTS;

20 B. PROMOTES THE MOBILITY OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS BETWEEN AND
21 AMONG THE MEMBER STATES IN ORDER TO ADDRESS WORKFORCE SHORTAGES AND
22 TO ENSURE THAT SAFE AND RELIABLE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES ARE
23 AVAILABLE IN EACH MEMBER STATE;

24 C. ENHANCES THE PUBLIC ACCESSIBILITY OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL
25 SERVICES BY INCREASING THE AVAILABILITY OF QUALIFIED, LICENSED SCHOOL
26 PSYCHOLOGISTS THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EFFICIENT AND
27 STREAMLINED PATHWAY FOR LICENSEES TO PRACTICE IN OTHER MEMBER STATES;

28 D. PRESERVES AND RESPECTS THE AUTHORITY OF EACH MEMBER STATE
29 TO PROTECT THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF ITS RESIDENTS BY ENSURING THAT ONLY
30 QUALIFIED, LICENSED PROFESSIONALS ARE AUTHORIZED TO PROVIDE SCHOOL
31 PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES WITHIN THAT STATE;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 340 3

1 E. REQUIRES SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS PRACTICING WITHIN A MEMBER
2 STATE TO COMPLY WITH THE SCOPE OF PRACTICE LAWS PRESENT IN THE STATE
3 WHERE THE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES ARE BEING PROVIDED;

4 F. PROMOTES COOPERATION BETWEEN THE MEMBER STATES IN
5 REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY WITHIN THOSE STATES; AND

6 G. FACILITATES THE RELOCATION OF MILITARY MEMBERS AND THEIR
7 SPOUSES WHO ARE LICENSED TO PROVIDE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

8 SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.

9 A. “ACTIVE MILITARY MEMBER” MEANS ANY PERSON WITH FULL–TIME
10 DUTY STATUS IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES, INCLUDING
11 MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE.

12 B. “ADVERSE ACTION” MEANS DISCIPLINARY ACTION OR ENCUMBRANCE
13 IMPOSED ON A LICENSE BY A STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY.

14 C. “ALTERNATIVE PROGRAM” MEANS A NON–DISCIPLINARY,
15 PROSECUTORIAL DIVERSION, MONITORING, OR PRACTICE REMEDIATION PROCESS
16 ENTERED INTO IN LIEU OF AN ADVERSE ACTION WHICH IS APPLICABLE TO A
17 SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST AND APPROVED BY THE STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY OF
18 A MEMBER STATE IN WHICH THE PARTICIPATING SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST IS
19 LICENSED. THIS INCLUDES, BUT IS NOT LIMITED TO, PROGRAMS TO WHICH
20 LICENSEES WITH SUBSTANCE ABUSE OR ADDICTION ISSUES MAY BE REFERRED IN
21 LIEU OF AN ADVERSE ACTION.

22 D. “COMMISSIONER” MEANS THE INDIVIDUAL APPOINTED BY A MEMBER
23 STATE TO SERVE AS THE REPRESENTATIVE TO THE COMMISSION FOR THAT
24 MEMBER STATE.

25 E. “COMPACT” MEANS THIS SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE
26 LICENSURE COMPACT.

27 F. “CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION” MEANS A REQUIREMENT,
28 IMPOSED BY A MEMBER STATE AS A CONDITION OF LICENSE RENEWAL, TO PROVIDE
29 EVIDENCE OF SUCCESSFUL PARTICIPATION IN PROFESSIONAL EDUCATIONAL
30 ACTIVITIES RELEVANT TO THE PROVISION OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

31 G. “CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK” MEANS THE SUBMISSION OF
32 FINGERPRINTS OR OTHER BIOMETRIC INFORMATION FOR A LICENSE APPLICANT
33 FOR THE PURPOSE OF OBTAINING THAT APPLICANT’S CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 340

1 INFORMATION, AS DEFINED IN 28 C.F.R. § 20.3(D), AND THE STATE’S CRIMINAL
2 HISTORY RECORD REPOSITORY AS DEFINED IN 28 C.F.R. § 20.3(F).

3 H. “DOCTORAL LEVEL DEGREE” MEANS A GRADUATE DEGREE PROGRAM
4 THAT CONSISTS OF AT LEAST 90 GRADUATE SEMESTER HOURS IN THE FIELD OF
5 SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY, INCLUDING A SUPERVISED INTERNSHIP.

6 I. “ENCUMBERED LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE THAT A STATE LICENSING
7 AUTHORITY HAS LIMITED IN ANY WAY OTHER THAN THROUGH AN ALTERNATIVE
8 PROGRAM, INCLUDING TEMPORARY OR PROVISIONAL LICENSES.

9 J. “EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE” MEANS THE COMMISSION’S CHAIR, VICE
10 CHAIR, SECRETARY AND TREASURER AND ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS AS MAY BE
11 DETERMINED BY COMMISSION RULE OR BYLAW.

12 K. “EQUIVALENT LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE TO PRACTICE SCHOOL
13 PSYCHOLOGY THAT A MEMBER STATE HAS IDENTIFIED AS A LICENSE THAT MAY BE
14 PROVIDED TO SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS FROM OTHER MEMBER STATES PURSUANT
15 TO THIS COMPACT.

16 L. “HOME STATE” MEANS THE MEMBER STATE THAT ISSUED THE HOME
17 STATE LICENSE TO THE LICENSEE AND IS THE LICENSEE’S PRIMARY STATE OF
18 PRACTICE.

19 M. “HOME STATE LICENSE” MEANS THE LICENSE THAT IS NOT AN
20 ENCUMBERED LICENSE ISSUED BY THE HOME STATE TO PROVIDE SCHOOL
21 PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

22 N. “LICENSE” MEANS A CURRENT LICENSE, CERTIFICATION, OR OTHER
23 AUTHORIZATION GRANTED BY A MEMBER STATE’S LICENSING AUTHORITY THAT
24 PERMITS AN INDIVIDUAL TO PROVIDE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

25 O. “LICENSEE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HOLDS A LICENSE FROM A
26 MEMBER STATE TO PROVIDE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

27 P. “MEMBER STATE” MEANS A STATE THAT HAS ENACTED THE COMPACT
28 AND BEEN ADMITTED TO THE COMMISSION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS
29 HEREIN AND COMMISSION RULES.

30 Q. “MODEL COMPACT” MEANS THE MODEL LANGUAGE FOR THE SCHOOL
31 PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT ON FILE WITH THE COUNCIL OF
32 STATE GOVERNMENTS OR OTHER ENTITY AS DESIGNATED BY THE COMMISSION.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 340 5

1 R. “PRACTICE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY” MEANS THE DELIVERY OF
2 SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES.

3 S. “QUALIFYING NATIONAL EXAM” MEANS A NATIONAL LICENSING
4 EXAMINATION ENDORSED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SCHOOL
5 PSYCHOLOGISTS AND ANY OTHER EXAM AS APPROVED BY THE RULES OF THE
6 COMMISSION.

7 T. “QUALIFYING SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST EDUCATION PROGRAM” MEANS
8 AN EDUCATION PROGRAM THAT AWARDS A SPECIALIST–LEVEL OR
9 DOCTORAL–LEVEL DEGREE OR EQUIVALENT UPON COMPLETION AND IS APPROVED
10 BY THE RULES OF THE COMMISSION AS MEETING THE NECESSARY MINIMUM
11 EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS TO ENSURE THAT ITS GRADUATES ARE READY,
12 QUALIFIED, AND ABLE TO ENGAGE IN THE PRACTICE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY.

13 U. “REMOTE STATE” MEANS A MEMBER STATE OTHER THAN THE HOME
14 STATE WHERE A LICENSEE HOLDS A LICENSE THROUGH THE COMPACT.

15 V. “RULE” MEANS A REGULATION PROMULGATED BY AN ENTITY,
16 INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE COMMISSION AND THE STATE LICENSING
17 AUTHORITY OF EACH MEMBER STATE, THAT HAS THE FORCE OF LAW.

18 W. “SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES” MEANS ACADEMIC, MENTAL,
19 AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES, INCLUDING ASSESSMENT, PREVENTION,
20 CONSULTATION AND COLLABORATION, INTERVENTION, AND EVALUATION,
21 PROVIDED BY A SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST IN A SCHOOL AS OUTLINED IN APPLICABLE
22 PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS AS DETERMINED BY COMMISSION RULE.

23 X. “SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS MET THE
24 REQUIREMENTS TO OBTAIN A HOME STATE LICENSE THAT LEGALLY CONVEYS THE
25 PROFESSIONAL TITLE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST, OR ITS EQUIVALENT AS
26 DETERMINED BY THE RULES OF THE COMMISSION.

27 Y. “SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT
28 COMMISSION” OR “COMMISSION” MEANS THE JOINT GOVERNMENT AGENCY
29 ESTABLISHED BY THIS COMPACT WHOSE MEMBERSHIP CONSISTS OF
30 REPRESENTATIVES FROM EACH MEMBER STATE THAT HAS ENACTED THE
31 COMPACT, AND AS FURTHER DESCRIBED IN SECTION 7.

32 Z. “SCOPE OF PRACTICE” MEANS THE PROCEDURES, ACTIONS, AND
33 PROCESSES A SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST LICENSED IN A STATE IS PERMITTED TO
34 UNDERTAKE IN THAT STATE AND THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THAT
35 LICENSEE IS PERMITTED TO UNDERTAKE THOSE PROCEDURES, ACTIONS, AND
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 340

1 PROCESSES. SUCH PROCEDURES, ACTIONS, AND PROCESSES, AND THE
2 CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THEY MAY BE UNDERTAKEN, MAY BE ESTABLISHED
3 THROUGH MEANS INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, STATUTE, REGULATIONS, CASE
4 LAW, AND OTHER PROCESSES AVAILABLE TO THE STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY OR
5 OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCY.

6 AA. “SPECIALIST–LEVEL DEGREE” MEANS A DEGREE PROGRAM THAT
7 REQUIRES AT LEAST 60 GRADUATE SEMESTER HOURS OR EQUIVALENT IN THE FIELD
8 OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY INCLUDING A SUPERVISED INTERNSHIP.

9 BB. “STATE” MEANS ANY STATE, COMMONWEALTH, DISTRICT, OR
10 TERRITORY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

11 CC. “STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY” MEANS A MEMBER STATE’S
12 REGULATORY BODY RESPONSIBLE FOR ISSUING LICENSES OR OTHERWISE
13 OVERSEEING THE PRACTICE OF SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY.

14 DD. “STATE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENT” MEANS A REQUIREMENT FOR
15 LICENSURE COVERED IN COURSEWORK OR EXAMINATION THAT INCLUDES CONTENT
16 OF UNIQUE INTEREST TO THE STATE.

17 EE. “UNENCUMBERED LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE THAT AUTHORIZES A
18 LICENSEE TO ENGAGE IN THE FULL AND UNRESTRICTED PRACTICE OF SCHOOL
19 PSYCHOLOGY.

20 SECTION 3. STATE PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT.

21 A. TO BE ELIGIBLE TO JOIN THIS COMPACT, AND TO MAINTAIN
22 ELIGIBILITY AS A MEMBER STATE, A STATE MUST:

23 1. ENACT A COMPACT STATUTE THAT IS NOT MATERIALLY
24 DIFFERENT FROM THE MODEL COMPACT AS DEFINED IN THE COMMISSION’S
25 RULES;

26 2. PARTICIPATE IN THE SHARING OF INFORMATION WITH OTHER
27 MEMBER STATES AS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO ACCOMPLISH THE OBJECTIVES
28 OF THIS COMPACT, AND AS FURTHER DEFINED IN SECTION 8;

29 3. IDENTIFY AND MAINTAIN WITH THE COMMISSION A LIST OF
30 EQUIVALENT LICENSES AVAILABLE TO LICENSEES WHO HOLD A HOME STATE
31 LICENSE UNDER THIS COMPACT;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 340 7

1 4. HAVE A MECHANISM IN PLACE FOR RECEIVING AND
2 INVESTIGATING COMPLAINTS ABOUT LICENSEES;

3 5. NOTIFY THE COMMISSION, IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE TERMS OF
4 THE COMPACT AND THE COMMISSION’S RULES, OF ANY ADVERSE ACTION TAKEN
5 AGAINST A LICENSEE, OR OF THE AVAILABILITY OF INVESTIGATIVE INFORMATION
6 THAT RELATES TO A LICENSEE OR APPLICANT FOR LICENSURE;

7 6. REQUIRE THAT APPLICANTS FOR A HOME STATE LICENSE HAVE:

8 A. TAKEN AND PASSED A QUALIFYING NATIONAL EXAM AS
9 DEFINED BY THE RULES OF THE COMMISSION;

10 B. COMPLETED A MINIMUM OF 1200 HOURS OF SUPERVISED
11 INTERNSHIP, OF WHICH AT LEAST 600 MUST HAVE BEEN COMPLETED IN A SCHOOL,
12 PRIOR TO BEING APPROVED FOR LICENSURE; AND

13 C. GRADUATED FROM A QUALIFYING SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST
14 EDUCATION PROGRAM; AND

15 7. COMPLY WITH THE TERMS OF THIS COMPACT AND THE RULES OF
16 THE COMMISSION.

17 B. EACH MEMBER STATE SHALL GRANT AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE TO
18 PRACTICE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY IN THAT STATE UPON APPLICATION BY A
19 LICENSEE WHO SATISFIES THE CRITERIA OF SECTION 4.A. EACH MEMBER STATE
20 SHALL GRANT RENEWAL OF THE EQUIVALENT LICENSE TO A LICENSEE WHO
21 SATISFIES THE CRITERIA OF SECTION 4.B.

22 C. MEMBER STATES MAY SET AND COLLECT A FEE FOR GRANTING AN
23 EQUIVALENT LICENSE.

24 SECTION 4. SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT.

25 A. TO OBTAIN AND MAINTAIN AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE FROM A REMOTE
26 STATE UNDER THIS COMPACT, A LICENSEE MUST:

27 1. HOLD AND MAINTAIN AN ACTIVE HOME STATE LICENSE;

28 2. SATISFY ANY APPLICABLE STATE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
29 ESTABLISHED BY THE MEMBER STATE AFTER AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE IS
30 GRANTED;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 340

1 3. COMPLETE ANY ADMINISTRATIVE OR APPLICATION
2 REQUIREMENTS WHICH THE COMMISSION MAY ESTABLISH BY RULE, AND PAY ANY
3 ASSOCIATED FEES; AND

4 4. COMPLETE ANY REQUIREMENTS FOR RENEWAL IN THE HOME
5 STATE, INCLUDING APPLICABLE CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION
6 REQUIREMENTS.

7 5. UPON THEIR APPLICATION TO RECEIVE A LICENSE UNDER THIS
8 COMPACT, UNDERGO A CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK IN THE MEMBER STATE IN
9 WHICH THE EQUIVALENT LICENSE IS SOUGHT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS AND
10 REGULATIONS OF SUCH MEMBER STATE.

11 B. TO RENEW AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE IN A MEMBER STATE OTHER THAN
12 THE HOME STATE, A LICENSEE MUST ONLY APPLY FOR RENEWAL, COMPLETE A
13 BACKGROUND CHECK, AND PAY RENEWAL FEES AS DETERMINED BY THE LICENSING
14 AUTHORITY.

15 SECTION 5. ACTIVE MILITARY MEMBERS OR THEIR SPOUSES.

16 A LICENSEE WHO IS AN ACTIVE MILITARY MEMBER OR IS THE SPOUSE OF AN
17 ACTIVE MILITARY MEMBER SHALL BE DEEMED TO HOLD A HOME STATE LICENSE
18 IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING LOCATIONS:

19 A. THE LICENSEE’S PERMANENT RESIDENCE;

20 B. A MEMBER STATE THAT IS THE LICENSEE’S PRIMARY STATE OF
21 PRACTICE; AND

22 C. A MEMBER STATE WHERE THE LICENSEE HAS RELOCATED PURSUANT
23 TO A PERMANENT CHANGE OF STATION (PCS).

24 SECTION 6. DISCIPLINE/ADVERSE ACTIONS.

25 A. NOTHING IN THIS COMPACT SHALL BE DEEMED OR CONSTRUED TO
26 LIMIT THE AUTHORITY OF A MEMBER STATE TO INVESTIGATE OR IMPOSE
27 DISCIPLINARY MEASURES ON LICENSEES ACCORDING TO THE STATE PRACTICE
28 LAWS THEREOF.

29 B. MEMBER STATES SHALL BE AUTHORIZED TO RECEIVE, AND SHALL
30 PROVIDE, FILES AND INFORMATION REGARDING THE INVESTIGATION AND
31 DISCIPLINE, IF ANY, OF LICENSEES IN OTHER MEMBER STATES UPON REQUEST.
32 ANY MEMBER STATE RECEIVING SUCH INFORMATION OR FILES SHALL PROTECT
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 340 9

1 AND MAINTAIN THE SECURITY AND CONFIDENTIALITY THEREOF, IN AT LEAST THE
2 SAME MANNER THAT IT MAINTAINS ITS OWN INVESTIGATORY OR DISCIPLINARY
3 FILES AND INFORMATION. PRIOR TO DISCLOSING ANY DISCIPLINARY OR
4 INVESTIGATORY INFORMATION RECEIVED FROM ANOTHER MEMBER STATE, THE
5 DISCLOSING STATE SHALL COMMUNICATE ITS INTENTION AND PURPOSE FOR SUCH
6 DISCLOSURE TO THE MEMBER STATE WHICH ORIGINALLY PROVIDED THAT
7 INFORMATION.

8 SECTION 7. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE
9 LICENSURE COMPACT COMMISSION.

10 A. THE MEMBER STATES HEREBY CREATE AND ESTABLISH A JOINT
11 GOVERNMENT AGENCY WHOSE MEMBERSHIP CONSISTS OF ALL MEMBER STATES
12 THAT HAVE ENACTED THE COMPACT, AND THIS AGENCY SHALL BE KNOWN AS THE
13 SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGIST INTERSTATE LICENSURE COMPACT COMMISSION. THE
14 COMMISSION IS AN INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE MEMBER STATES ACTING JOINTLY
15 AND NOT AN INSTRUMENTALITY OF ANY ONE STATE. THE COMMISSION SHALL COME
16 INTO EXISTENCE ON OR AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE COMPACT AS SET
17 FORTH IN SECTION 11.

18 B. MEMBERSHIP, VOTING, AND MEETINGS.

19 1. EACH MEMBER STATE SHALL HAVE AND BE LIMITED TO ONE (1)
20 COMMISSIONER SELECTED BY THAT MEMBER STATE’S STATE LICENSING
21 AUTHORITY.

22 2. THE COMMISSIONER SHALL BE THE PRIMARY ADMINISTRATIVE
23 OFFICER OF THE MEMBER STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY OR THEIR DESIGNEE WHO
24 IS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE MEMBER STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY.

25 3. THE COMMISSION SHALL BY RULE OR BYLAW ESTABLISH A TERM
26 OF OFFICE FOR COMMISSIONERS AND MAY BY RULE OR BYLAW ESTABLISH TERM
27 LIMITS.

28 4. THE COMMISSION MAY RECOMMEND REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION
29 OF ANY COMMISSIONER FROM OFFICE.

30 5. A MEMBER STATE’S LICENSING AUTHORITY SHALL FILL ANY
31 VACANCY OF ITS COMMISSIONER OCCURRING ON THE COMMISSION WITHIN 60 DAYS
32 OF THE VACANCY.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 340

1 6. EACH COMMISSIONER SHALL BE ENTITLED TO ONE VOTE ON ALL
2 MATTERS BEFORE THE COMMISSION REQUIRING A VOTE BY COMMISSION
3 COMMISSIONERS.

4 7. A COMMISSIONER SHALL VOTE IN PERSON OR BY SUCH OTHER
5 MEANS AS PROVIDED IN THE BYLAWS. THE BYLAWS MAY PROVIDE FOR
6 COMMISSIONERS TO MEET BY TELECOMMUNICATION, VIDEO CONFERENCE, OR
7 OTHER MEANS OF COMMUNICATION.

8 8. THE COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST ONCE DURING EACH
9 CALENDAR YEAR. ADDITIONAL MEETINGS MAY BE HELD AS SET FORTH IN THE
10 BYLAWS. THE COMMISSION MAY MEET BY TELECOMMUNICATION, VIDEO
11 CONFERENCE OR OTHER SIMILAR ELECTRONIC MEANS.

12 C. THE COMMISSION SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING POWERS:

13 1. ESTABLISH THE FISCAL YEAR OF THE COMMISSION;

14 2. ESTABLISH CODE OF CONDUCT AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST
15 POLICIES;

16 3. ESTABLISH AND AMEND RULES AND BYLAWS;

17 4. ESTABLISH THE PROCEDURE THROUGH WHICH A LICENSEE MAY
18 CHANGE THEIR HOME STATE;

19 5. MAINTAIN ITS FINANCIAL RECORDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
20 BYLAWS;

21 6. MEET AND TAKE SUCH ACTIONS AS ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE
22 PROVISIONS OF THIS COMPACT, THE COMMISSION’S RULES, AND THE BYLAWS;

23 7. INITIATE AND CONCLUDE LEGAL PROCEEDINGS OR ACTIONS IN
24 THE NAME OF THE COMMISSION, PROVIDED THAT THE STANDING OF ANY MEMBER
25 STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY TO SUE OR BE SUED UNDER APPLICABLE LAW MAY
26 NOT BE AFFECTED;

27 8. MAINTAIN AND CERTIFY RECORDS AND INFORMATION PROVIDED
28 TO A MEMBER STATE AS THE AUTHENTICATED BUSINESS RECORDS OF THE
29 COMMISSION, AND DESIGNATE AN AGENT TO DO SO ON THE COMMISSION’S BEHALF;

30 9. PURCHASE AND MAINTAIN INSURANCE AND BONDS;
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 340 11

1 10. BORROW, ACCEPT, OR CONTRACT FOR SERVICES OF PERSONNEL,
2 INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, EMPLOYEES OF A MEMBER STATE;

3 11. CONDUCT AN ANNUAL FINANCIAL REVIEW;

4 12. HIRE EMPLOYEES, ELECT OR APPOINT OFFICERS, FIX
5 COMPENSATION, DEFINE DUTIES, GRANT SUCH INDIVIDUALS APPROPRIATE
6 AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THE COMPACT, AND ESTABLISH THE
7 COMMISSION’S PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROGRAMS RELATING TO CONFLICTS OF
8 INTEREST, QUALIFICATIONS OF PERSONNEL, AND OTHER RELATED PERSONNEL
9 MATTERS;

10 13. ASSESS AND COLLECT FEES;

11 14. ACCEPT ANY AND ALL APPROPRIATE GIFTS, DONATIONS, GRANTS
12 OF MONEY, OTHER SOURCES OF REVENUE, EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, AND
13 SERVICES, AND RECEIVE, UTILIZE, AND DISPOSE OF THE SAME; PROVIDED THAT AT
14 ALL TIMES THE COMMISSION SHALL AVOID ANY APPEARANCE OF IMPROPRIETY
15 AND/OR CONFLICT OF INTEREST;

16 15. LEASE, PURCHASE, RETAIN, OWN, HOLD, IMPROVE, OR USE ANY
17 PROPERTY, REAL, PERSONAL, OR MIXED, OR ANY UNDIVIDED INTEREST THEREIN;

18 16. SELL, CONVEY, MORTGAGE, PLEDGE, LEASE, EXCHANGE,
19 ABANDON, OR OTHERWISE DISPOSE OF ANY PROPERTY, REAL, PERSONAL, OR MIXED;

20 17. ESTABLISH A BUDGET AND MAKE EXPENDITURES;

21 18. BORROW MONEY;

22 19. APPOINT COMMITTEES, INCLUDING STANDING COMMITTEES,
23 COMPOSED OF MEMBERS, STATE REGULATORS, STATE LEGISLATORS OR THEIR
24 REPRESENTATIVES, AND CONSUMER REPRESENTATIVES, AND SUCH OTHER
25 INTERESTED PERSONS AS MAY BE DESIGNATED IN THIS COMPACT AND THE BYLAWS;

26 20. PROVIDE AND RECEIVE INFORMATION FROM, AND COOPERATE
27 WITH, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES;

28 21. ESTABLISH AND ELECT AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, INCLUDING
29 A CHAIR AND A VICE CHAIR;
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 340

1 22. DETERMINE WHETHER A STATE’S ADOPTED LANGUAGE IS
2 MATERIALLY DIFFERENT FROM THE MODEL COMPACT LANGUAGE SUCH THAT THE
3 STATE WOULD NOT QUALIFY FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT; AND

4 23. PERFORM SUCH OTHER FUNCTIONS AS MAY BE NECESSARY OR
5 APPROPRIATE TO ACHIEVE THE PURPOSES OF THIS COMPACT.

6 D. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

7 1. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL HAVE THE POWER TO ACT ON
8 BEHALF OF THE COMMISSION ACCORDING TO THE TERMS OF THIS COMPACT. THE
9 POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL
10 INCLUDE:

11 A. OVERSEE THE DAY–TO–DAY ACTIVITIES OF THE
12 ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMPACT INCLUDING ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
13 WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT, ITS RULES AND BYLAWS, AND OTHER
14 SUCH DUTIES AS DEEMED NECESSARY;

15 B. RECOMMEND TO THE COMMISSION CHANGES TO THE
16 RULES OR BYLAWS, CHANGES TO THIS COMPACT LEGISLATION, FEES CHARGED TO
17 MEMBER STATES, FEES CHARGED TO LICENSEES, AND OTHER FEES;

18 C. ENSURE COMPACT ADMINISTRATION SERVICES ARE
19 APPROPRIATELY PROVIDED, INCLUDING BY CONTRACT;

20 D. PREPARE AND RECOMMEND THE BUDGET;

21 E. MAINTAIN FINANCIAL RECORDS ON BEHALF OF THE
22 COMMISSION;

23 F. MONITOR COMPACT COMPLIANCE OF MEMBER STATES
24 AND PROVIDE COMPLIANCE REPORTS TO THE COMMISSION;

25 G. ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL COMMITTEES AS NECESSARY;

26 H. EXERCISE THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION
27 DURING THE INTERIM BETWEEN COMMISSION MEETINGS, EXCEPT FOR ADOPTING
28 OR AMENDING RULES, ADOPTING OR AMENDING BYLAWS, AND EXERCISING ANY
29 OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES EXPRESSLY RESERVED TO THE COMMISSION BY RULE
30 OR BYLAW; AND
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 340 13

1 I. OTHER DUTIES AS PROVIDED IN THE RULES OR BYLAWS OF
2 THE COMMISSION.

3 2. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL BE COMPOSED OF UP TO 7
4 MEMBERS:

5 A. THE CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE
6 VOTING MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE; AND

7 B. THE COMMISSION SHALL ELECT 5 VOTING MEMBERS FROM
8 THE CURRENT MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION.

9 3. THE COMMISSION MAY REMOVE ANY MEMBER OF THE EXECUTIVE
10 COMMITTEE AS PROVIDED IN THE COMMISSION’S BYLAWS.

11 4. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL MEET AT LEAST ANNUALLY.

12 A. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEETINGS SHALL BE OPEN TO THE
13 PUBLIC, EXCEPT THAT THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MAY MEET IN A CLOSED,
14 NON–PUBLIC MEETING AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION F.2 BELOW.

15 B. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL GIVE 30 DAYS’ NOTICE
16 OF ITS MEETINGS, POSTED ON ITS WEBSITE AND AS DETERMINED TO PROVIDE
17 NOTICE TO PERSONS WITH AN INTEREST IN THE BUSINESS OF THE COMMISSION.

18 C. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MAY HOLD A SPECIAL
19 MEETING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION F.1.B. BELOW.

20 E. THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT AND PROVIDE TO THE MEMBER
21 STATES AN ANNUAL REPORT.

22 F. MEETINGS OF THE COMMISSION.

23 1. ALL MEETINGS SHALL BE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC, EXCEPT THAT
24 THE COMMISSION MAY MEET IN A CLOSED, NON–PUBLIC MEETING AS PROVIDED IN
25 SUBSECTION F.2 BELOW.

26 A. PUBLIC NOTICE FOR ALL MEETINGS OF THE FULL
27 COMMISSION SHALL BE GIVEN IN THE SAME MANNER AS REQUIRED UNDER THE
28 RULEMAKING PROVISIONS IN SECTION 9, EXCEPT THAT THE COMMISSION MAY
29 HOLD A SPECIAL MEETING AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION F.1.B. BELOW.
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 340

1 B. THE COMMISSION MAY HOLD A SPECIAL MEETING WHEN IT
2 MUST MEET TO CONDUCT EMERGENCY BUSINESS BY GIVING 48 HOURS’ NOTICE TO
3 ALL COMMISSIONERS, ON THE COMMISSION’S WEBSITE, AND OTHER MEANS AS
4 PROVIDED IN THE COMMISSION’S RULES. THE COMMISSION’S LEGAL COUNSEL
5 SHALL CERTIFY THAT THE COMMISSION’S NEED TO MEET QUALIFIES AS AN
6 EMERGENCY.

7 2. THE COMMISSION OR THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OR OTHER
8 COMMITTEES OF THE COMMISSION MAY CONVENE IN A CLOSED, NON–PUBLIC
9 MEETING FOR THE COMMISSION OR EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OR OTHER
10 COMMITTEES OF THE COMMISSION TO RECEIVE LEGAL ADVICE OR TO DISCUSS:

11 A. NON–COMPLIANCE OF A MEMBER STATE WITH ITS
12 OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE COMPACT;

13 B. THE EMPLOYMENT, COMPENSATION, DISCIPLINE OR OTHER
14 MATTERS, PRACTICES, OR PROCEDURES RELATED TO SPECIFIC EMPLOYEES;

15 C. CURRENT OR THREATENED DISCIPLINE OF A LICENSEE BY
16 THE COMMISSION OR BY A MEMBER STATE’S LICENSING AUTHORITY;

17 D. CURRENT, THREATENED, OR REASONABLY ANTICIPATED
18 LITIGATION;

19 E. NEGOTIATION OF CONTRACTS FOR THE PURCHASE, LEASE,
20 OR SALE OF GOODS, SERVICES, OR REAL ESTATE;

21 F. ACCUSING ANY PERSON OF A CRIME OR FORMALLY
22 CENSURING ANY PERSON;

23 G. TRADE SECRETS OR COMMERCIAL OR FINANCIAL
24 INFORMATION THAT IS PRIVILEGED OR CONFIDENTIAL;

25 H. INFORMATION OF A PERSONAL NATURE WHERE
26 DISCLOSURE WOULD CONSTITUTE A CLEARLY UNWARRANTED INVASION OF
27 PERSONAL PRIVACY;

28 I. INVESTIGATIVE RECORDS COMPILED FOR LAW
29 ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES;

30 J. INFORMATION RELATED TO ANY INVESTIGATIVE REPORTS
31 PREPARED BY OR ON BEHALF OF OR FOR USE OF THE COMMISSION OR OTHER
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 340 15

1 COMMITTEE CHARGED WITH RESPONSIBILITY OF INVESTIGATION OR
2 DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE ISSUES PURSUANT TO THE COMPACT;

3 K. MATTERS SPECIFICALLY EXEMPTED FROM DISCLOSURE BY
4 FEDERAL OR MEMBER STATE LAW; OR

5 L. OTHER MATTERS AS PROMULGATED BY THE COMMISSION
6 BY RULE.

7 3. IF A MEETING, OR PORTION OF A MEETING, IS CLOSED, THE
8 PRESIDING OFFICER SHALL STATE THAT THE MEETING WILL BE CLOSED AND
9 REFERENCE EACH RELEVANT EXEMPTING PROVISION, AND SUCH REFERENCE
10 SHALL BE RECORDED IN THE MINUTES.

11 4. THE COMMISSION SHALL KEEP MINUTES THAT FULLY AND
12 CLEARLY DESCRIBE ALL MATTERS DISCUSSED IN A MEETING AND SHALL PROVIDE A
13 FULL AND ACCURATE SUMMARY OF ACTIONS TAKEN, AND THE REASONS THEREFOR,
14 INCLUDING A DESCRIPTION OF THE VIEWS EXPRESSED. ALL DOCUMENTS
15 CONSIDERED IN CONNECTION WITH AN ACTION SHALL BE IDENTIFIED IN SUCH
16 MINUTES. ALL MINUTES AND DOCUMENTS OF A CLOSED MEETING SHALL REMAIN
17 UNDER SEAL, SUBJECT TO RELEASE ONLY BY A MAJORITY VOTE OF THE
18 COMMISSION OR ORDER OF A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

19 G. FINANCING OF THE COMMISSION.

20 1. THE COMMISSION SHALL PAY, OR PROVIDE FOR THE PAYMENT
21 OF, THE REASONABLE EXPENSES OF ITS ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANIZATION, AND
22 ONGOING ACTIVITIES.

23 2. THE COMMISSION MAY ACCEPT ANY AND ALL APPROPRIATE
24 REVENUE SOURCES AS PROVIDED IN C(14).

25 3. THE COMMISSION MAY LEVY ON AND COLLECT AN ANNUAL
26 ASSESSMENT FROM EACH MEMBER STATE AND IMPOSE FEES ON LICENSEES
27 PRACTICING IN THE MEMBER STATES UNDER AN EQUIVALENT LICENSE TO COVER
28 THE COST OF THE OPERATIONS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMISSION AND ITS
29 STAFF, WHICH MUST BE IN A TOTAL AMOUNT SUFFICIENT TO COVER ITS ANNUAL
30 BUDGET AS APPROVED EACH YEAR FOR WHICH REVENUE IS NOT PROVIDED BY
31 OTHER SOURCES. THE AGGREGATE ANNUAL ASSESSMENT AMOUNT FOR MEMBER
32 STATES SHALL BE ALLOCATED BASED UPON A FORMULA THAT THE COMMISSION
33 SHALL PROMULGATE BY RULE.
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 340

1 4. THE COMMISSION MAY NOT INCUR OBLIGATIONS OF ANY KIND
2 PRIOR TO SECURING THE FUNDS ADEQUATE TO MEET THE SAME; NOR SHALL THE
3 COMMISSION PLEDGE THE CREDIT OF ANY OF THE MEMBER STATES, EXCEPT BY
4 AND WITH THE AUTHORITY OF THE MEMBER STATE.

5 5. THE COMMISSION SHALL KEEP ACCURATE ACCOUNTS OF ALL
6 RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS. THE RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS OF THE
7 COMMISSION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE FINANCIAL REVIEW AND ACCOUNTING
8 PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED UNDER ITS BYLAWS. HOWEVER, ALL RECEIPTS AND
9 DISBURSEMENTS OF FUNDS HANDLED BY THE COMMISSION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO
10 AN ANNUAL FINANCIAL REVIEW BY A CERTIFIED OR LICENSED PUBLIC
11 ACCOUNTANT, AND THE REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL REVIEW SHALL BE INCLUDED IN
12 AND BECOME PART OF THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COMMISSION.

13 H. QUALIFIED IMMUNITY, DEFENSE, AND INDEMNIFICATION.

14 1. THE MEMBERS, OFFICERS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEES
15 AND REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE IMMUNE FROM SUIT AND
16 LIABILITY, BOTH PERSONALLY AND IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY, FOR ANY CLAIM
17 FOR DAMAGE TO OR LOSS OF PROPERTY OR PERSONAL INJURY OR OTHER CIVIL
18 LIABILITY CAUSED BY OR ARISING OUT OF ANY ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR,
19 OR OMISSION THAT OCCURRED, OR THAT THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE CLAIM
20 IS MADE HAD A REASONABLE BASIS FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE
21 OF COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES; PROVIDED THAT
22 NOTHING IN THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO PROTECT ANY SUCH
23 PERSON FROM SUIT OR LIABILITY FOR ANY DAMAGE, LOSS, INJURY, OR LIABILITY
24 CAUSED BY THE INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL OR WANTON MISCONDUCT OF THAT
25 PERSON. THE PROCUREMENT OF INSURANCE OF ANY TYPE BY THE COMMISSION
26 MAY NOT IN ANY WAY COMPROMISE OR LIMIT THE IMMUNITY GRANTED HEREUNDER.

27 2. THE COMMISSION SHALL DEFEND ANY MEMBER, OFFICER,
28 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEE, AND REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMMISSION IN
29 ANY CIVIL ACTION SEEKING TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ARISING OUT OF ANY ACTUAL OR
30 ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR OMISSION THAT OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF
31 COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, OR AS DETERMINED BY
32 THE COMMISSION THAT THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE CLAIM IS MADE HAD A
33 REASONABLE BASIS FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF
34 COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, PROVIDED THAT
35 NOTHING HEREIN SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT THAT PERSON FROM
36 RETAINING THEIR OWN COUNSEL AT THEIR OWN EXPENSE, AND PROVIDED
37 FURTHER, THAT THE ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR OMISSION DID NOT
38 RESULT FROM THAT PERSON’S INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL OR WANTON
39 MISCONDUCT.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 340 17

1 3. THE COMMISSION SHALL INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS ANY
2 MEMBER, OFFICER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEE, AND REPRESENTATIVE OF
3 THE COMMISSION FOR THE AMOUNT OF ANY SETTLEMENT OR JUDGMENT OBTAINED
4 AGAINST THAT PERSON ARISING OUT OF ANY ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR
5 OMISSION THAT OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT,
6 DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, OR THAT SUCH PERSON HAD A REASONABLE BASIS
7 FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT,
8 DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, PROVIDED THAT THE ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT,
9 ERROR, OR OMISSION DID NOT RESULT FROM THE INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL OR
10 WANTON MISCONDUCT OF THAT PERSON.

11 4. NOTHING HEREIN SHALL BE CONSTRUED AS A LIMITATION ON
12 THE LIABILITY OF ANY LICENSEE FOR PROFESSIONAL MALPRACTICE OR
13 MISCONDUCT, WHICH SHALL BE GOVERNED SOLELY BY ANY OTHER APPLICABLE
14 STATE LAWS.

15 5. NOTHING IN THIS COMPACT SHALL BE INTERPRETED TO WAIVE
16 OR OTHERWISE ABROGATE A MEMBER STATE’S STATE ACTION IMMUNITY OR STATE
17 ACTION AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE WITH RESPECT TO ANTITRUST CLAIMS UNDER THE
18 SHERMAN ACT, CLAYTON ACT, OR ANY OTHER STATE OR FEDERAL ANTITRUST OR
19 ANTICOMPETITIVE LAW OR REGULATION.

20 6. NOTHING IN THIS COMPACT SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO BE A
21 WAIVER OF SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY BY THE MEMBER STATES OR BY THE
22 COMMISSION.

23 SECTION 8. FACILITATING INFORMATION EXCHANGE.

24 A. THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE FOR FACILITATING THE EXCHANGE
25 OF INFORMATION TO ADMINISTER AND IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
26 COMPACT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RULES OF THE COMMISSION, CONSISTENT
27 WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED DATA PROTECTION PRINCIPLES.

28 B. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF STATE LAW TO THE
29 CONTRARY, A MEMBER STATE SHALL AGREE TO PROVIDE FOR THE FACILITATION
30 OF THE FOLLOWING LICENSEE INFORMATION AS REQUIRED BY THE RULES OF THE
31 COMMISSION, INCLUDING:

32 1. IDENTIFYING INFORMATION;

33 2. LICENSURE DATA;
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 340

1 3. ADVERSE ACTIONS AGAINST A LICENSE AND INFORMATION
2 RELATED THERETO;

3 4. NON–CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION RELATED TO ALTERNATIVE
4 PROGRAM PARTICIPATION, THE BEGINNING AND ENDING DATES OF SUCH
5 PARTICIPATION, AND OTHER INFORMATION RELATED TO SUCH PARTICIPATION NOT
6 MADE CONFIDENTIAL UNDER MEMBER STATE LAW;

7 5. ANY DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSURE, AND THE
8 REASON(S) FOR SUCH DENIAL;

9 6. THE PRESENCE OF INVESTIGATIVE INFORMATION; AND

10 7. OTHER INFORMATION THAT MAY FACILITATE THE
11 ADMINISTRATION OF THIS COMPACT OR THE PROTECTION OF THE PUBLIC, AS
12 DETERMINED BY THE RULES OF THE COMMISSION.

13 C. NOTHING IN THIS COMPACT SHALL BE DEEMED OR CONSTRUED TO
14 ALTER, LIMIT, OR INHIBIT THE POWER OF A MEMBER STATE TO CONTROL AND
15 MAINTAIN OWNERSHIP OF ITS LICENSEE INFORMATION OR ALTER, LIMIT, OR
16 INHIBIT THE LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING LICENSEE INFORMATION IN THE
17 MEMBER STATE.

18 SECTION 9. RULEMAKING.

19 A. THE COMMISSION SHALL EXERCISE ITS RULEMAKING POWERS
20 PURSUANT TO THE CRITERIA SET FORTH IN THIS INTERSTATE COMPACT AND THE
21 RULES ADOPTED THEREUNDER. RULES AND AMENDMENTS SHALL BECOME
22 BINDING AS OF THE DATE SPECIFIED IN EACH RULE OR AMENDMENT.

23 B. THE COMMISSION SHALL PROMULGATE REASONABLE RULES TO
24 ACHIEVE THE INTENT AND PURPOSE OF THIS INTERSTATE COMPACT. IN THE EVENT
25 THE COMMISSION EXERCISES ITS RULEMAKING AUTHORITY IN A MANNER THAT IS
26 BEYOND THE PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THIS INTERSTATE COMPACT, OR THE
27 POWERS GRANTED HEREUNDER, THEN SUCH AN ACTION BY THE COMMISSION
28 SHALL BE INVALID AND HAVE NO FORCE AND EFFECT OF LAW IN THE MEMBER
29 STATES.

30 C. IF A MAJORITY OF THE LEGISLATURES OF THE MEMBER STATES
31 REJECTS A RULE, BY ENACTMENT OF A STATUTE OR RESOLUTION IN THE SAME
32 MANNER USED TO ADOPT THE COMPACT WITHIN FOUR (4) YEARS OF THE DATE OF
33 ADOPTION OF THE RULE, THEN SUCH RULE SHALL HAVE NO FURTHER FORCE AND
34 EFFECT IN ANY MEMBER STATE.
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 340 19

1 D. RULES OR AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES SHALL BE ADOPTED OR
2 RATIFIED AT A REGULAR OR SPECIAL MEETING OF THE COMMISSION IN
3 ACCORDANCE WITH COMMISSION RULES AND BYLAWS.

4 E. PRIOR TO PROMULGATION AND ADOPTION OF A FINAL RULE OR RULES
5 BY THE COMMISSION, AND AT LEAST THIRTY (30) DAYS IN ADVANCE OF THE
6 MEETING AT WHICH THE RULE WILL BE CONSIDERED AND VOTED UPON, THE
7 COMMISSION SHALL FILE A NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULEMAKING:

8 1. ON THE WEBSITE OF THE COMMISSION OR OTHER PUBLICLY
9 ACCESSIBLE PLATFORM; AND

10 2. ON THE WEBSITE OF EACH MEMBER STATE LICENSING
11 AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE PLATFORM OR THE PUBLICATION IN
12 WHICH EACH STATE WOULD OTHERWISE PUBLISH PROPOSED RULES.

13 F. UPON DETERMINATION THAT AN EMERGENCY EXISTS, THE
14 COMMISSION MAY CONSIDER AND ADOPT AN EMERGENCY RULE WITH 48 HOURS’
15 NOTICE, WITH OPPORTUNITY TO COMMENT, PROVIDED THAT THE USUAL
16 RULEMAKING PROCEDURES SHALL BE RETROACTIVELY APPLIED TO THE RULE AS
17 SOON AS REASONABLY POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT LATER THAN NINETY (90) DAYS
18 AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE RULE. FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS
19 PROVISION, AN EMERGENCY RULE IS ONE THAT MUST BE ADOPTED IMMEDIATELY
20 IN ORDER TO:

21 1. MEET AN IMMINENT THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, OR
22 WELFARE;

23 2. PREVENT A LOSS OF COMMISSION OR MEMBER STATE FUNDS;

24 3. MEET A DEADLINE FOR THE PROMULGATION OF AN
25 ADMINISTRATIVE RULE THAT IS ESTABLISHED BY FEDERAL LAW OR RULE; OR

26 4. PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.

27 SECTION 10. OVERSIGHT, DISPUTE RESOLUTION, AND ENFORCEMENT.

28 A. OVERSIGHT.

29 1. THE EXECUTIVE AND JUDICIAL BRANCHES OF THE STATE
30 GOVERNMENT IN EACH MEMBER STATE SHALL ENFORCE THIS COMPACT AND TAKE
31 ALL ACTIONS NECESSARY AND APPROPRIATE TO IMPLEMENT THE COMPACT.
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 340

1 2. VENUE IS PROPER AND JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS BY OR AGAINST
2 THE COMMISSION SHALL BE BROUGHT SOLELY AND EXCLUSIVELY IN A COURT OF
3 COMPETENT JURISDICTION WHERE THE PRINCIPAL OFFICE OF THE COMMISSION IS
4 LOCATED. THE COMMISSION MAY WAIVE VENUE AND JURISDICTIONAL DEFENSES
5 TO THE EXTENT IT ADOPTS OR CONSENTS TO PARTICIPATE IN ALTERNATIVE
6 DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEEDINGS. NOTHING HEREIN SHALL AFFECT OR LIMIT
7 THE SELECTION OR PROPRIETY OF VENUE IN ANY ACTION AGAINST A LICENSEE FOR
8 PROFESSIONAL MALPRACTICE, MISCONDUCT, OR ANY SUCH SIMILAR MATTER.

9 3. THE COMMISSION SHALL BE ENTITLED TO RECEIVE SERVICE OF
10 PROCESS IN ANY PROCEEDING REGARDING THE ENFORCEMENT OR
11 INTERPRETATION OF THE COMPACT AND SHALL HAVE STANDING TO INTERVENE IN
12 SUCH A PROCEEDING FOR ALL PURPOSES. FAILURE TO PROVIDE THE COMMISSION
13 SERVICE OF PROCESS SHALL RENDER A JUDGMENT OR ORDER VOID AS TO THE
14 COMMISSION, THIS COMPACT, OR PROMULGATED RULES.

15 B. DEFAULT, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND TERMINATION.

16 1. IF THE COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT A MEMBER STATE HAS
17 DEFAULTED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF ITS OBLIGATIONS OR RESPONSIBILITIES
18 UNDER THIS COMPACT OR THE PROMULGATED RULES, THE COMMISSION SHALL
19 PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE DEFAULTING STATE. THE NOTICE OF DEFAULT
20 SHALL DESCRIBE THE DEFAULT, THE PROPOSED MEANS OF CURING THE DEFAULT,
21 AND ANY OTHER ACTION THAT THE COMMISSION MAY TAKE, AND SHALL OFFER
22 TRAINING AND SPECIFIC TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE REGARDING THE DEFAULT.

23 2. THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE NOTICE OF
24 DEFAULT TO THE OTHER MEMBER STATES.

25 C. IF A STATE IN DEFAULT FAILS TO CURE THE DEFAULT, THE DEFAULTING
26 STATE MAY BE TERMINATED FROM THE COMPACT UPON AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF
27 A SUPERMAJORITY OF THE DELEGATES OF THE MEMBER STATES, AND ALL RIGHTS,
28 PRIVILEGES AND BENEFITS CONFERRED ON THAT STATE BY THIS COMPACT MAY BE
29 TERMINATED ON THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION. A CURE OF THE DEFAULT
30 DOES NOT RELIEVE THE OFFENDING STATE OF OBLIGATIONS OR LIABILITIES
31 INCURRED DURING THE PERIOD OF DEFAULT.

32 D. TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP IN THE COMPACT SHALL BE IMPOSED
33 ONLY AFTER ALL OTHER MEANS OF SECURING COMPLIANCE HAVE BEEN
34 EXHAUSTED. NOTICE OF INTENT TO SUSPEND OR TERMINATE SHALL BE GIVEN BY
35 THE COMMISSION TO THE GOVERNOR, THE MAJORITY AND MINORITY LEADERS OF
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
HOUSE BILL 340 21

1 THE DEFAULTING STATE’S LEGISLATURE, THE DEFAULTING STATE’S LICENSING
2 AUTHORITY, AND EACH OF THE MEMBER STATES’ LICENSING AUTHORITIES.

3 E. A STATE THAT HAS BEEN TERMINATED IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL
4 ASSESSMENTS, OBLIGATIONS, AND LIABILITIES INCURRED THROUGH THE
5 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION, INCLUDING OBLIGATIONS THAT EXTEND
6 BEYOND THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION.

7 F. UPON THE TERMINATION OF A STATE’S MEMBERSHIP FROM THIS
8 COMPACT, THAT STATE SHALL IMMEDIATELY PROVIDE NOTICE TO ALL LICENSEES
9 WITHIN THAT STATE OF SUCH TERMINATION. THE TERMINATED STATE SHALL
10 CONTINUE TO RECOGNIZE ALL LICENSES GRANTED PURSUANT TO THIS COMPACT
11 FOR A MINIMUM OF SIX (6) MONTHS AFTER THE DATE OF SAID NOTICE OF
12 TERMINATION.

13 G. THE COMMISSION MAY NOT BEAR ANY COSTS RELATED TO A STATE
14 THAT IS FOUND TO BE IN DEFAULT OR THAT HAS BEEN TERMINATED FROM THE
15 COMPACT, UNLESS AGREED UPON IN WRITING BETWEEN THE COMMISSION AND THE
16 DEFAULTING STATE.

17 H. THE DEFAULTING STATE MAY APPEAL THE ACTION OF THE
18 COMMISSION BY PETITIONING THE U.S. DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF
19 COLUMBIA OR THE FEDERAL DISTRICT WHERE THE COMMISSION HAS ITS
20 PRINCIPAL OFFICES. THE PREVAILING PARTY SHALL BE AWARDED ALL COSTS OF
21 SUCH LITIGATION, INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

22 I. DISPUTE RESOLUTION.

23 1. UPON REQUEST BY A MEMBER STATE, THE COMMISSION SHALL
24 ATTEMPT TO RESOLVE DISPUTES RELATED TO THE COMPACT THAT ARISE AMONG
25 MEMBER STATES AND BETWEEN MEMBER AND NON–MEMBER STATES.

26 2. THE COMMISSION SHALL PROMULGATE A RULE PROVIDING FOR
27 BOTH MEDIATION AND BINDING DISPUTE RESOLUTION FOR DISPUTES AS
28 APPROPRIATE.

29 J. ENFORCEMENT.

30 1. BY MAJORITY VOTE AS PROVIDED BY RULE, THE COMMISSION
31 MAY INITIATE LEGAL ACTION AGAINST A MEMBER STATE IN DEFAULT IN THE
32 UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR THE
33 FEDERAL DISTRICT WHERE THE COMMISSION HAS ITS PRINCIPAL OFFICES TO
34 ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT AND ITS
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
22 HOUSE BILL 340

1 PROMULGATED RULES. THE RELIEF SOUGHT MAY INCLUDE BOTH INJUNCTIVE
2 RELIEF AND DAMAGES. IN THE EVENT JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT IS NECESSARY, THE
3 PREVAILING PARTY SHALL BE AWARDED ALL COSTS OF SUCH LITIGATION,
4 INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES. THE REMEDIES HEREIN MAY NOT BE
5 THE EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES OF THE COMMISSION. THE COMMISSION MAY PURSUE
6 ANY OTHER REMEDIES AVAILABLE UNDER FEDERAL OR THE DEFAULTING MEMBER
7 STATE’S LAW.

8 2. A MEMBER STATE MAY INITIATE LEGAL ACTION AGAINST THE
9 COMMISSION IN THE U.S. DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR
10 THE FEDERAL DISTRICT WHERE THE COMMISSION HAS ITS PRINCIPAL OFFICES TO
11 ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT AND ITS
12 PROMULGATED RULES. THE RELIEF SOUGHT MAY INCLUDE BOTH INJUNCTIVE
13 RELIEF AND DAMAGES. IN THE EVENT JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT IS NECESSARY, THE
14 PREVAILING PARTY SHALL BE AWARDED ALL COSTS OF SUCH LITIGATION,
15 INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

16 3. NO PERSON OTHER THAN A MEMBER STATE SHALL ENFORCE
17 THIS COMPACT AGAINST THE COMMISSION.

18 SECTION 11. EFFECTIVE DATE, WITHDRAWAL, AND AMENDMENT.

19 A. THE COMPACT SHALL COME INTO EFFECT ON THE DATE ON WHICH THE
20 COMPACT STATUTE IS ENACTED INTO LAW IN THE SEVENTH MEMBER STATE.

21 1. ON OR AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE COMPACT INDICATED
22 ABOVE, THE COMMISSION SHALL CONVENE AND REVIEW THE ENACTMENT OF EACH
23 OF THE CHARTER MEMBER STATES TO DETERMINE IF THE STATUTE ENACTED BY
24 EACH SUCH CHARTER MEMBER STATE IS MATERIALLY DIFFERENT THAN THE
25 MODEL COMPACT STATUTE.

26 A. A CHARTER MEMBER STATE WHOSE ENACTMENT IS FOUND
27 TO BE MATERIALLY DIFFERENT FROM THE MODEL COMPACT STATUTE SHALL BE
28 ENTITLED TO THE DEFAULT PROCESS SET FORTH IN SECTION 10.

29 B. IF ANY MEMBER STATE IS LATER FOUND TO BE IN DEFAULT,
30 OR IS TERMINATED OR WITHDRAWS FROM THE COMPACT, THE COMMISSION SHALL
31 REMAIN IN EXISTENCE AND THE COMPACT SHALL REMAIN IN EFFECT EVEN IF THE
32 NUMBER OF MEMBER STATES SHOULD BE LESS THAN SEVEN.

33 2. MEMBER STATES ENACTING THE COMPACT SUBSEQUENT TO THE
34 CHARTER MEMBER STATES SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE PROCESS SET FORTH IN
35 SECTION 7.C(22) TO DETERMINE IF THEIR ENACTMENTS ARE MATERIALLY
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
HOUSE BILL 340 23

1 DIFFERENT FROM THE MODEL COMPACT STATUTE AND WHETHER THEY QUALIFY
2 FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT.

3 3. ALL ACTIONS TAKEN FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE COMMISSION OR
4 IN FURTHERANCE OF THE PURPOSES OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMPACT
5 PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE COMPACT OR THE COMMISSION COMING
6 INTO EXISTENCE SHALL BE CONSIDERED TO BE ACTIONS OF THE COMMISSION
7 UNLESS SPECIFICALLY REPUDIATED BY THE COMMISSION.

8 A. ANY STATE THAT JOINS THE COMPACT SUBSEQUENT TO
9 THE COMMISSION’S INITIAL ADOPTION OF THE RULES AND BYLAWS SHALL BE
10 SUBJECT TO THE RULES AND BYLAWS AS THEY EXIST ON THE DATE ON WHICH THE
11 COMPACT BECOMES LAW IN THAT STATE. ANY RULE THAT HAS BEEN PREVIOUSLY
12 ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION SHALL HAVE THE FULL FORCE AND EFFECT OF LAW
13 ON THE DAY THE COMPACT BECOMES LAW IN THAT STATE.

14 B. ANY MEMBER STATE MAY WITHDRAW FROM THIS COMPACT
15 BY ENACTING A STATUTE REPEALING THE SAME.

16 B. A MEMBER STATE’S WITHDRAWAL MAY NOT TAKE EFFECT UNTIL 180
17 DAYS AFTER ENACTMENT OF THE REPEALING STATUTE.

18 C. WITHDRAWAL MAY NOT AFFECT THE CONTINUING REQUIREMENT OF
19 THE WITHDRAWING STATE’S LICENSING AUTHORITY TO COMPLY WITH THE
20 INVESTIGATIVE AND ADVERSE ACTION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
21 COMPACT PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF WITHDRAWAL.

22 D. UPON THE ENACTMENT OF A STATUTE WITHDRAWING FROM THIS
23 COMPACT, A STATE SHALL IMMEDIATELY PROVIDE NOTICE OF SUCH WITHDRAWAL
24 TO ALL LICENSEES WITHIN THAT STATE. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY SUBSEQUENT
25 STATUTORY ENACTMENT TO THE CONTRARY, SUCH WITHDRAWING STATE SHALL
26 CONTINUE TO RECOGNIZE ALL LICENSES GRANTED PURSUANT TO THIS COMPACT
27 FOR A MINIMUM OF SIX (6) MONTHS AFTER THE DATE OF SUCH NOTICE OF
28 WITHDRAWAL.

29 1. NOTHING CONTAINED IN THIS COMPACT SHALL BE CONSTRUED
30 TO INVALIDATE OR PREVENT ANY LICENSURE AGREEMENT OR OTHER COOPERATIVE
31 ARRANGEMENT BETWEEN A MEMBER STATE AND A NON–MEMBER STATE THAT
32 DOES NOT CONFLICT WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS COMPACT.

33 2. THIS COMPACT MAY BE AMENDED BY THE MEMBER STATES. NO
34 AMENDMENT TO THIS COMPACT SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE AND BINDING UPON
35 ANY MEMBER STATE UNTIL IT IS ENACTED INTO THE LAWS OF ALL MEMBER STATES.
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
24 HOUSE BILL 340

1 SECTION 12. CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.

2 A. THIS COMPACT AND THE COMMISSION’S RULEMAKING AUTHORITY
3 SHALL BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED SO AS TO EFFECTUATE THE PURPOSES AND THE
4 IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMPACT. PROVISIONS OF THE
5 COMPACT EXPRESSLY AUTHORIZING OR REQUIRING THE PROMULGATION OF
6 RULES MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO LIMIT THE COMMISSION’S RULEMAKING
7 AUTHORITY SOLELY FOR THOSE PURPOSES.

8 B. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS COMPACT SHALL BE SEVERABLE AND IF ANY
9 PHRASE, CLAUSE, SENTENCE OR PROVISION OF THIS COMPACT IS HELD BY A COURT
10 OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION TO BE CONTRARY TO THE CONSTITUTION OF ANY
11 MEMBER STATE, A STATE SEEKING PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT, OR OF THE
12 UNITED STATES, OR THE APPLICABILITY THEREOF TO ANY GOVERNMENT, AGENCY,
13 PERSON, OR CIRCUMSTANCE IS HELD TO BE UNCONSTITUTIONAL BY A COURT OF
14 COMPETENT JURISDICTION, THE VALIDITY OF THE REMAINDER OF THIS COMPACT
15 AND THE APPLICABILITY THEREOF TO ANY OTHER GOVERNMENT, AGENCY, PERSON,
16 OR CIRCUMSTANCE MAY NOT BE AFFECTED THEREBY.

17 C. NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION B OF THIS SECTION, THE
18 COMMISSION MAY DENY A STATE’S PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT OR, IN
19 ACCORDANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SECTION 10.B, TERMINATE A MEMBER
20 STATE’S PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT, IF IT DETERMINES THAT A
21 CONSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENT OF A MEMBER STATE IS A MATERIAL DEPARTURE
22 FROM THE COMPACT. OTHERWISE, IF THIS COMPACT SHALL BE HELD TO BE
23 CONTRARY TO THE CONSTITUTION OF ANY MEMBER STATE, THE COMPACT SHALL
24 REMAIN IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT AS TO THE REMAINING MEMBER STATES AND
25 IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT AS TO THE MEMBER STATE AFFECTED AS TO ALL
26 SEVERABLE MATTERS.

27 SECTION 13. CONSISTENT EFFECT AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER STATE LAWS.

28 A. NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PREVENT OR INHIBIT THE ENFORCEMENT OF
29 ANY OTHER LAW OF A MEMBER STATE THAT IS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THE
30 COMPACT.

31 B. ANY LAWS, STATUTES, REGULATIONS, OR OTHER LEGAL
32 REQUIREMENTS IN A MEMBER STATE IN CONFLICT WITH THE COMPACT ARE
33 SUPERSEDED TO THE EXTENT OF THE CONFLICT.

34 C. ALL PERMISSIBLE AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE COMMISSION AND THE
35 MEMBER STATES ARE BINDING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR TERMS.
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
HOUSE BILL 340 25

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 25