START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 399

P6 6lr2468
CF 6lr2467

By: Delegate Forbes (Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions)
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Retirement and Pension System – Transfers Between Systems –
3 Workgroup – Extension

4 FOR the purpose of extending the reporting date and the termination date for a workgroup
5 convened by the State Retirement Agency to study transfers of member service
6 between State and local retirement and pension systems; altering the entities to
7 which the State Retirement Agency is required to report; and generally relating to
8 transfers of member service between State and local retirement and pension
9 systems.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Chapter 768 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
12 Section 1(a)(1)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Chapter 768 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
15 Section 1(d) and 2

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Chapter 769 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
18 Section 1(a)(1)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Chapter 769 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
21 Section 1(d) and 2

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Chapter 768 of the Acts of 2025

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0399*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 399

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That:

3 (a) (1) The State Retirement Agency shall convene a workgroup of interested
4 stakeholders to study the requirements and processes for transfers of member service
5 between State and local retirement and pension systems and make recommendations to
6 improve the process of transfers between systems.

7 (d) On or before [December 1, 2025] OCTOBER 1, 2026, the State Retirement
8 Agency shall submit a report of the findings and recommendations of the workgroup,
9 including the need for any legislative initiatives, to the Governor and, in accordance with §
10 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the [General Assembly] SENATE BUDGET AND
11 TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE
12 JOINT COMMITTEE ON PENSIONS.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
14 1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of [1 year] 2 YEARS and 1 month and, at the
15 end of June 30, [2026] 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General
16 Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

17 Chapter 769 of the Acts of 2025

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That:

20 (a) (1) The State Retirement Agency shall convene a workgroup of interested
21 stakeholders to study the requirements and processes for transfers of member service
22 between State and local retirement and pension systems and make recommendations to
23 improve the process of transfers between systems.

24 (d) On or before [December 1, 2025] OCTOBER 1, 2026, the State Retirement
25 Agency shall submit a report of the findings and recommendations of the workgroup,
26 including the need for any legislative initiatives, to the Governor and, in accordance with §
27 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the [General Assembly] SENATE BUDGET AND
28 TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE
29 JOINT COMMITTEE ON PENSIONS.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
31 1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of [1 year] 2 YEARS and 1 month and, at the
32 end of June 30, [2026] 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General
33 Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

34 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
35 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2