START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 316 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 316 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Confidentiality of Medical Records - Definition of Medical Record 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “medical record” regarding provisions governing the 
confidentiality of medical records by specifying that a medical record means any 
information that is recorded by a health care provider through written, electronic, or other 
means, including audio or video means, and includes any electronic message sent or 
received by a health care provider that identifies or may readily be associated with the 
identify of a patient. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect local 
governmental finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Medical record” means any oral, written, or other transmission in any 
form or medium of information that (1) is entered in the record of a patient or recipient; 
(2) identifies or can readily be associated with the identity of a patient or recipient; and 
(3) relates to the health care of the patient or recipient.  
 
“Medical record” includes any (1) documentation of disclosures of a medical record to any 
person who is not an employee, agent, or consultant of the health care provider; (2) file or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 316/ Page 2 
record maintained by a pharmacy of a prescription order for drugs, medicines, or devices 
that identifies or may be readily associated with the identity of a patient; (3) documentation 
of an examination of a patient regardless of who requested the examination or is making 
payment for the examination; and (4) file or record received from another health care 
provider that relates to the health care of a patient or recipient received from that health 
care provider and identifies or can readily be associated with the identity of the patient or 
recipient. 
 
Confidentiality of Medical Records Act 
 
Maryland’s Confidentiality of Medical Records Act requires health care providers and 
facilities to keep the medical record of a patient confidential and obtain written consent for 
disclosure, even for purposes of treatment and payment. Generally, a person to whom a 
medical record is disclosed may not redisclose the medical record unless authorized by the 
person in interest. Exceptions are made for such purposes as provision of health care 
services, billing, utilization review, and legal claims. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2