START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 306

R4 6lr1906
SB 834/25 – JPR

By: Delegates Qi and Hill
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Manufacturers and Dealers – Prices Listed on Dealer Websites
3 (Jack Fitzgerald Price Transparency Act)

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch from taking
5 an adverse action against a dealer for disclosing certain information on prices listed
6 on its website; and generally relating to prices listed on dealer websites.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 15–207(h)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Transportation
14 Section 15–313(a) and (b)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Transportation

20 15–207.

21 (h) (1) (i) Any consumer rebates, dealer incentives, price or interest rate
22 reductions, or finance terms that a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch offers or
23 advertises, or allows its dealers to offer or advertise, shall be offered to all dealers of the
24 same line make.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0306*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 306

1 (ii) Any manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch that denies the
2 benefit of any consumer rebates, dealer incentives, price or interest rate reductions, or
3 finance terms to a dealer on the basis that the dealer failed to comply with performance
4 standards has the burden of proving that the performance standards comply with the
5 provisions of this section.

6 (2) Unless a dealer violates a State or local law intended to protect the
7 public, a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch may not:

8 (i) Require a dealer to alter or replace an existing dealership
9 facility; or

10 (ii) Deny, or threaten to deny, any benefit generally available to all
11 dealers for a dealer’s failure to alter or replace an existing dealership facility.

12 (3) UNLESS A DEALER VIOLATES § 15–313(A) OR (B) OF THIS TITLE
13 OR A STATE OR LOCAL LAW INTENDED TO PROTECT THE PUBLIC, A MANUFACTURER,
14 DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH MAY NOT TAKE AN ADVERSE ACTION AGAINST
15 A DEALER FOR DISCLOSING ON ITS WEBSITE THAT THE ADVERTISED PRICE OF A
16 VEHICLE IS THE MANUFACTURER’S MINIMUM ALLOWABLE ADVERTISED PRICE AND
17 THAT THE DEALER MAY OFFER A LOWER PRICE FOR THE VEHICLE.

18 [(3)] (4) A manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch may not reduce
19 the price of a motor vehicle charged to a dealer or provide different financing terms to a
20 dealer in exchange for the dealer’s agreement to:

21 (i) Maintain an exclusive sales or service facility;

22 (ii) Build or alter a sales or service facility; or

23 (iii) Participate in a floor plan or other financing arrangement.

24 15–313.

25 (a) A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer may not use any advertisement
26 that is in any way false, deceptive, or misleading.

27 (b) A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer may not by any means advertise
28 or offer to the public any vehicle without intent to sell it as advertised or offered.

29 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
30 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2