START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 330 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 330 
(Delegate Kaufman) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Maryland Legal Services Corporation - Board of Directors - Membership 
 
 
This bill increases the number of members on the Board of Directors of the Maryland Legal 
Services Corporation (MLSC) and makes related changes. Specifically, the bill increases 
(1) from 9 to 12, the number of voting members; (2) from 5 to 7, the number of voting 
members who must be lawyers admitted to the Bar in the State; (3) from 4 to 5, the voting 
members who must be nonlawyers; and (4) from 7 to 9, the number of voting members 
required to remove a voting member. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the composition of the board does not affect State operations 
or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MLSC was initially established by the General Assembly in 1982 to raise 
funds and make grants to nonprofit organizations for the provision of civil legal assistance 
to low‐income persons in Maryland. 
 
MLSC is governed by a nine-person board of directors appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Senate. The board appoints the executive director, who serves  
ex officio on the board as a nonvoting member. The term of office for a voting member is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 330/ Page 2 
three years. A voting member may be removed for (1) malfeasance in office; (2) persistent 
neglect of or inability to discharge duties; or (3) offenses involving moral turpitude. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 252 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2