START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 361 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 361 
(Delegate Arentz, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Queen Anne’s County – Circuit Court Judgeships 
 
 
This bill alters the number of resident judges of the circuit court by adding  
one additional judgeship in Queen Anne’s County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $370,700 in FY 2027 for 
one additional judge and associated staff; future year expenditures reflect annualization. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
370,700 
487,900 
496,300 
505,100 
513,700 
Net Effect 
($370,700) 
($487,900) 
($496,300) 
($505,100) 
($513,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Queen Anne’s County expenditures increase by approximately $700,000 in  
FY 2027 and by a minimum of $600,000 annually thereafter for staff and ongoing operating 
costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There are 176 circuit court judges in the State, including 1 in  
Queen Anne’s County. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 361/ Page 2 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $370,670 in 
fiscal 2027, which reflects a 90‐day start‐up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective 
date. This estimate reflects the cost of creating one circuit court judgeship in  
Queen Anne’s County and the associated positions of one courtroom clerk and one law 
clerk with the judgeship (a total of three positions). It includes salaries and fringe benefits. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$370,670 
Operating Expenses* 
           0 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$370,670 
 
(* Because counties are generally responsible for funding certain operating expenses of the 
circuit courts, expenditures for operating expenses are reflected in the fiscal estimate for 
Queen Anne’s County below)  
 
Future year expenditures generally reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover. The Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that this estimate only 
reflects the current salary (fiscal 2026 – $214,433) for a circuit court judge. Pursuant to 
statute, future increases in judicial salaries depend on any recommendations proposed by 
the Judicial Compensation Commission and subsequent action by the General Assembly. 
Legislation (Senate Joint Resolution 2 and House Joint Resolution 6 of 2026) proposing 
increases in judicial salaries from fiscal 2027 through 2030 has been introduced this 
session. General fund expenditures therefore may increase beyond what is estimated in this 
fiscal and policy note to the extent that judicial salaries are increased.   
 
Local Expenditures:  Queen Anne’s County anticipates expenditures of approximately 
$700,000 in fiscal 2027 for costs associated with operating expenses (including a one‑time 
equipment cost of $255,000) and hiring five full‐time and two part‐time staff to support 
the new circuit court judgeship; expenditures increase by at least $600,000 annually 
thereafter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 877 and HB 975 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 358 (Senator Hershey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Queen Anne’s County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 361/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3