START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 301 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 301 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland Military Department – Supervision of State Active Duty Personnel 
 
   
This departmental bill establishes that during State active duty, all members of the Military 
Department are under the operational command and control of the Adjutant General, or 
any officer of the National Guard designated by the Adjutant General, whether the Adjutant 
General or designee is (1) in State active duty or (2) in a federal status in which the 
Governor is the Commander in Chief. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice, as discussed below.   
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  The Military Department has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Militia – Composition and State Active Duty 
 
The Public Safety Article lists two classes of State militia:  the organized militia and the 
unorganized militia. The organized militia consists of the National Guard, Inactive 
National Guard, and the Maryland Defense Force (MDDF). Generally, the National Guard 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 301/ Page 2 
is part of the reserve components of the U.S. Armed Forces under dual control of the State 
and the federal government. MDDF is an all-volunteer force designed to assist the 
National Guard during stateside emergencies. The Governor is the Commander‑in‑Chief 
of MDDF, and MDDF generally cannot be deployed outside the borders of Maryland. 
 
The Governor may order the militia into State active duty (1) in times or on reasonable 
apprehension of imminent public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, insurrection, 
invasion, tumult, or breach of peace; (2) when martial law is declared; (3) to enforce the 
laws; or (4) to carry on any function of the militia of the State. 
 
To enforce the laws, a member of the militia in State active duty has all the authority of a 
peace or law enforcement officer. The authority of the member extends throughout the 
State during the State active duty. Whenever the militia is in State active duty, the ranking 
officer of the militia ordered into State active duty or that officer’s subordinates on State 
active duty must (1) cooperate with local law enforcement authorities or (2) if the 
exigencies of the case require, and subject only to order from the Governor, direct and 
control local law enforcement authorities and the Department of State Police and assume 
all the powers vested in these subordinated law enforcement authorities.  
 
The Military Department and Adjutant General 
 
The Military Department provides overall direction and maintenance of the Maryland 
National Guard, which is comprised of the Maryland Army National Guard and the 
Maryland Air National Guard. The Maryland National Guard may be called up by the 
Governor during State emergencies or may be activated by the U.S. Department of 
Defense. 
 
The Adjutant General is the head of the Military Department. Among other things, the 
Adjutant General must be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate and is subordinate only to the Governor in matters relating to the Military 
Department. The Adjutant General must have a commissioned grade not above that of 
Lieutenant General and must be a full-time employee of the Military Department in State 
active-duty status.  
 
Background/State Fiscal Effect:  The Military Department advises that the bill is 
intended to codify current practice of the Adjutant General being in command of the 
Military Department during State active duty. However, the Military Department also 
advises that under current law situations could occur where the Adjutant General may be 
limited in their ability to direct service members on State active duty orders when they are 
in federal status. According to the Military Department, in emergency response situations, 
there may be service members in federal status assisting in operations alongside service 
members on State active duty, and differences between service members, their ranks, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 301/ Page 3 
duty status may result in confusion regarding the chain of command. The Military 
Department advises the bill will allow for better operational effectiveness while personnel 
are in State active duty status.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 128 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Military Department; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 301/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Military Department - Supervision of State Active Duty 
Personnel 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 301 
 
PREPARED BY: Dr. Tony Campbell 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The proposed bill will have NO economic impact on Maryland Small Businesses 
 

END OF PAGE 4