START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 371

C7 6lr1907
CF 6lr1908

By: Delegate Ebersole
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Lottery – Courier Services – Licensure

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Director of the State Lottery and Gaming Control
4 Agency to issue a license to certain persons to conduct certain lottery courier services
5 in the State, subject to certain requirements and limitations; providing that certain
6 contracts between a licensed courier and a State lottery sales agent are not subject
7 to disclosure under the Public Information Act; authorizing licensed couriers to
8 charge a certain service fee, subject to certain limitations; and generally relating to
9 the licensure of lottery courier service providers.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – State Government
12 Section 9–101(a), (b), (d), (g), and (h)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – State Government
17 Section 9–111(e)(1)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY adding to
21 Article – State Government
22 Section 9–111.1
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
26 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0371*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 371

1 Article – State Government

2 9–101.

3 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

4 (b) “Agency” means the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency.

5 (d) “Director” means the Director of the Agency.

6 (g) “License” means a license issued by the Director to act as a licensed agent.

7 (h) “Licensed agent” means a person or governmental unit licensed by the
8 Director to act as a State lottery sales agent.

9 9–111.

10 (e) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection AND §
11 9–111.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE, the Agency may not allow the establishment of any system
12 or program that allows a person to purchase a State lottery ticket through an electronic
13 device that connects to the Internet, such as a personal computer or mobile device.

14 9–111.1.

15 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
16 INDICATED.

17 (2) “COURIER SERVICE” MEANS THE PROCESS OF DELIVERING A
18 LOTTERY TICKET TO A PURCHASER THROUGH THE ONLINE ACCOUNT OF A LICENSED
19 COURIER.

20 (3) “LICENSED COURIER” MEANS A PERSON LICENSED BY THE
21 DIRECTOR TO CONDUCT COURIER SERVICES IN THE STATE.

22 (B) UNLESS THE CONTEXT REQUIRES OTHERWISE, THE REQUIREMENTS
23 UNDER §§ 9–112.1, 9–114, 9–115, AND 9–116 OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLY TO A
24 LICENSED COURIER.

25 (C) (1) THE DIRECTOR MAY ISSUE A COURIER LICENSE TO A PERSON TO
26 CONDUCT COURIER SERVICES IN THE STATE.

27 (2) A LICENSED COURIER MAY:

28 (I) ESTABLISH A SYSTEM OR PROGRAM THROUGH AN
29 ELECTRONIC DEVICE THAT CONNECTS TO THE INTERNET THAT ALLOWS A PERSON
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 371 3

1 IN THE STATE TO PURCHASE A LOTTERY TICKET THROUGH THE ONLINE ACCOUNT
2 OF THE LICENSED COURIER; AND

3 (II) ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT WITH A LICENSED AGENT TO
4 PURCHASE A LOTTERY TICKET TO FULFILL AN ORDER PLACED THROUGH THE
5 ONLINE ACCOUNT OF THE LICENSED COURIER.

6 (3) AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN A LICENSED COURIER AND A LICENSED
7 AGENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

8 (I) SHALL BE DISCLOSED TO THE AGENCY; AND

9 (II) IS NOT SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER THE PUBLIC
10 INFORMATION ACT.

11 (D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
12 DIRECTOR SHALL:

13 (I) NOTWITHSTANDING § 9–124(B)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE,
14 ALLOW A LICENSED COURIER TO CHARGE A CUSTOMER A SERVICE FEE THAT IS A
15 PERCENTAGE OF THE AMOUNT DEPOSITED BY THE CUSTOMER INTO THE
16 CUSTOMER’S ACCOUNT; AND

17 (II) ENSURE THAT:

18 1. ANY FEE THAT THE LICENSED COURIER CHARGES FOR
19 A TRANSACTION IS CLEARLY DISPLAYED ON THE LICENSED COURIER’S MOBILE
20 APPLICATION AND WEBSITE;

21 2. THE CUSTOMER AFFIRMATIVELY ACCEPTS AND
22 CONSENTS TO THE LICENSED COURIER’S FEE BEFORE THE TRANSACTION IS
23 COMPLETED; AND

24 3. THE CUSTOMER IS CHARGED NO OTHER FEE FOR
25 USING THE COURIER SERVICES.

26 (2) THE DIRECTOR MAY NOT ALLOW A PORTION OR PERCENTAGE OF
27 A CUSTOMER’S LOTTERY WINNINGS TO BE CHARGED, ACCEPTED, GIVEN, OR PAID TO
28 THE LICENSED COURIER AS A FEE.

29 (E) A LICENSED COURIER SHALL:

30 (1) MAINTAIN AN INTERNET WEBSITE THAT:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 371

1 (I) IDENTIFIES ITSELF AS THE WEBSITE OF THE LICENSED
2 COURIER; AND

3 (II) DISPLAYS A PROBLEM GAMBLING ASSISTANCE MESSAGE
4 PROMINENTLY;

5 (2) SAFEGUARD THE PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION OF A
6 LICENSED COURIER’S CUSTOMERS, INCLUDING DEBIT CARD NUMBER, BANK
7 ACCOUNT INFORMATION, AND OTHER SIMILAR INFORMATION;

8 (3) VERIFY THE IDENTITY, AGE, AND PHYSICAL LOCATION OF THE
9 CUSTOMER UTILIZING THE COURIER SERVICE TO ENSURE TRANSACTIONS ARE
10 OCCURRING IN THE STATE;

11 (4) REDEEM A PRIZE FROM A LOTTERY TICKET ON BEHALF OF THE
12 CUSTOMER UTILIZING THE COURIER SERVICE IN A SECURE MANNER;

13 (5) SECURELY STORE THE TICKET PURCHASED ON BEHALF OF THE
14 COURIER SERVICE CUSTOMER IN LIEU OF DELIVERY;

15 (6) PROVIDE AN ELECTRONIC COPY OF THE TICKET PURCHASED
16 DISPLAYING THE CUSTOMER’S NUMBERS AND OTHER INFORMATION FROM THE
17 TICKET ON THE RECEIPT;

18 (7) REQUIRE THE CUSTOMER TO CLAIM ANY PRIZE OVER $600 IN
19 PERSON;

20 (8) PROVIDE THE CUSTOMER WITH THE OPTION TO OBTAIN THE
21 ORIGINAL TICKET;

22 (9) STORE A TICKET AND MAINTAIN A SECURE DATABASE OF ALL
23 STORED LOTTERY TICKETS, LINKED TO EACH RESPECTIVE CUSTOMER; AND

24 (10) NOTIFY THE CUSTOMER OF A WINNING TICKET AND ITS PRIZE
25 VALUE WITHIN 24 HOURS OF A DRAWING.

26 (F) THE DIRECTOR MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THE
27 PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, INCLUDING REGULATIONS THAT:

28 (1) LIMIT THE NUMBER OF TERMINALS THAT A LICENSED COURIER
29 MAY USE FOR COURIER SERVICES AT A SINGLE LOCATION; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 371 5

1 (2) ESTABLISH QUALIFICATION STANDARDS FOR LICENSED
2 COURIERS AND THEIR EMPLOYEES.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
4 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5