START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 318

L5 6lr1015

By: Prince George’s County Delegation and Montgomery County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission and Washington
3 Suburban Sanitary Commission – Vendor Registration

4 PG/MC 107–26

5 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning
6 Commission and the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission to accept as a
7 registered vendor any person that is registered as a vendor with Montgomery County
8 or Prince George’s County; authorizing the Maryland–National Capital Park and
9 Planning Commission and the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission to enter
10 into certain memoranda of understanding with Montgomery County and Prince
11 George’s County; and generally relating to procurement by the Maryland–National
12 Capital Park and Planning Commission and the Washington Suburban Sanitary
13 Commission.

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – Land Use
16 Section 14–101(a) and (b)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – Land Use
21 Section 15–206
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
25 Article – Public Utilities
26 Section 16–101(a) and (b)
27 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0318*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 318

1 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 BY adding to
3 Article – Public Utilities
4 Section 20–401 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4. Vendor Registration
5 Process”
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

8 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
9 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

10 Article – Land Use

11 14–101.

12 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

13 (b) “Commission” means the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning
14 Commission.

15 15–206.

16 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL ACCEPT AS A REGISTERED VENDOR FOR THE
17 COMMISSION ANY PERSON THAT IS REGISTERED AS A VENDOR THROUGH A VENDOR
18 REGISTRATION PROCESS IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY OR PRINCE GEORGE’S
19 COUNTY.

20 (B) THE COMMISSION MAY ENTER INTO MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING
21 WITH MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY TO IMPLEMENT THIS
22 SECTION.

23 Article – Public Utilities

24 16–101.

25 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

26 (b) “Commission” means the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission.

27 SUBTITLE 4. VENDOR REGISTRATION PROCESS.

28 20–401.

29 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL ACCEPT AS A REGISTERED VENDOR FOR THE
30 COMMISSION ANY PERSON THAT IS REGISTERED AS A VENDOR THROUGH A VENDOR
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 318 3

1 REGISTRATION PROCESS IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY OR PRINCE GEORGE’S
2 COUNTY.

3 (B) THE COMMISSION MAY ENTER INTO MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING
4 WITH MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY TO IMPLEMENT THIS
5 SECTION.

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
7 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3