START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 379

L2 6lr1013

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – School Facilities and Public Safety and Behavioral
3 Health Surcharges – Deferral of Payment

4 PG 405–26

5 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Prince George’s County Council and the Governing
6 Body of Prince George’s County to defer the payment of certain surcharges until the
7 occurrence of certain events; and generally relating to the school facilities surcharge
8 and the public safety and behavioral health surcharge in Prince George’s County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 The Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County
11 Section 10–192.01(a)
12 Article 17 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
13 (2015 Edition and 2018 Supplement, as amended)
14 (As enacted by Chapter 351 of the Arts of the General Assembly of 2019)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 The Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County
17 Section 10–192.01(d)
18 Article 17 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
19 (2015 Edition and 2018 Supplement, as amended)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
21 The Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County
22 Section 10–192.11(a)
23 Article 17 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
24 (2015 Edition and 2018 Supplement, as amended)
25 (As enacted by Chapter 567 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021)

26 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0379*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 379

1 The Public Local Laws of Prince George’s County
2 Section 10–192.11(c)
3 Article 17 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
4 (2015 Edition and 2018 Supplement, as amended)
5 (As enacted by Chapter 567 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021)

6 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
7 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

8 Article 17 – Prince George’s County

9 10–192.01.

10 (a) (1) The governing body of Prince George’s County, by resolution, shall
11 impose a school facilities surcharge on new residential construction for which a building
12 permit is issued on or after July 1, 2003.

13 (2) (A) Except as provided under subparagraph (B) of this paragraph,
14 the County Council may impose a school facilities surcharge on new residential
15 construction for which a building permit is issued on or after July 1, 2003, by a municipal
16 corporation in Prince George’s County with zoning authority and the authority to issue
17 building permits.

18 (B) The County Council may not impose a school facilities surcharge
19 on new residential construction for which a building permit is issued by a municipal
20 corporation if Prince George’s County has collected a surcharge on issuance of a County
21 permit for the same new residential construction.

22 (d) (1) (A) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (B) OF
23 THIS PARAGRAPH, THE school facilities surcharge shall be paid by the seller at the time
24 a building permit is issued for the dwelling unit.

25 (B) THE COUNTY COUNCIL MAY DEFER PAYMENT OF THE
26 SCHOOL FACILITIES SURCHARGE UNTIL THE:

27 (I) FINAL INSPECTION OF THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
28 CONSTRUCTION;

29 (II) ISSUANCE OF A USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT FOR
30 THE PROPERTY; OR

31 (III) TIME OF CLOSING OF THE FIRST SALE OF THE
32 PROPERTY OCCURRING AFTER THE ISSUANCE OF THE BUILDING PERMIT.

33 (2) The school facilities surcharge may not be construed to be a settlement
34 cost.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 379 3

1 10–192.11.

2 (a) The Governing Body of Prince George’s County, by resolution, may impose a
3 public safety and behavioral health surcharge on new residential construction for which a
4 building permit is issued by the County unless a preliminary plan for the residential
5 development was approved on or before July 1, 2005.

6 (c) (1) (A) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (B) OF
7 THIS PARAGRAPH, THE public safety and behavioral health surcharge shall be paid by the
8 seller at the time a building permit is issued for the dwelling unit.

9 (B) THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
10 MAY DEFER PAYMENT OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
11 SURCHARGE UNTIL THE:

12 (I) FINAL INSPECTION OF THE NEW RESIDENTIAL
13 CONSTRUCTION;

14 (II) ISSUANCE OF A USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT FOR
15 THE PROPERTY; OR

16 (III) TIME OF CLOSING OF THE FIRST SALE OF THE
17 PROPERTY OCCURRING AFTER THE ISSUANCE OF THE BUILDING PERMIT.

18 (2) The public safety AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH surcharge may not be
19 construed to be a settlement cost.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3