START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 322

J3 6lr1997
CF 6lr2215

By: Delegate Kerr
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Health Care Commission – Membership

3 FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Maryland Health Care Commission by
4 reducing the number of members who are individuals who do not have any
5 connection with the management or policy of a health care provider or payor and
6 including a representative of a hospital; altering the number of Commission
7 members who must be residents of different counties with a certain minimum
8 population; and generally relating to the membership of the Maryland Health Care
9 Commission.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Health – General
12 Section 19–101
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Health – General
17 Section 19–104
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Health – General

23 19–101.

24 In this subtitle, “Commission” means the Maryland Health Care Commission.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0322*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 322

1 19–104.

2 (a) (1) The Commission shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Governor
3 with the advice and consent of the Senate.

4 (2) Of the 15 members:

5 (i) [Nine] EIGHT shall be individuals who do not have any
6 connection with the management or policy of a health care provider or payor; and

7 (ii) Of the remaining [six] SEVEN members:

8 1. Two shall be physicians;

9 2. Two shall be payors, as defined in § 19–132 of this subtitle;

10 3. ONE SHALL BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF A HOSPITAL,
11 AS DEFINED IN § 19–301 OF THIS TITLE;

12 4. One shall be a nursing home administrator in the State;
13 and

14 [4.] 5.One shall be a nonphysician health care practitioner.

15 (b) (1) The term of a member is 4 years.

16 (2) The terms of members are staggered as required by the terms provided
17 for members of the Commission on October 1, 1999.

18 (3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
19 appointed and qualifies.

20 (4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
21 rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

22 (5) The Governor may remove a member for neglect of duty, incompetence,
23 or misconduct.

24 (6) A member may not serve more than two consecutive terms.

25 (c) When appointing members to the Commission, the Governor shall:

26 (1) Assure that:

27 (i) At least [five] FOUR members are residents of different counties
28 with a population of 300,000 or more; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 322 3

1 (ii) At least three members are residents of different counties with a
2 population of less than 300,000, of which at least:

3 1. One shall be a resident of the Eastern Shore;

4 2. One shall be a resident of Allegany County, Garrett
5 County, Washington County, Carroll County, or Frederick County; and

6 3. One shall be a resident of Southern Maryland; and

7 (2) To the extent practicable, assure geographic balance and promote
8 racial, ethnic, and gender diversity in the Commission’s membership.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3