START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 375 
(Delegate Stinnett) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Estates and Trusts - Interpretation of Wills - Evidence of Intent (Granny's Law) 
 
 
This bill authorizes a personal representative – who has power of attorney or was named, 
or acted, as the decedent’s caregiver – to petition the court to find that a certain legacy was 
intended to be used to address health equity issues or certain other issues. The court must 
defer to the judgment of the personal representative regarding the administration of the 
decedent’s will under the bill’s provisions if specified language is included in the will and 
there is no compelling evidence the personal representative is acting with fraudulent intent. 
The bill provides certain authority to the court and the personal representative to help 
ensure that the legacy is used in accordance with the decedent’s intent determined under 
the bill’s provisions. The bill also establishes a State policy relating to health disparities. 
The bill’s provisions regarding the use of a certain legacy to address health equity or other 
issues applies retroactively to any will probated on or after October 1, 2021. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 375/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Petition to Interpret a Will 
 
The bill specifies that a personal representative who has power of attorney, whom a 
decedent named as the decedent’s caregiver, or who acted as the decedent’s caregiver may 
petition the court to interpret a will according to the intent of the decedent if the will: 
 
 
contains a legacy for a health provider or a charitable organization in a sector that 
has a documented need of support or inequality or is deemed by State law or policy 
to be in need of support; and 
 
does not expressly provide that the legacy must be used to address issues relevant 
to the health provider or organization described immediately above, even though 
the decedent’s life reflected an active interest in those issues. 
 
Court Proceeding – Requirements 
 
The following requirements apply in a court proceeding on the personal representative’s 
petition: 
 
(1) 
Evidence to Demonstrate the Intent of the Decedent – The personal representative 
must present evidence satisfactory to the court, including evidence of actions taken 
by the decedent during the decedent’s lifetime, to demonstrate the decedent’s intent 
that the legacy to the health provider or charitable organization in the health sector 
must be used to address health equity issues. 
 
(2) 
Deference to the Judgment of the Personal Representative – The court must defer 
to the judgment of the personal representative regarding the administration of the 
will (in the absence of compelling evidence of fraudulent intent) if the will includes 
the following language: 
 
In addition to the powers conferred upon personal representatives and 
trustees by law, my representative and trustee, or any duly appointed 
successor, shall have authority without adjudication or order or direction of 
the court to: 
 
 
sell, pursuant to option or otherwise, at a public or private sale and 
upon such terms as the personal representative shall deem best, any 
real or personal property belonging to my estate without regard to the 
necessity of such sale for the purpose of paying debts, taxes, or 
legacies; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 375/ Page 3 
 
retain any and all of such property not so required without liability for 
any depreciation thereof; 
 
assign or transfer certificates of stock, bonds, or other securities; 
 
adjust, compromise, and settle any and all claims in favor of or against 
my estate; 
 
conduct and carry on all business until such time as the business can 
be sold and distributed as a going concern or otherwise, and the 
personal representative shall be exonerated from any loss, which may 
result thereby; and 
 
do any and all things necessary and proper to complete the 
administration of all my estate as fully as I could do if I were living. 
 
(3) 
Interpretation of the Above Language – The above-quoted language must be 
interpreted to ensure that (1) all individuals with powers of attorney, named as 
caregivers by the decedent, or who acted as caregivers for the decedent during the 
decedent’s lifetime are held accountable and protected and (2) a personal 
representative holds an interested person accountable for their actions or inactions 
toward, related to, in honor of, or on behalf of the decedent. 
 
Ensuring Use of the Legacy for Health Equity Issues 
 
For the period beginning six months after the probate of the estate and ending three years 
after the probate of the estate, a personal representative who petitions the court under the 
bill’s provisions may require a legatee (health provider or charitable organization) to 
demonstrate how the legacy was used by the legatee. If the legatee fails to demonstrate that 
the legacy was used in accordance with the court’s interpretation of the will under the bill’s 
provisions, the personal representative may petition the court to issue (1) an order requiring 
the beneficiary to return the legacy to the estate or (2) a judgment requiring the legatee to 
pay the estate the value of the legacy. The court, with the approval of the personal 
representative, may pass any order it considers proper and consistent with the guidance 
under the bill’s provisions. 
 
Health-General Article – State Policy 
 
The bill adds a provision to the Health-General Article specifying that it is the policy of 
the State to oppose and alleviate any disparity in health outcomes for and among racial 
groups in the State resulting from the provision of treatment otherwise available to assist 
the public in general, and to encourage and support the making of gifts and bequests 
consistent with this policy to address and alleviate such health disparities. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 375/ Page 4 
Current Law: 
 
Orphans’ Courts 
 
Under the Maryland Constitution, each county and Baltimore City elects, for a term of  
four years, three judges to the Orphans’ Court of their respective jurisdictions, with the 
exception of Harford, Howard, and Montgomery counties, where a circuit court judge sits 
as the Orphans’ Court. The Orphans’ Courts are the State’s probate courts. The courts 
supervise the handling of estates and also have certain jurisdiction over the guardianship 
of minors and their property. 
 
Interpretation of a Will – Testator’s Intent 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland, in Vito v. Grueff, described that when interpreting a will 
the primary concern of the court is to understand and effectuate the testator’s expressed 
intent from the “four corners of the will.” Extrinsic evidence is inadmissible unless it 
clarifies an ambiguous testamentary intent. See 453 Md. 88, 106-108, 110 (2017). 
 
Personal Representative Powers 
 
A personal representative may exercise all of the power or authority conferred on the 
personal representative by statute or in the will, without application to, the approval of, or 
ratification by the court. The personal representative has various statutory powers listed in 
§ 7-401 of the Estates and Trusts Article. The personal representative may also petition the 
court for permission to act in any matter relating to the administration of the estate and the 
court may pass any order it considers proper. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1029 and HB 868 of 2025 and HB 1518 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 190 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Register of 
Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4