START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 335 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 335 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Dedication - Roads 
 
  
This bill establishes circumstances under which a private road is considered to be offered 
for dedication to public use and accepted.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant impact on Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
expenditures to the extent the bill (1) requires the State Highway Administration (SHA) to 
reconstruct and maintain private roads to meet State standards and (2) increases liability 
exposure, as discussed below. Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local government expenditures to the extent 
the bill (1) requires local governments to maintain private roads to meet local government 
standards and (2) increases liability exposure, as discussed below. Local highway user 
revenues may potentially be affected, as discussed below. This bill may impose a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes that if a private road has been open to public travel for 
20 years or more, the road must be considered offered for dedication to public use. If the 
State, county, or municipality provides maintenance of and repair to the private road in the 
same manner as a public road before or following the offer, an offer for dedication to public 
use must be considered accepted.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 335/ Page 2 
A governing body of a county or municipality may not enact or enforce a local law, 
ordinance, or regulation that conflicts with the provisions of the bill, and the provisions of 
the bill may not be interpreted as limiting or prohibiting any alternative method of offer or 
acceptance of dedication of private land to public use available under law. 
 
Current Law:  The Supreme Court of Maryland, in Bd. of Cnty. Comm’rs v. Aiken, 
indicated that a public road is established over real property by (1) public authority; 
(2) dedication; or (3) prescriptive easement. 483 Md. 590, 624 (2023).  
 
Statute specifies that a public authority (State or local) may acquire real property, including 
a private road, through a condemnation proceeding. Dedication and prescriptive easement 
as ways of establishing a private road for public use have been recognized by 
Maryland courts based on the common law. Local codes vary regarding the specific 
requirements for dedication of a private road for public use.  
 
Public Authority – Condemnation Proceedings 
 
Eminent Domain – Generally:  The power to take, or condemn, private property for public 
use is one of the inherent powers of state government, and, through the state, its political 
subdivisions. Courts have long held that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is 
derived from the sovereignty of the state; however, there are limits. Both constitutions 
establish two requirements for taking property through the power of eminent domain:  
(1) the property taken must be for a “public use”; and (2) the party whose property is taken 
must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value of the 
real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken is generally entitled 
to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property.  
 
State Highway Administration – Condemnation Proceedings:  SHA, within the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT), has the general power to acquire for the State, by 
condemnation under Title 12 of the Real Property Article, or by other specified means, any 
private property for any public purpose it considers necessary or desirable to perform its 
duties or for any other purpose authorized under Title 8 of the Transportation Article.  
 
Dedication  
 
In General:  Maryland recognizes the common law dedication of a private road for public 
use. Offer and acceptance are required for a dedication to be complete.   
 
Offer:  According to the court in Aiken, the landowner’s offer to dedicate a road for public 
use must be voluntary, unambiguous, and clearly manifested from declarations and acts. In 
many cases, the offer is expressed through the act of the landowner recording a plat to 
dedicate certain types of land to public use, such as roads and parks, which then must be 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 335/ Page 3 
accepted by the State or local government to complete the dedication (methods of 
acceptance specified below). For example, § 13‐2‐203 of the Anne Arundel County Code 
specifies that a private road may be dedicated for public use by the filing of a petition by 
the owner requesting that the county accept the road into the county road system. The 
county may accept if certain conditions are met, including that the road meets all applicable 
legal, design, and construction standards.  
 
However, in Wilkinson v. Bd. of Cnty. Comm’rs, the Appellate Court of Maryland indicated 
that “pursuant to an applicable statute, the recording of a subdivision plat may constitute 
both an offer and acceptance of the roads or streets depicted on the plat.” The court cited 
prior cases that held, pursuant to local codes, the approval and recording of a subdivision 
plat was both an offer and acceptance completing the dedication of a street for public use. 
255 Md. App. 213, 252 (2022).  
 
In addition to an explicit offer of dedication, in Allegany County, for example, an implied 
offer may be made whenever any road has been in public use for 20 years (even if the road 
has not been condemned or dedicated as a public highway). The county commissioners 
may declare (accept) the road to be a public highway (with public notice, as specified) if 
the road is at least 40 feet in width. Once declared to be a public road, the county must keep 
the road in good order and repair as other public roads. (See § 461‐5 of the Allegany County 
Code) 
 
Acceptance:  The court in Aiken specified that an acceptance to an offer to dedicate a 
private road for public use may be made by (1) deed or other record; (2) acts in pais 
(informal acts outside of the legal process), such as opening, grading, or keeping the road 
in repair at the public expense; (3) the general public’s “long continued use” of the land; 
and (4) express statutory provision or other similar official action. The court noted that 
acceptance may be either express through a recorded document (as stated above), or 
implied “by the appropriate entity assuming control and maintenance of the property 
offered.” (Quoting City of Annapolis v. Waterman 357 Md. 484, 504 (2000); 483 Md. 590, 
626‐628 (2023).  
 
Prescriptive Easement 
 
Prescriptive easement (a right to use or control land owned by another person) was not 
relevant to the Aiken case; however, the court cited prior cases establishing that a public 
road by prescriptive easement requires evidence of “adverse, exclusive, and uninterrupted 
use of another’s real property for twenty years.” 483 Md. 590, 625 n.10 (2023).  
 
As stated above, the long, continued use of land or a road by the general public is 
considered acceptance of an offer to dedicate a private road for public use.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 335/ Page 4 
Similarly, the Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland), in 
Mt. Sinai Nursing Home, Inc. v. Pleasant Manor Corp., held that uninterrupted use of a 
road by the general public for twenty years vests title by prescription as a public easement. 
254 Md. 1, 6‐7 (1969)  
 
State Highway Administration – Road Standards 
 
SHA has the responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining  
State roads and bridges to safety and performance standards while considering 
sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. SHA must construct, reconstruct, and 
repair State highways as necessary to maintain them in good condition. SHA maintains a 
Book of Standards for Highway & Incidental Structures that establishes structural and 
maintenance standards, including paving, for State roads.  
 
State Expenditures:  Potential significant impact on TTF expenditures to the extent the 
bill requires SHA to reconstruct and maintain private roads to meet State standards, 
including the cost of any environmental impacts that require mitigation, as well as 
increased exposure to liability. 
 
Reconstruction and Maintenance of Private Roads  
 
Because MDOT’s capital program is fully subscribed, to account for any increased 
reconstruction or maintenance costs under the bill, SHA must either redirect capital funding 
from other projects to upgrade and maintain private roads or reduce the amount of 
State highways or lane miles rehabilitated each year.  
 
MDOT indicates that private roads are typically not built to SHA’s standard widths, and 
pavement and drainage standards. According to SHA, the depth of pavement required for 
a State highway (necessary for trucks and longevity) may require reconstruction of a 
private road. For context, SHA estimates that the costs of pavement reconstruction (at 
1 foot depth) may exceed $1 million per lane mile for a two‐lane residential highway; or if 
the road is only resurfaced, an estimated cost of $310,000 per lane mile.  
 
According to MDOT, SHA’s responsibility for a private road may also incur maintenance 
costs. SHA’s average routine maintenance costs are $11,700 per year per lane mile. MDOT 
also advises that costs associated with repairs to private roads may delay eligibility for 
funding provided by the Federal Highway Administration. 
 
The magnitude of costs, if any, cannot be reliably estimated without experience under the 
bill; however, MDOT advises that under one potential scenario of 10 private roads (1 mile 
each) becoming SHA’s responsibility per year, associated costs could exceed $10.6 million 
on an annual basis. Over 90% of the costs are associated with pavement reconstruction. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 335/ Page 5 
Other Impacts 
 
TTF expenditures may increase to the extent that the State faces additional exposure to 
liability based on the acquisition of private roads under the bill; however, any potential 
impact cannot be reliably estimated in advance.  
 
Local Revenues:  The amount of the capital grants (local highway user revenues) that 
MDOT must annually provide to local governments from the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle 
Revenue Account is based on a statutory formula based on road mileage and motor vehicle 
registration. To the extent the bill requires local governments to increase mileage (private 
roads) under their jurisdiction, a reallocation of local highway user revenues among local 
jurisdictions may occur. Local governments that increase road mileage by acquiring private 
roads under the bill will receive a greater share of the highway user revenues at the expense 
of other local governments through a reallocation of the total amount of capital grants 
available. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Potential significant increase in local government expenditures to 
the extent the bill (1) requires local governments to maintain private roads to meet local 
government standards and (2) increases liability exposure.  
 
The Maryland Municipal League (MML) advises that upgrading a private road to local 
government public use standards requires significant expenditures, such as those associated 
with maintaining a level road surface, trimming trees, and appropriate signage and traffic 
controls. Prince George’s County indicates that the bill may have a significant fiscal 
impact, because the county in most cases does not have prior rights where utilities are 
installed on a private road that may lead to costly relocations if certain maintenance and 
repairs are required. 
 
MML further advises that municipalities may experience increased liability exposure and 
potential tort claims under the bill. A private road is typically not maintained at the same 
level as a county or municipal road. Thus, the road may have a pothole or other defects 
creating pedestrian or vehicular hazards increasing liability exposure for accidents and 
injuries. The Maryland Association of Counties also expressed concerns regarding liability 
and uncertainty over when the county would have to assume responsibility for the private 
road.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that engage in the construction, maintenance, 
and repair of roads may benefit from an increased demand for contractual services by the 
State or local governments as a result of the bill.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 335/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 258 (Senator Attar) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; Maryland Association 
of Counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney 
General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of 
Planning; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6