START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 343 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Housing Development Projects - Housing Counseling Services 
 
 
This bill requires a recipient of funding from the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD) for any project to construct, acquire, or rehabilitate residential 
property for use as housing, to agree to offer “housing counseling” services to prospective 
residents. Such services must be provided by housing counselors certified by the  
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and employed by an 
“approved housing counseling agency,” as defined. Beginning fiscal 2028 and annually 
thereafter, the Governor must appropriate $200,000 to be used by community development 
organizations to partner with approved housing counseling agencies providing housing 
counseling services under the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $200,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2028 due to the mandated appropriation. DHCD can administer the funding to 
community development organizations with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 343/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Housing counseling” means counselor-to-client assistance that addresses 
unique financial circumstances or housing issues and focuses on ways of overcoming 
specific obstacles to achieving a housing goal. 
 
Current Law:  A “community development organization” is a corporation, foundation, or 
other legal entity with the purpose of improving the physical, economic, or social 
environment of the area where it operates and for which no part of its net earnings inures 
to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual holding an interest in that entity. 
 
Among other responsibilities, DHCD administers several programs that provide financial 
assistance related to affordable housing. Examples of programs that specifically award 
grants and loans for affordable single-family or multifamily housing are described in more 
detail below. 
 
 
Partnership Rental Housing Program:  The Partnership Rental Housing Program is 
intended to expand the supply of affordable housing for low-income households. 
Among other potential program participants, DHCD is authorized to provide 
financial assistance to political subdivisions or housing authorities to acquire, 
construct, reconstruct, renovate, or rehabilitate rental housing that is affordable to 
households of limited income. The fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes 
$8.0 million in general obligation (GO) bonds for the program. 
 
Rental Housing Program:  The Rental Housing Program is intended to, among other 
things, stimulate the production of rental housing and use available resources 
efficiently to serve households that are in need of quality affordable housing 
opportunities, including families, the elderly, and persons with disabilities or special 
needs. Loans may be issued to private or nonprofit sponsors, political subdivisions, 
or local housing authorities on behalf of sponsors of proposed rental housing units. 
The fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes $65.0 million in GO bonds, 
$19.5 million in special funds, and $9.0 million in federal funds for the program. 
 
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative Program:  The Baltimore Regional 
Neighborhood Initiative (BRNI) Program is intended to, among other things, 
provide strategic investment in local housing and businesses to encourage healthy, 
sustainable communities with a growing tax base and enhanced quality of life. The 
fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced includes $20.0 million in GO bonds for the 
program. 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program:  Similar to BRNI, the 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program also provides strategic 
investment in local housing and businesses to encourage healthy, sustainable 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 343/ Page 3 
communities with a growing tax base and enhanced quality of life. The fiscal 2027 
capital budget as introduced includes $20.0 million in GO bonds for the program. 
 
Maryland Mortgage Program:  The Maryland Mortgage Program (MMP) provides 
below-market, fixed-rate mortgages through private lending institutions to low- and 
moderate-income households. The program is financed through the sale of mortgage 
revenue bonds, targeted to first-time homebuyers, and includes eligibility limits on 
both household income and the cost of the home. MMP has annual income 
requirements limiting who can apply for a loan through the program. Income 
requirements vary by location and whether the home is in a “targeted area.” 
 
Down Payment and Settlement Expense Loan Program:  The Down Payment and 
Settlement Expense Loan Program (DSELP), a supplementary program to MMP, 
provides financing for down payment and settlement expenses to enable eligible 
homebuyers to purchase homes. An individual qualifies as an eligible homebuyer if 
the individual (1) will purchase and occupy a single-unit principal residence and has 
household income not exceeding upper limits established by the Secretary of 
Housing and Community Development or (2) will purchase and occupy a residential 
building with no more than four units and agrees to rent all units other than the 
owner’s unit to households with income not exceeding upper limits established by 
the secretary. Pursuant to Chapter 104 of 2018, a recipient of a loan under DSELP 
must complete homebuyer education. 
 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development – Housing Counseling 
 
HUD sponsors housing counseling agencies throughout the country to assist individuals 
with, among other things, advice on buying a home. HUD housing counselors must be 
certified by HUD and prove competence in the following six areas:  financial management; 
housing affordability; fair housing; homeownership; avoiding foreclosure; and tenancy 
issues. Generally, HUD housing counselors charge fees to clients for their services 
(e.g., prospective tenants and homeowners); however, HUD guidelines require  
that any fee be waived if the client cannot afford to pay the fee. HUD also maintains  
a list of department-approved counseling agencies. As of February 2026, there were  
10 HUD-approved housing counseling agencies in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  No effect in fiscal 2027. General fund expenditures increase by 
$200,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2028 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation. 
Although the bill does not specify to which agency or program the mandated appropriation 
is made, the bill is drafted to the Housing and Community Development Article. Therefore, 
this analysis assumes that DHCD receives the appropriation and must disburse it. DHCD 
can disburse the funding to community development organizations with existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 343/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1302 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Wicomico Counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Budget and Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4