START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 322 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 322 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission - Membership 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) by 
(1) reducing, from nine to eight, the number of members who do not have any connection 
with the management or policy of a health care provider or payor and (2) requiring  
one member to be a representative of a hospital. When appointing members of the 
commission, the Governor must assure that at least four (rather than five) members are 
residents of different counties with a population of 300,000 or more. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the membership of the commission does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MHCC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department of 
Health with a mission to plan for health system needs, promote informed decision making, 
increase accountability, and improve access in a rapidly changing health care environment 
by providing timely and accurate information on availability, cost, and quality of services 
to policymakers, purchasers, providers, and the public. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 322/ Page 2 
The commission consists of 15 members appointed by the Governor with the advice and 
consent of the Senate. Of the 15 members:   
 
 
nine must be individuals who do not have any connection with the management or 
policy of a health care provider or payor; and  
 
of the remaining six members:  (1) two must be physicians; (2) two must be payors; 
(3) one must be a nursing home administrator; and (4) one must be a nonphysician 
health care practitioner. 
 
When appointing members to the commission, the Governor must assure that at least  
five members are residents of different counties with a population of 300,000 or more and 
at least three members are residents of different counties with a population less than 
300,000, as specified. To the extent practicable, the Governor must assure geographic 
balance and promote racial, ethnic, and gender diversity in the commission’s membership. 
 
The term of a member is four years; Members may not serve more than two consecutive 
terms. At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is appointed and 
qualifies. The Governor may remove a member for neglect of duty, incompetence, or 
misconduct.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 260 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2