START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 315

D5 6lr1839
CF 6lr1840

By: Delegate Stewart
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Human Relations – Discrimination in Housing – Income–Based Housing
3 Subsidies

4 FOR the purpose of providing that a certain landlord may not refuse to rent to a prospective
5 tenant who pays rent with the assistance of an income–based housing subsidy under
6 certain circumstances, subject to a certain exception; establishing that a violation of
7 this Act is a discriminatory housing practice and is subject to enforcement by the
8 Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; and generally relating to housing
9 discrimination.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – State Government
12 Section 20–701(a) and 20–1020(a)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – State Government
17 Section 20–701(c) and 20–1020(e)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY adding to
21 Article – State Government
22 Section 20–705.1
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
26 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0315*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 315

1 Article – State Government

2 20–701.

3 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

4 (c) “Discriminatory housing practice” means an act that is prohibited under §
5 20–705, § 20–705.1, § 20–706, § 20–707, or § 20–708 of this subtitle.

6 20–705.1.

7 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “INCOME–BASED HOUSING SUBSIDY” MEANS
8 RECURRING MONETARY ASSISTANCE TO A LANDLORD FROM A GOVERNMENTAL
9 ENTITY OR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT IS INTENDED TO DEFRAY, IN WHOLE
10 OR IN PART, A TENANT’S RENT OBLIGATION.

11 (2) “INCOME–BASED HOUSING SUBSIDY” INCLUDES LOW–INCOME
12 HOUSING ASSISTANCE CERTIFICATES AND VOUCHERS ISSUED UNDER THE UNITED
13 STATES HOUSING ACT OF 1937.

14 (B) EXCEPT AS AUTHORIZED UNDER FEDERAL LAW, A LANDLORD OR
15 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY THAT USES FINANCIAL INFORMATION, INCLUDING
16 CREDIT HISTORY, AS PART OF A PROSPECTIVE TENANT’S RENTAL APPLICATION MAY
17 NOT REFUSE TO RENT TO A PROSPECTIVE TENANT WHO PAYS RENT WITH THE
18 ASSISTANCE OF AN INCOME–BASED HOUSING SUBSIDY ON THE BASIS OF:

19 (1) THE PROSPECTIVE TENANT’S INCOME;

20 (2) THE PROSPECTIVE TENANT’S CREDIT SCORE OR LACK OF CREDIT
21 SCORE; OR

22 (3) ANY ADVERSE CREDIT HISTORY THAT AROSE DURING A PERIOD
23 WHEN THE PROSPECTIVE TENANT DID NOT HAVE AN INCOME–BASED HOUSING
24 SUBSIDY, IF THE LANDLORD COULD REASONABLY HAVE KNOWN THE DATE ON WHICH
25 THE SUBSIDY WAS RECEIVED.

26 (C) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A LANDLORD
27 THAT RECEIVES FUNDING FROM A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, A
28 QUASI–GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, OR A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT REQUIRES
29 INCOME QUALIFICATION FOR TENANTS IN INCOME–RESTRICTED RENTAL UNITS MAY
30 COLLECT FINANCIAL INFORMATION FROM A PROSPECTIVE TENANT IF THE
31 COLLECTION OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION IS A CONDITION OF THE FUNDING.

32 20–1020.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 315 3

1 (a) In this part the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (e) “Discriminatory housing practice” means an act that is prohibited under §
3 20–705, § 20–705.1, § 20–706, § 20–707, or § 20–708 of this title.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3