START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 328

L5, G2 6lr1061

By: Prince George’s County Delegation and Montgomery County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Bicounty Commissions – Public Ethics – Financial Disclosure Statements

3 PG/MC 105–26

4 FOR the purpose of requiring an applicant for appointment as a commissioner of a bicounty
5 commission to submit a certain statement to the Prince George’s County Office of
6 Ethics and Accountability; requiring the chief administrative officer for Prince
7 George’s County to transmit the financial disclosure statements of commissioners or
8 appointed applicants of bicounty commissions to the Office; requiring the Office,
9 rather than the chief administrative officer for Prince George’s County, to retain the
10 statements, return the statements to certain applicants under certain
11 circumstances, provide certain notice to the State Ethics Commission, record certain
12 information of individuals examining or copying the statement, and maintain, make
13 available, and establish procedures governing the inspection of the statements; and
14 generally relating to financial disclosure statements for commissioners and
15 applicants for appointment as commissioners of bicounty commissions.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – General Provisions
18 Section 5–822, 5–824(c)(1) and (2), and 5–825(a)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 Article – General Provisions
23 Section 5–825(b)(1), 5–826, and 5–827
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
27 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0328*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 328

1 Article – General Provisions

2 5–822.

3 In this part, “commissioner” means a commissioner of a bicounty commission.

4 5–824.

5 (c) (1) Each commissioner shall file a financial disclosure statement
6 electronically with the Ethics Commission.

7 (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, each
8 commissioner shall also print a paper copy of the electronically filed financial disclosure
9 statement and submit it to the chief administrative officer of the county from which the
10 commissioner is appointed.

11 5–825.

12 (a) An applicant for appointment as commissioner shall file the financial
13 disclosure statement required by this part electronically with the Ethics Commission.

14 (b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, an applicant
15 shall also print a paper copy of the electronically filed statement and submit it to:

16 (I) the chief administrative officer of the county from which the
17 applicant seeks appointment; AND

18 (II) IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S
19 COUNTY OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

20 5–826.

21 (a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the chief
22 administrative officer of a county shall transmit each financial disclosure statement of a
23 commissioner or appointed applicant to the executive director of the appropriate bicounty
24 commission AND, IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
25 OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

26 (2) In Montgomery County, the county council shall transmit each
27 financial disclosure statement of a commissioner or appointed applicant to the
28 Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Commission to the executive director of the
29 commission.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 328 3

1 (b) The FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT SHALL BE RETAINED BY THE
2 FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES FOR THE ENTIRE TERM OF OFFICE OF THE
3 COMMISSIONER:

4 (1) THE executive director [and];

5 (2) IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, the chief administrative officer [shall
6 retain the statement for the entire term of office of the commissioner]; AND

7 (3) IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
8 OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

9 (c) (1) [Within 15 days after an appointment to a bicounty commission has
10 become final, if] IF an applicant provided a paper copy of a financial disclosure
11 STATEMENT, THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER
12 AN APPOINTMENT TO A BICOUNTY COMMISSION HAS BECOME FINAL, SHALL RETURN
13 TO EACH APPLICANT WHO IS NOT APPOINTED ALL COPIES OF THE STATEMENT
14 SUBMITTED BY THAT APPLICANT:

15 (I) the county council [and];

16 (II) IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, the chief administrative officer [of
17 the county involved shall return to each applicant who is not appointed the original and all
18 copies of the statement submitted by that applicant]; AND

19 (III) IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S
20 COUNTY OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

21 (2) On notification by the chief administrative officer [of the county
22 involved] FOR MONTGOMERY COUNTY OR THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY OFFICE
23 OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY that an applicant was not appointed, the Ethics
24 Commission shall promptly delete the FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE statement electronically
25 filed by the applicant.

26 5–827.

27 (a) The Ethics Commission, the executive director of each bicounty commission,
28 [and] the chief administrative officer [of each county] FOR MONTGOMERY COUNTY, AND
29 THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY:

30 (1) shall maintain financial disclosure statements of commissioners and
31 appointed applicants received under this part;

32 (2) shall make the statements available to the public for examination and
33 copying during normal office hours; and
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 328

1 (3) may charge a reasonable fee and adopt reasonable administrative
2 procedures for the examination and copying of a statement.

3 (b) The Ethics Commission, the executive director of each bicounty commission,
4 [and] the chief administrative officer [of each county] FOR MONTGOMERY COUNTY, AND
5 THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY OFFICE OF ETHICS AND ACCOUNTABILITY shall
6 require that any person examining or copying a statement shall record:

7 (1) the person’s name and home address; and

8 (2) the name of the individual whose statement was examined or copied.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4