START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 387 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 387 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Commissioned Public Art - Artist Rights and Registration of Art 
 
 
This bill prohibits an entity from including provisions in a contract for State public art that 
require an artist to waive copyright protections or rights under federal law, but allows an 
artist to choose to waive those protections or rights in writing. It also requires an entity that 
commissions State public art to register the art with the Maryland State Arts Council 
(MSAC), as specified. The bill applies only prospectively and may not be applied or 
interpreted to have any effect on or application to any contract entered into before  
October 1, 2026. “State public art” is defined as art commissioned for a project that receives 
State funding, regardless of whether the State funding directly paid for the public art. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSAC can register State public art with existing resources. The bill 
otherwise does not materially affect governmental operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local governmental finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 106A of Title 17 of the U.S. Code, known as the Visual Artist 
Rights Act (VARA), allows artists to control the ascription and integrity of their works of 
visual art, including the right to prevent intentional distortion, mutilation, or destruction of 
their artwork, particularly if it is considered of recognized stature. VARA provides its 
protections only to paintings, drawings, prints, sculptures, and still photographic images 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 387/ Page 2 
produced for exhibition only if they exist as single copies or in limited editions of 200 or 
fewer copies, signed and numbered by the artist. 
 
Prohibited Provisions in State Contracts 
 
State law delineates provisions that may not be included in a State contract. Except as 
required by State or federal law, a State contract may not contain a provision:   
 
 
that requires the State to indemnify, defend, or hold harmless another person without 
an appropriation of State funds for that purpose; 
 
by which the State agrees to binding arbitration or any other binding extrajudicial 
dispute resolution process; 
 
that names a jurisdiction or venue for any action or dispute against the State other 
than a court of proper jurisdiction in the State; 
 
that requires the State to agree to limit the liability for any direct loss to the State, 
as specified, or that would otherwise impose an indemnification obligation on the 
State; 
 
that requires the State to be bound by a term or condition that (1) is unknown to the 
State at the time of signing the contract; (2) may be unilaterally changed by the other 
party; or (3) is electronically accepted by a State employee without authority; 
 
that requires a person other than the Attorney General of Maryland to serve as legal 
counsel for the State, except as allowed under current law; 
 
that is inconsistent with the State’s Open Meetings Act or Public Information Act; 
 
that binds the State to pay unappropriated amounts or otherwise causes the State to 
incur unfunded liabilities, as specified under State law; 
 
for automatic renewal that obligates the State to allocate funding in subsequent 
fiscal years; or 
 
that limits the State’s ability to recover the cost of a replacement contractor. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1006 and HB 961 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 41 (Senator Kagan) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of General Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 387/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3