START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 343

C9 6lr0651

By: Delegate Rosenberg
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Housing Development Projects – Housing Counseling Services

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a recipient of certain funding from the Department of
4 Housing and Community Development to offer housing counseling services to certain
5 prospective residents; requiring the Governor to appropriate funds in certain years
6 for community development organizations to partner with certain housing
7 counseling agencies; and generally relating to housing counseling services.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Housing and Community Development
10 Section 2–304
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Housing and Community Development

16 2–304.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
18 INDICATED.

19 (2) “APPROVED HOUSING COUNSELING AGENCY” MEANS AN
20 ORGANIZATION THAT IS APPROVED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
21 URBAN DEVELOPMENT TO PROVIDE HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES DIRECTLY OR
22 THROUGH AFFILIATES OR BRANCHES.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0343*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 343

1 (3) “COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ENTITY
2 THAT MEETS THE QUALIFICATIONS OF § 6–203 OF THIS ARTICLE.

3 (4) “HOUSING COUNSELING” MEANS COUNSELOR–TO–CLIENT
4 ASSISTANCE THAT ADDRESSES UNIQUE FINANCIAL CIRCUMSTANCES OR HOUSING
5 ISSUES AND FOCUSES ON WAYS OF OVERCOMING SPECIFIC OBSTACLES TO
6 ACHIEVING A HOUSING GOAL.

7 (B) AS A CONDITION ON THE RECEIPT OF FUNDING FROM THE
8 DEPARTMENT FOR ANY PROJECT TO CONSTRUCT, ACQUIRE, OR REHABILITATE
9 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY FOR USE AS HOUSING, A FUNDING RECIPIENT SHALL
10 AGREE TO OFFER HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES TO PROSPECTIVE RESIDENTS.

11 (C) HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES OFFERED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
12 THIS SECTION SHALL BE PROVIDED BY HOUSING COUNSELORS CERTIFIED BY THE
13 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYED BY AN
14 APPROVED HOUSING COUNSELING AGENCY.

15 (D) IN FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
16 GOVERNOR SHALL APPROPRIATE $200,000 TO BE USED BY COMMUNITY
17 DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATIONS TO PARTNER WITH APPROVED HOUSING
18 COUNSELING AGENCIES PROVIDING HOUSING COUNSELING SERVICES UNDER THIS
19 SECTION.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2