START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 364 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 364 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Veterans' Cemeteries - Interment 
 
 
This bill defines “interment” and “interment location” for purposes of the interment of 
individuals in State veterans’ cemeteries. With each interment location, the Department of 
Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) must provide an outer burial receptacle or 
columbarium niche and marker (rather than a grave liner) at no cost for the veteran or the 
veteran’s eligible spouse or dependent. The bill also makes conforming changes in the 
Business Regulation, Health Occupations, and State Government articles. The terms 
“burial,” “buried,” “bury,” “graves,” and “a plot” are replaced with “interment,” “interred,” 
“inter,” “interment locations,” and “an interment location,” respectively.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  For purposes of the State Government Article (which 
governs veterans’ cemeteries), the bill defines “interment” to means all final disposition of 
human remains, including (1) earth burial and (2) niche or columbarium. “Interment 
location” means a grave plot or niche in a columbarium.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 364/ Page 2 
Under current law, the definition of “interment” under the Business Regulation Article 
means all final disposition of human or pet remains, including (1) earth burial; 
(2) mausoleum entombment; and (3) niche or columbarium interment. The word 
“interment” is changed to “inurnment” under the bill.  
 
The bill also defines “interment” under the Health Occupations Article to reflect the 
Business Regulation Article definition.  
 
Under current law, to qualify for a plot in a State veterans’ cemetery, an applicant must be 
a veteran who meets the requirements for burial at a national veterans’ cemetery or an 
eligible spouse or dependent of a veteran who meets specified requirements. In addition, if 
the applicant is a veteran, the veteran must have been a resident of the State when the 
veteran entered the U.S. Armed Forces; when the veteran died; or for two years, unless 
DVMF waives the time period. DVMF must provide a plot and a grave liner at no cost to 
the veteran, eligible spouse, or dependent. In addition, DVMF must bury the veteran, 
eligible spouse, or dependent without charge.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 46 (Senator Simonaire) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2