START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 388 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 388 
(Delegate Forbes, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore County Public Library - Collective Bargaining - Supervisory 
Employees 
 
 
This bill expands collective bargaining rights to supervisory employees of the 
Baltimore County Public Library. To that end, the bill authorizes two collective bargaining 
units at the Baltimore County Public Library – one for supervisory employees and one for 
nonsupervisory employees. The bill may not be construed to modify or terminate a 
collective bargaining agreement or a bargaining unit that was recognized or in existence 
on or before June 30, 2026. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. State revenues and expenditures are not directly affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The Baltimore County Public Library can handle payroll deductions for 
union and service fees using existing resources. Baltimore County Public Library 
expenditures may increase due to the hiring of outside mediators and increases in library 
employee salaries; however, any such increases are dependent on the outcome of collective 
bargaining and are expected to be minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 747 and 748 of 2021 allowed full- and part-time nonmanagement 
employees of the Baltimore County Public Library to form a unit for the purpose of 
collective bargaining. Under these chapters, an employee does not include a confidential 
employee, management employee, or supervisory employee, and thus prohibits those 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 388/ Page 2 
categories of employees from participating in the collective bargaining process. Current 
law does not establish a designated number of units that can be created for the purpose of 
collective bargaining.  
 
Under the current collective bargaining framework for Baltimore County Public Library 
employees, the county executive may approve, reject, or partially approve requests for 
additional funding and must submit approved requests to the county council, which can 
also approve, reject, or modify them. If any part of a request is rejected, it must be 
renegotiated within the allocated funding limits and a timetable set by the county executive. 
If an impasse occurs, both parties submit final offers, and the county executive selects a 
binding offer.  
 
Employee Categories 
 
“Employee” is defined as a full-time or part-time employee of the Baltimore County Public 
Library. It does not include a confidential employee or supervisory employee.  
 
“Management employee” is defined as an employee who generally has authority and who 
formulates policy that is applicable throughout a bargaining unit and has a significant role 
in personal administration, employee relations, or the preparation and administration of 
budgets for the employer. Further, a management employee may be required to assist in 
collective bargaining negotiations or have a major role in administering collective 
bargaining agreements.  
 
“Supervisory employee” is defined as an employee who is authorized to (1) manage hiring, 
transfers, promotions, discipline, or other employment actions; (2) direct employees for 
more than half of their working hours; or (3) handle and resolve employee grievances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 914 and HB 1071 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 253 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Maryland State Library Agency; Public 
Employee Relations Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 388/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3