START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 353

C5, L2 6lr1011

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Termination of Gas or Electric Service to Multifamily
3 Dwelling Units – Notification

4 PG 406–25

5 FOR the purpose of requiring a public service company that intends to terminate, because
6 of nonpayment, electric or gas service to a certain multifamily dwelling unit located
7 in Prince George’s County to notify certain elected officials before the termination of
8 gas or electric service under certain circumstances; and generally relating to the
9 termination of gas or electric service in Prince George’s County.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Public Utilities
12 Section 7–307.3
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Public Utilities

18 7–307.3.

19 (a) (1) A public service company that intends to terminate, because of
20 nonpayment, electric or gas service to a customer of the service to a multifamily dwelling
21 unit shall notify the property owner or property manager of the multifamily dwelling unit
22 before terminating service to the customer if the public service company has received the
23 customer’s consent that designates the property owner or property manager as a
24 third–party authorized to receive a notice of termination of services.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0353*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 353

1 (2) IF A PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY INTENDS TO TERMINATE,
2 BECAUSE OF NONPAYMENT, ELECTRIC OR GAS SERVICE TO A MULTIFAMILY
3 DWELLING UNIT LOCATED IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, THE PUBLIC SERVICE
4 COMPANY SHALL NOTIFY EACH COUNTY ELECTED OFFICIAL REPRESENTING THE
5 DISTRICT IN WHICH THE MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT IS LOCATED BEFORE
6 TERMINATING THE SERVICE TO THE CUSTOMER IF:

7 (I) THE SERVICE IS PROVIDED TO THE AFFECTED UNIT
8 THROUGH A MASTER METER OR SUBMETER; AND

9 (II) THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY HAS RECEIVED CONSENT
10 FROM THE CUSTOMER AND THE TENANT, IF ANY, OF THAT UNIT.

11 (b) As a term of a lease of a multifamily dwelling unit, the property owner or
12 property manager of the multifamily dwelling unit may require a tenant to ensure that a
13 customer of the public service company that is responsible for the account for that
14 multifamily dwelling unit provides consent for the property owner or property manager to
15 receive a notice of termination of services as a result of nonpayment by the customer.

16 (c) A customer’s consent may be provided to a public service company by:

17 (1) the customer; or

18 (2) if the consent is written, the property owner or property manager of the
19 multifamily dwelling unit.

20 (d) Each public service company shall set up a procedure for handling the
21 third–party notification process in a manner best suited to the circumstances of the
22 particular public service company.

23 (e) Nothing in this section may be construed to prevent any other form of
24 third–party notification that a customer may request.

25 (f) The Commission may adopt regulations to carry out this section.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
27 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2