START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 355

F1 6lr0874
HB 763/25 – W&M CF SB 254

By: Delegate S. Johnson
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Sexual Abuse and Assault Awareness and Prevention Program –
3 Human and Sex Trafficking

4 FOR the purpose of requiring that a certain program on the awareness and prevention of
5 sexual abuse and assault include, for students in certain grades, material promoting
6 the awareness and prevention of human and sex trafficking; and generally relating
7 to human and sex trafficking awareness and prevention programs in public and
8 nonpublic schools.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Education
11 Section 7–439
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 7–439.

18 (a) In this section, “nonpublic school” means a noncollegiate educational
19 institution that:

20 (1) Holds a certificate of approval from the State Board under § 2–206(e) of
21 this article; and

22 (2) Participates in the Nonpublic Schools Textbook and Technology Grants
23 Program.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0355*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 355

1 (b) (1) The State Board and each nonpublic school in the State shall develop
2 and implement a program of age–appropriate education on the awareness and prevention
3 of sexual abuse and assault.

4 (2) The program required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall [be]:

5 (i) [Taught] BE TAUGHT by a teacher who is trained to provide
6 instruction on the awareness and prevention of sexual abuse and assault; [and]

7 (ii) [Incorporated] BE INCORPORATED into the health curriculum
8 of each county board and each nonpublic school; AND

9 (III) INCLUDE, FOR STUDENTS IN GRADES 6 THROUGH 8,
10 MATERIAL PROMOTING THE AWARENESS AND PREVENTION OF HUMAN AND SEX
11 TRAFFICKING.

12 (c) The State Board shall adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this
13 section.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2