START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 335

N1 6lr0997
CF SB 258

By: Delegates Rosenberg, Ruff, and Stinnett
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Real Property – Dedication – Roads

3 FOR the purpose of establishing that a private road open to public travel shall be considered
4 offered for dedication to public use under certain circumstances; establishing that
5 the State, a county, or a municipality shall be considered to have accepted an offer
6 for the dedication of a private road to public use under certain circumstances; and
7 generally relating to dedication of private land to public use.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Real Property
10 Section 14–134
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Real Property

16 14–134.

17 (A) A PRIVATE ROAD SHALL BE CONSIDERED OFFERED FOR DEDICATION TO
18 PUBLIC USE IF THE ROAD HAS BEEN OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL FOR 20 YEARS OR
19 MORE.

20 (B) AN OFFER FOR THE DEDICATION OF A PRIVATE ROAD TO PUBLIC USE
21 UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE CONSIDERED ACCEPTED BY THE
22 STATE, A COUNTY, OR A MUNICIPALITY IF THE STATE, COUNTY, OR MUNICIPALITY
23 PROVIDES MAINTENANCE OF AND REPAIR TO THE PRIVATE ROAD IN THE SAME
24 MANNER AS A PUBLIC ROAD BEFORE OR FOLLOWING THE OFFER.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0335*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 335

1 (C) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY MAY NOT ENACT
2 OR ENFORCE A LOCAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR REGULATION THAT CONFLICTS WITH
3 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

4 (D) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE INTERPRETED AS
5 LIMITING OR PROHIBITING ANY ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF OFFER OR ACCEPTANCE
6 OF DEDICATION OF PRIVATE LAND TO PUBLIC USE AVAILABLE UNDER LAW.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2