START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 300 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 300 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Commerce) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Contracts - Prohibited Provisions - Exemptions 
 
 
This departmental bill exempts from the list of prohibited provisions any State contract 
entered into by the Office of International Trade (OIT) in the Department of Commerce for 
the development of international business activities and opportunities authorized under 
State law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. This bill codifies existing practice. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Commerce has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  OIT is established in State law with the goal of promoting the development 
of international business activities and opportunities in the State. The office has several 
statutory obligations and authorities, including the authority to enter into contracts and 
make grants. Procurement by the office for services to be performed or supplies to be 
delivered outside the State is not subject to State procurement law but must be consistent 
with it. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 300/ Page 2 
Chapter 433 of 2024 prohibited specified provisions from being included in State contracts. 
Except as required by State or federal law, and notwithstanding any term or condition to 
the contrary in the contract, a State contract may not contain a provision: 
 
 
that requires the State to indemnify, defend, or hold harmless another person without 
an appropriation of State funds for that purpose; 
 
by which the State agrees to binding arbitration or any other binding extrajudicial 
dispute resolution process; 
 
that names a jurisdiction or venue for any action or dispute against the State other 
than a court of proper jurisdiction in the State; 
 
that requires the State to agree to limit the liability for any direct loss to the State, 
as specified, or that would otherwise impose an indemnification obligation on the 
State; 
 
that requires the State to be bound by a term or condition that (1) is unknown to the 
State at the time of signing the contract; (2) may be unilaterally changed by the other 
party; or (3) is electronically accepted by a State employee without authority; 
 
that requires a person other than the Attorney General of Maryland to serve as legal 
counsel for the State, except as allowed under current law; 
 
that is inconsistent with the State’s Open Meetings Act or Public Information Act; 
 
that binds the State to pay unappropriated amounts or otherwise causes the State to 
incur unfunded liabilities, as specified under State law; 
 
for automatic renewal that obligates the State to allocate funding in subsequent 
fiscal years; or 
 
that limits the State’s ability to recover the cost of a replacement contractor. 
 
If a State contract contains any of these provisions, the provision is void and the contract 
containing that provision is enforceable as if it did not contain the provision. 
 
Background: OIT maintains that some of the currently prohibited provisions include items 
OIT generally needs to include in its contracts for international conventions and other 
activities. Due to the international nature of the contracts the office enters into, OIT’s 
statutory authority includes an exemption from Division II of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article, but the prohibited provisions are listed in Division I of the same 
article. As the Office does not have an exemption from the prohibited contract provisions 
added in 2024 to Division I of the article, OIT was made aware that its contracts may be 
violating State law. Adding the exemption from the prohibited provisions ensures that OIT 
can continue to operate as it has and that the prohibited provisions of Division I do not 
interfere with the office’s ability to function. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 300/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 77 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of General Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 300/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: State Contracts - Prohibited Provisions - Exemptions 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 300 
 
PREPARED BY: Matthew Kachura (410-767-6443) 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal adds contracts entered into by the Office of International Investment and 
Trade (OIIT) to the stated exemptions from State Finance and Procurement Article 2-901 
which prohibits State contracts from including certain provisions. The proposed changes 
would have no impact on small businesses. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4