START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 308 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 308 
(Delegates Qi and Hill) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Corporations and Associations - Principal Offices - Private Mailboxes 
 
 
This bill modifies the definition of a “principal office” under the Corporations and 
Associations Article by including an address supplied by a commercial mail receiving 
agency (CMRA) that a Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability 
partnership, or limited partnership has a valid commercial mail receiving agreement with, 
in accordance with, U.S. Postal Service regulations. “Commercial mail receiving agency” 
means a person that is authorized by the U.S. Postal Service to accept the delivery of mail 
on behalf of another person as a business service. If a person designates an address provided 
by a CMRA as a principal office for purposes under the Corporations and Associations 
Article, the person acknowledges that the mail receiving agency must provide the contact 
information included in USPS Form 1583 to the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) or a law enforcement agency on request. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues from filing fees increase beginning in FY 2027. It is 
assumed that SDAT can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Corporations and Associations Article, “principal office” means 
(1) the place in the State filed or recorded with SDAT as the principal office of a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 308/ Page 2 
Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or limited 
partnership, or (2) if there is no principal office designated, the main office of the 
aforementioned business entities in the State for the transaction of business. 
 
Each Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or 
limited partnership must have a principal office in the State; the address of the principal 
office must be included in the applicable incorporation documents filed with SDAT. 
According to SDAT guidelines, the principal office must be a specific street address in 
Maryland. 
 
The business entity may designate or change its principal office by filing a statement with 
SDAT signed by an authorized person of the entity; the change of principal office is 
effective when SDAT accepts the statement for record. SDAT charges a $25 fee for regular 
processing of a notice of change of address of a principal office; an additional fee applies 
for expedited processing. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues increase, at least minimally, beginning in 
fiscal 2027 to the extent that existing business entities file to change their principal office 
address to an address supplied by a CMRA and pay the required filing fees. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that SDAT has not responded to a request to 
provide information on the fiscal and operational impact of the bill. This estimate assumes 
that SDAT can make any necessary changes to forms (online and paper) and develop 
guidance regarding the use of a CMRA with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  CMRAs may benefit from additional business generated by the 
ability to supply addresses for principal offices of Maryland business entities as a result of 
the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 308/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3