START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 369

Q2 6lr1012

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Property Tax Credit – New Businesses

3 PG 407–26

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of Prince George’s County to grant, by
5 law, a certain property tax credit against the county property tax imposed on the
6 property of new businesses that add a certain number of jobs in certain industries
7 targeted for expansion; and generally relating to a property tax credit for new
8 businesses in Prince George’s County.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Tax – Property
11 Section 9–318(k)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Tax – Property

17 9–318.

18 (K) (1) TO ENCOURAGE THE LOCATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS
19 OPERATIONS AND EXPANSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT BASE IN PRINCE GEORGE’S
20 COUNTY, THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY GRANT, BY
21 LAW, A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE COUNTY PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON
22 ANY PROPERTY OWNED OR LEASED BY A NEW BUSINESS THAT CREATES 10 OR MORE
23 FULL–TIME JOBS IN AN INDUSTRY TARGETED FOR EXPANSION BY THE PRINCE
24 GEORGE’S COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0369*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 369

1 (2) A TAX CREDIT GRANTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE
2 GRANTED FOR MORE THAN 10 YEARS.

3 (3) THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY
4 ESTABLISH, BY LAW:

5 (I) THE AMOUNT OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

6 (II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
7 DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT;

8 (III) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE TAX CREDIT;

9 (IV) REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION
10 AND UNIFORM PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE TAX CREDIT; AND

11 (V) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE TAX
12 CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
14 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2