START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 350 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 350 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Voting Rights Act of 2026 - Counties and Municipal Corporations 
 
 
This emergency bill (1) establishes a specified prohibition against the impairment of the 
ability of members of a protected class (members of a race, color, or language minority 
group or a class or two or more of those groups) to elect candidates of their choice in 
elections in a county or municipality, or to influence the outcome of such elections; 
(2) authorizes the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) or any other person to bring an 
action to enforce the prohibition in the county or municipality where the alleged violation 
occurred; (3) gives the court specified authority to order remedies and grant preliminary 
relief; and (4) includes factors, considerations, and criteria related to the establishment of 
a violation of the prohibition and determination of an appropriate remedy. The bill does 
not apply to statewide elections. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase, to the extent OAG undertakes 
enforcement efforts pursuant to the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 350/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Prohibition 
 
The bill prohibits the imposition or application of a method for electing the governing body 
of a county or municipality in a manner that impairs the ability of members of a protected 
class to elect candidates of the members’ choice, or the members’ ability to influence the 
outcome of an election, as a result of the dilution or the abridgement of the rights of voters 
who are members of a protected class. 
 
A violation of the prohibition is established if (1) elections in a county or municipality 
exhibit polarized voting and (2) the method of election dilutes or abridges the voting 
strength of members of a protected class to elect a candidate of the members’ choice or the 
members’ ability to influence the outcome of an election, as demonstrated by the existence 
of one or more methods of election that could be constitutionally adopted that would likely 
mitigate the dilution. 
 
“Protected Class” and “Polarized Voting” 
 
“Protected class” means a class of voters who are members of a race, color, or language 
minority group or a class of two or more of those groups. “Polarized voting” means voting 
in which there is a difference in the choice of candidates or other electoral choices that are 
preferred by voters in a protected class and in the choice of candidates and electoral choices 
that are preferred by another class or set of classes. 
 
Enforcement Action May be Brought by the Attorney General or Any Other Person 
 
The bill authorizes OAG and any other person to bring an action to enforce the prohibition 
in the county where the violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other 
relief. 
 
The bill authorizes the court to award reasonable attorney’s fees and litigation costs in an 
action to enforce the bill’s prohibition, including expert witness fees and expenses to a 
prevailing private plaintiff (that receives some or all of the relief sought as a result of the 
action). 
 
Court‑ordered Remedies 
 
If a court finds a violation of the bill’s prohibition, the court has broad authority to order 
appropriate remedies that are tailored to address the violation. However, a court may not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 350/ Page 3 
order the adoption of a method of election that is inconsistent with the methods of election 
in use in counties in the State without consent of the relevant jurisdiction. The court must 
consider remedies proposed by any parties to the action or interested parties and may not 
give deference or priority to a proposed remedy because it is proposed by a county or 
municipality.  
 
Court May Grant Preliminary Relief 
 
A court may grant preliminary relief requested regarding an upcoming election if the court 
determines (1) that the party is more likely than not to succeed on the merits and (2) it is 
possible to implement an appropriate remedy that would resolve the alleged violation 
before the election. 
 
Relevant Factors, Considerations, and Criteria 
 
The bill establishes additional factors, considerations, and criteria relevant to establishing 
a violation of the prohibition, establishing whether elections in a county or municipality 
exhibit polarized voting, and determining an appropriate remedy. See §§ 15.7-104 and 
15.7-105 of the bill. 
 
Severability of the Bill’s Provisions 
 
The bill’s provisions are declared severable so that a court holding that affects the 
application of a provision of the bill does not affect other provisions or any other 
application of the bill that can be given effect without the affected provision or application. 
 
Current Law:  Under Section 2 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, no voting 
qualification or prerequisite to voting or standard, practice, or procedure may be imposed 
or applied by any State or political subdivision in a manner that results in a denial or 
abridgement of the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or 
color, or status as a member of a language minority group. A violation of that prohibition 
is established if, based on the totality of circumstances, it is shown that the political 
processes leading to nomination or election in the State or political subdivision are not 
equally open to participation by members of a class of citizens protected by the prohibition 
in that its members have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate 
in the political process and to elect representatives of their choice. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase, to the extent OAG 
undertakes enforcement efforts pursuant to the bill. OAG advises that it requires one 
Assistant Attorney General (AAG) and funding to pay expert witness fees to pursue 
enforcement actions under the bill, resulting in general fund expenditures of $242,704 in 
fiscal 2027, if the AAG starts in July 2026, with ongoing costs in future years. The 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 350/ Page 4 
Department of Legislative Services advises, however, that it is unclear how enforcement 
of the bill will be balanced between private plaintiffs and OAG, and consequently what 
level of involvement OAG will have in enforcing the bill. It is also unclear how many local 
governments will be in violation of the bill’s prohibition. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 342 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 255 (Senator Sydnor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford County; cities of Frederick and 
Havre de Grace; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4