START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 330

D1, O1 6lr1975
CF SB 252

By: Delegate Kaufman
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Legal Services Corporation – Board of Directors – Membership

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the number of members on the Board of Directors of the
4 Maryland Legal Services Corporation; and generally relating to the Maryland Legal
5 Services Corporation.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Human Services
8 Section 11–101(a) through (c)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Human Services
13 Section 11–301
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Human Services

19 11–101.

20 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (b) “Board” means the Board of Directors of the Maryland Legal Services
22 Corporation.

23 (c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Legal Services Corporation.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0330*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 330

1 11–301.

2 (a) There is a Board of Directors of the Corporation.

3 (b) (1) The Board consists of:

4 (i) [nine] 12 voting members appointed by the Governor with the
5 advice and consent of the Senate; and

6 (ii) the executive director, who is a nonvoting ex officio member.

7 (2) Voting members shall be residents of the State and shall represent the
8 different geographical regions of the State.

9 (3) [Five] SEVEN voting members shall be lawyers admitted to the Bar in
10 the State and [four] FIVE voting members shall be nonlawyers.

11 (c) A voting member of the Board is not an officer or employee of the State.

12 (d) (1) The term of office of a voting member is 3 years.

13 (2) At the end of a term a voting member continues to serve until a
14 successor is appointed and qualifies.

15 (3) The terms of voting members are staggered as required by the terms
16 provided for members of the Board on October 1, 2007.

17 (4) If a vacancy occurs during the term of a voting member, the Governor
18 shall fill the vacancy.

19 (5) A voting member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only
20 for the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

21 (6) A voting member may not be reappointed for more than 2 consecutive
22 terms immediately following the member’s initial term.

23 (e) (1) A voting member may be removed by a vote of [seven] NINE members.

24 (2) A voting member may only be removed for:

25 (i) malfeasance in office;

26 (ii) persistent neglect of or inability to discharge duties; or

27 (iii) offenses involving moral turpitude.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 330 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3