START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 308

C1 6lr1712

By: Delegates Qi and Hill
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Corporations and Associations – Principal Offices – Private Mailboxes

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing an address supplied by a commercial mail receiving agency
4 to be designated as the principal office of a Maryland corporation, limited liability
5 company, limited liability partnership, or limited partnership, under certain
6 circumstances; providing for the disclosure of certain contact information by a
7 commercial mail receiving agency; and generally relating to the principal offices of
8 corporate entities.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Corporations and Associations
11 Section 1–101(a)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Corporations and Associations
16 Section 1–101(w)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2025 Replacement Volume)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – Corporations and Associations
21 Section 1–407
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2025 Replacement Volume)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Corporations and Associations

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0308*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 308

1 1–101.

2 (a) In this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following
3 words have the meanings indicated.

4 (w) “Principal office” means:

5 (1) The place in this State filed or recorded with the Department as the
6 principal office of a Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability
7 partnership, or limited partnership; [or]

8 (2) SUBJECT TO § 1–407 OF THIS TITLE, AN ADDRESS SUPPLIED BY A
9 COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCY WITH WHICH A MARYLAND CORPORATION,
10 LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP, OR LIMITED
11 PARTNERSHIP HAS A VALID COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGREEMENT IN
12 ACCORDANCE WITH U.S. POSTAL SERVICE REGULATIONS; OR

13 (3) If there is no principal office designated UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS
14 SUBSECTION OR ADDRESS SUPPLIED UNDER ITEM (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, the main
15 office of the Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
16 or limited partnership in this State for the transaction of business.

17 1–407.

18 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “COMMERCIAL MAIL RECEIVING AGENCY” MEANS A
19 PERSON THAT IS AUTHORIZED BY THE U.S. POSTAL SERVICE TO ACCEPT THE
20 DELIVERY OF MAIL ON BEHALF OF ANOTHER PERSON AS A BUSINESS SERVICE.

21 (B) IF A PERSON DESIGNATES AN ADDRESS PROVIDED BY A COMMERCIAL
22 MAIL RECEIVING AGENCY AS A PRINCIPAL OFFICE FOR PURPOSES OF THIS ARTICLE,
23 THE PERSON ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE MAIL RECEIVING AGENCY SHALL PROVIDE
24 THE CONTACT INFORMATION INCLUDED IN USPS FORM 1583 TO THE DEPARTMENT
25 OR A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY ON REQUEST.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
27 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2