START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 334

P2 6lr2066

By: Delegates Ruth, Charkoudian, Addison, Forbes, Hill, Kaufman, Lehman,
Lewis, Martinez, Moreno, Pasteur, Stein, Taveras, Terrasa, and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Procurement – Constitutional Violations – Prohibited

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a procurement officer to require a certain certification from
4 a bidder or offeror and to include a certain clause in a State procurement contract
5 relating to unconstitutional activity; and generally relating to constitutional
6 violations and State procurement.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – State Finance and Procurement
9 Section 13–212.2 and 13–230
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – State Finance and Procurement

15 13–212.2.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “AFFILIATE” MEANS AN ENTITY WITH A CORPORATE OR LEGAL
19 RELATIONSHIP WITH THE BIDDER OR OFFEROR, INCLUDING:

20 (I) SHARED OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL; OR

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0334*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 334

1 (II) AN ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP OR PARTNERSHIP,
2 INCLUDING MARKETING OR PROMOTION.

3 (3) “BIDDER OR OFFEROR” INCLUDES:

4 (I) ANY DIVISION OF THE BIDDER OR OFFEROR, EVEN IF IT IS
5 UNRELATED TO THE PROCUREMENT ACTIVITY; AND

6 (II) AN AFFILIATE OF THE BIDDER OR OFFEROR.

7 (B) A PROCUREMENT OFFICER SHALL REQUIRE A BIDDER OR OFFEROR, AS
8 A CONDITION TO SUBMITTING A BID OR PROPOSAL ON A STATE PROCUREMENT, TO
9 CERTIFY THAT THE BIDDER OR OFFEROR:

10 (1) IS NOT ENGAGING IN ANY ACTIONS THAT VIOLATE THE U.S.
11 CONSTITUTION OR THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION; AND

12 (2) WILL REFRAIN FROM ENGAGING IN ANY ACTIONS THAT VIOLATE
13 THE U.S. CONSTITUTION OR THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION FOR THE DURATION
14 OF THE CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS.

15 13–230.

16 A PROCUREMENT OFFICER SHALL INCLUDE IN A STATE PROCUREMENT
17 CONTRACT A CLAUSE REQUIRING THE CONTRACTOR TO CERTIFY THAT THE
18 CONTRACTOR:

19 (1) IS NOT ENGAGING IN ANY ACTIONS THAT VIOLATE THE U.S.
20 CONSTITUTION OR THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION; AND

21 (2) WILL REFRAIN FROM ENGAGING IN ANY ACTIONS THAT VIOLATE
22 THE U.S. CONSTITUTION OR THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION FOR THE DURATION
23 OF THE CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
25 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2