START OF PAGE 1
HB 327/ Page 1 
  HB 327 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 327 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Education - Board of Community College Trustees for Baltimore County - 
Membership 
 
 
This bill reduces the Baltimore County Board of Community College Trustees by  
four members by eliminating five councilmanic district seats and adding one at-large seat. 
As a result, the bill aligns district-based trustee representation (reduced to one member per 
district under the bill) with the County Council’s nine-district structure in effect for the 
2026 election cycle. The bill also accommodates the smaller board by (1) specifying the 
trustees whose terms must expire or who must shift to a new district and (2) staggering the 
terms of newly appointed trustees. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects the Community College of Baltimore County. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal decrease in reimbursement expenditures for Board of Community 
College trustee members beginning FY 2027 as a result of the smaller board. Local 
revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Board of Community College Trustees for Baltimore County consists 
of 15 members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. Of 
the members, 1 serves at large and 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in 
Baltimore County, 2 from each district. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
State law generally establishes that community college boards have seven members serving 
staggered six-year terms, with several specified exceptions. Therefore, there are variations 
in the number and terms of board members. Appendix 1 shows characteristics of the 
various boards. With one exception, the boards are appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. For Chesapeake College, the board is 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland House of 
Delegates. 
 
Currently, the Baltimore County Council comprises seven members each elected from one 
of seven councilmanic districts. For the 2026 and 2030 councilmanic elections, the council 
adopted a new map that includes nine councilmanic districts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 306 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB 327/ Page 3 
 
Appendix 1 
Selected Community College Board Member Requirements 
 
Community College 
Number of Members 
Board Terms (Years) 
Term Limits 
Residency Requirements 
Allegany 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Anne Arundel 
101 
4 
32 
Yes3 
Baltimore City 
91 
6 
24 
Some5 
Baltimore 
15 
5 
24 
See Note6 
Carroll 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Cecil 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Chesapeake 
10 
5 
3 
Yes7 
Frederick 
7 
5 
3 
Yes8 
Garrett 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Hagerstown 
7 
6 
No Limit 
Yes9 
Harford 
9 
5 
24 
Yes10 
Howard 
9 
6 
No Limit 
Some11 
Montgomery 
101,12 
6 
No Limit 
Some13 
Prince George’s 
91 
5 
24 
Yes14 
Southern Maryland 
9 
5 
24 
Yes15 
Wor-Wic 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
 
1The board includes a student member serving a one-year term. The student body elects the student board member in Prince George’s County. 
2Consecutive full terms. 
3All members must be a resident of Anne Arundel County. 
4Consecutive terms. 
5All members must be a resident of the State. The majority must be residents of Baltimore City. 
6Of the members, 1 serves at large and the other 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in Baltimore County, 2 from each district. 
7Two members from each county that supports Chesapeake College (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot). 
8All seven members must be a resident of Frederick County. 
9All members must be a resident of Washington County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Washington County throughout their term of appointment. 
10All members must be a resident of Harford County for the duration of their term. 
11Of the nine members, at least eight must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Howard County throughout the term of appointment. 
12A local nominating committee must submit to the Governor the names of two to four candidates per vacancy, from which the Governor must appoint a new member. 
13The student member must be a resident of the county. 
14All members must be a resident of Prince George’s County. 
15Members must be a resident of the State. Each of the southern Maryland counties must be represented by at least three members who are residents of the county. 
 
Source:  Annotated Code of Maryland 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3