START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 378

Q3 6lr1083
HB 404/25 – W&M

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Income Tax Credit for Parent and Guardian
3 Volunteers in Elementary and Secondary Schools

4 PG 420–26

5 FOR the purpose of allowing certain eligible taxpayers who volunteer in certain schools in
6 Prince George’s County a credit against the State income tax; requiring the State
7 Department of Education, in consultation with the Comptroller, to develop and make
8 available a certain application and tax credit certificate; requiring a certain county
9 board member or school administrator to issue tax credit certificates in a certain
10 manner; making the credit refundable under certain circumstances; and generally
11 relating to a credit against the State income tax for volunteering in certain schools
12 in Prince George’s County.

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Tax – General
15 Section 10–758
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Tax – General

21 10–758.

22 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
23 INDICATED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0378*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 378

1 (2) “COUNTY BOARD” MEANS THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
2 BOARD OF EDUCATION.

3 (3) “ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

4 (I) 1. IS THE PARENT OF A SCHOOL STUDENT; OR

5 2. HAS LEGAL CUSTODY OF A SCHOOL STUDENT AS A
6 LEGAL GUARDIAN; AND

7 (II) VOLUNTEERS AT THE SCHOOL IN WHICH THE STUDENT IS
8 ENROLLED.

9 (4) “SCHOOL” MEANS A PUBLIC OR NONPUBLIC ELEMENTARY OR
10 SECONDARY SCHOOL IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, INCLUDING A CHARTER
11 SCHOOL.

12 (B) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS OF THIS SECTION, EACH ELIGIBLE
13 TAXPAYER, REGARDLESS OF INDIVIDUAL OR JOINT FILING STATUS, MAY CLAIM A
14 CREDIT AGAINST THE STATE INCOME TAX IN THE AMOUNT STATED ON A TAX CREDIT
15 CERTIFICATE ISSUED TO THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER DURING THE TAXABLE YEAR IN
16 ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

17 (C) (1) THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION SHALL, IN
18 CONSULTATION WITH THE COMPTROLLER, DEVELOP AND MAKE AVAILABLE AN
19 APPLICATION AND A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE TO BE USED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
20 PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

21 (2) AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER SHALL SUBMIT AN APPLICATION FOR A
22 CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION:

23 (I) IF THE STUDENT IS ENROLLED IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL, TO THE
24 COUNTY BOARD MEMBER WHO REPRESENTS THE SCHOOL; OR

25 (II) IF THE STUDENT IS ENROLLED IN A NONPUBLIC SCHOOL, TO
26 AN ADMINISTRATOR OF THE SCHOOL.

27 (3) (I) ON APPLICATION BY AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER UNDER
28 PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A COUNTY BOARD MEMBER OR SCHOOL
29 ADMINISTRATOR SHALL ISSUE A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO
30 $20 FOR EACH HOUR THAT THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER VOLUNTEERS AT THE SCHOOL
31 IN WHICH THE STUDENT IS ENROLLED.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 378 3

1 (II) FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR:

2 1. AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER MAY APPLY FOR AND
3 RECEIVE MORE THAN ONE TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
4 ANOTHER ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER HAS RECEIVED A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE FOR THE
5 SAME STUDENT; AND

6 2. THE AGGREGATE AMOUNT OF THE TAX CREDIT THAT
7 EACH ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER MAY CLAIM MAY NOT EXCEED $500.

8 (4) THE COUNTY BOARD MEMBER OR SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR
9 ISSUING A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL KEEP A RECORD
10 OF THE NUMBER OF VOLUNTEER HOURS ACCRUED BY EACH ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER
11 THAT RECEIVES A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE.

12 (D) IF THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR
13 EXCEEDS THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THAT TAXABLE YEAR, THE ELIGIBLE
14 TAXPAYER MAY CLAIM A REFUND IN THE AMOUNT OF THE EXCESS.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
16 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 3