START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 394

L1 6lr2436
HB 811/25 – ENT & W&M CF SB 158

By: Delegates Terrasa, Boyce, Feldmark, D. Jones, Kaufman, Lehman, Taveras,
and White Holland
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections and Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Counties – Construction of Sidewalks and Crosswalks – Safe Alternative Routes
3 to Public Schools

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a county board of education each year to prepare and post in
5 a certain manner a report that identifies pathways that public school students may
6 use to travel to school using only safe alternative routes under certain circumstances;
7 requiring the governing body of a county each year to review a certain report and
8 construct any sidewalks and crosswalks necessary to create safe alternative routes
9 for public school students under certain circumstances; requiring the governing body
10 of a county to develop a certain plan with a certain governmental entity or person
11 and make certain efforts to execute the plan under certain circumstances; and
12 generally relating to safe alternative routes to public schools.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 7–801(b)(1)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Education
20 Section 7–801(e)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Local Government
25 Section 12–506.1
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0394*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 394

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 7–801.

5 (b) (1) At its own expense, a county governing body may provide
6 transportation for public school students in addition to the transportation provided by the
7 State.

8 (E) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “SAFE ALTERNATIVE ROUTE” INCLUDES:

9 (I) A ROAD WITH SIDEWALKS AND, AT INTERSECTIONS,
10 CROSSWALKS;

11 (II) A FOOT PATH; AND

12 (III) A BIKE PATH.

13 (2) EACH YEAR, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL PREPARE A REPORT THAT
14 IDENTIFIES:

15 (I) FOR EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY, THOSE AREAS
16 OF THE COUNTY WHERE A STUDENT WHO IS REGULARLY ASSIGNED TO THE SCHOOL
17 WOULD BE INELIGIBLE FOR TRANSPORTATION SERVICES BASED ON THE DISTANCE
18 BETWEEN A RESIDENCE AND THE SCHOOL; AND

19 (II) PATHWAYS THAT A STUDENT RESIDING IN AN AREA
20 IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY USE TO TRAVEL BETWEEN
21 THE STUDENT’S RESIDENCE AND REGULARLY ASSIGNED SCHOOL USING ONLY A
22 SAFE ALTERNATIVE ROUTE OR A CONTIGUOUS SERIES OF SAFE ALTERNATIVE
23 ROUTES.

24 (3) THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL POST TO THE COUNTY’S WEBSITE
25 EACH REPORT PREPARED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

26 Article – Local Government

27 12–506.1.

28 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “SAFE ALTERNATIVE ROUTE” HAS THE MEANING
29 STATED IN § 7–801 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 394 3

1 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO ALL COUNTIES.

2 (C) EACH YEAR, THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY SHALL:

3 (1) REVIEW THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER § 7–801(E)(2) OF THE
4 EDUCATION ARTICLE; AND

5 (2) CONSTRUCT ANY SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS NECESSARY TO
6 CREATE SAFE ALTERNATIVE ROUTES FOR STUDENTS AS IDENTIFIED IN THE REPORT.

7 (D) IF THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY MUST ALTER A ROAD THAT IS
8 NOT SUBJECT TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE COUNTY IN ORDER TO MEET THE
9 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION, THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL:

10 (1) DEVELOP A PLAN WITH THE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OR PERSON
11 THAT HAS CONTROL OF THE ROAD; AND

12 (2) MAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS TO EXECUTE THE PLAN IN AN
13 EXPEDITIOUS MANNER.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3