START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 320 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 320 
(Delegate Behler, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Property Tax Credit - Rural Legacy Program 
 
 
This bill authorizes Anne Arundel County to grant, by law, a property tax credit for real 
property that is located in a specified Rural Legacy Area and for which the property owner 
has sold the development rights under the Rural Legacy Program. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County property tax revenues decrease by approximately 
$27,800 annually beginning in FY 2027 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
County expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Anne Arundel County is authorized to grant a property tax credit for real 
property that is subject to the State’s or county’s agricultural land preservation program. 
 
The Department of Natural Resources indicates that one Rural Legacy Area is located in 
Anne Arundel County, consisting of 37,381 acres. This area completes a greenway of 
farmland from the Patuxent River to the Rhode River on the Chesapeake Bay and contains 
extensive tidal and forested wetlands. Four watersheds are located within the area, 
including the West River, Herring Bay, the Rhode River, and the Patuxent River. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 320/ Page 2 
To date, the Board of Public Works has approved over $12 million in Rural Legacy 
Program grants to Anne Arundel County to purchase 17 conservation easements totaling 
over 1,800 acres across 21 properties. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
(SDAT) indicates that perpetual conservation easements under the Rural Legacy Program 
receive a $500 per acre conservation use assessment.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  There are currently 21 properties in Anne Arundel County that have 
Rural Legacy conservation easements. These properties already receive the agricultural use 
assessment from SDAT, resulting in a lower property assessment. Anne Arundel County 
currently provides a property tax credit to agricultural landowners that have similar 
conservation easements under the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation 
(MALPF) Program and the County Agricultural and Woodland Preservation Program. 
 
When comparing the 2025 real property tax bill for properties in the MALPF program (that 
receive the existing tax credit) and the Rural Legacy Program (that do not receive the tax 
credit), on average the Rural Legacy property owners pay approximately $1,325 more in 
real property taxes annually.  
 
Based on the current number of properties with a Rural Legacy conservation easement (21) 
and the county real property tax rate in fiscal 2026 ($0.9770 per $100 of assessment),  
Anne Arundel County property tax revenues could decrease by $27,825 annually beginning 
in fiscal 2027, to the extent the property tax credit is granted. To the extent additional 
easements are purchased in the Anne Arundel County Rural Legacy Area, county property 
tax revenues will decrease accordingly. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Anne Arundel County 
 
Anne Arundel County is projected to collect approximately $1.0 billion in property tax 
revenues in fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the 
report is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Natural Resources; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 320/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3