START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 369 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 369 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Prince George's County - Property Tax Credit - New Businesses  
PG 407-26 
 
 
This bill authorizes Prince George’s County to grant, by law, a property tax credit against 
the county property tax imposed on any property owned or leased by a new business that 
creates 10 or more full-time jobs in an industry targeted for expansion by the 
Prince George’s County Economic Development Corporation. The property tax credit may 
not be granted for more than ten years. Prince George’s County may establish, by law:  
(1) the amount of the tax credit; (2) the duration of the tax credit; (3) additional eligibility 
criteria for the tax credit; (4) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform 
processing of requests for the tax credit; and (5) any other provision necessary to carry out 
the tax credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
FY 2027 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Businesses qualifying for the property tax 
credit will pay less in county property taxes. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Tax credit programs mandated by law may be applicable only to specific 
counties or municipalities. These credits can be found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 369/ Page 2 
Tax – Property Article. In addition to statewide optional tax credits, some optional credits 
are applicable only to a specified county or municipality within a specified county. These 
county specific optional credits are found in Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Tax – Property Article. 
Exhibit 
1 
shows 
the 
mandatory 
and 
optional 
property 
tax 
credits 
in 
Prince George’s County. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Prince George’s County Property Tax Credits 
 
9-318 
Optional Tax Credits 
(b)(1)(i) 
Nonprofit community civic association or corporation 
(b)(1)(ii) 
Piscataway Hills Citizens Association 
(b)(1)(iii) 
Real property improvements to promote housing, community 
redevelopment, and business revitalization 
(b)(1)(iv) 
On site childcare facility 
(b)(1)(v) 
American Center for Physics 
(b)(1)(vi) 
Real property adversely impacted by refuse disposal system 
(b)(1)(vii) 
Kettering-Largo-Mitchellville Boys and Girls Club 
(b)(1)(viii) 
Agricultural land subject to land preservation programs 
(c)(1) 
Chapel Hill Citizens’ Association 
(c)(2) 
Clinton Boys and Girls Club 
(c)(3) 
East Pines Citizens’ Association 
(c)(4) 
Lions Club of Bowie 
(c)(5) 
Prince George’s Jaycees 
(c)(6) 
Suitland Civic Association 
(c)(7) 
Prince George’s County Parks and Recreation Foundation 
(c)(8) 
Freestate Riding Club 
(c)(9) 
boys and girls club chartered by Prince George’s County 
Boys and Girls Club, Inc. 
(c)(10) 
Lake Arbor Foundation 
(c)(11) 
George Washington House 
(c)(12) 
Crescent Cities Charities 
(c)(13) 
Nonprofit community development corporation at 
Maryland Route 202 and St. Joseph’s Drive 
(d)  
Residential property in neighborhood preservation and 
stabilization area (expired) 
(f) 
Certified green business property 
(g) 
Property located in specified municipal revitalization districts 
(h) 
Commercial property equipped with a security camera 
(i) 
Personal property tax credit for specified grocery store property 
(j) 
Dwelling of eligible school employees 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 369/ Page 3 
9-318 
Mandatory Tax Credits 
(a)(1) 
Maryland Jaycees 
(a)(2) 
Prince George’s County Chamber of Commerce Foundation 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County property tax revenues may decrease 
beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the 
revenue decrease depends on the number of property tax credits that are granted, the 
assessed value of each eligible property, and the amount and duration of the property tax 
credit, none of which can be reliably estimated. 
 
Property Tax Collections in Prince George’s County 
 
Prince George’s County is projected to collect approximately $1.7 billion in property tax 
revenues in fiscal 2026, as shown in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the 
report is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3