START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 380 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 380 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health 
 
 
State Board of Examiners in Optometry - Examination Requirements and Time 
Period for Inactive Status 
 
 
This bill clarifies examination requirements for licensure and reinstatement under the  
State Board of Examiners in Optometry by specifying that an applicant for licensure or 
reinstatement must pass all sections of each part of an examination and the board must 
determine the passing scores for all sections of each part of an examination. The board is 
prohibited from placing a licensee on inactive status for more than six consecutive years. 
The bill also repeals the requirement that the board give examinations to applicants not 
more than once every six months and notify applicants of the time and place of the 
examination and that an applicant pay a reexamination fee to retake the licensure exam. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change board activities or operations. Board 
special fund expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Examiners in Optometry is responsible for licensing 
individuals to practice optometry in the State, regulating the practice of optometry, 
investigating alleged violations of the Maryland Optometry Act, and taking disciplinary 
actions where warranted. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 380/ Page 2 
In general, to qualify for a license, an applicant must be of good moral character, be at least 
18 years old, meet certain educational criteria, and pass an examination given by the board. 
Licenses may be renewed upon expiration for a term no longer than two years provided the 
licensee is otherwise entitled to be licensed, pays the renewal fee, and submits a renewal 
application including satisfactory evidence of compliance with continuing education 
requirements as specified. 
 
The board must give examinations to applicants periodically – though not more often than 
every six months – and must notify qualified applicants of the time and date of the 
examination. The board must determine the scope, form, subjects, and passing score for 
the exam, though the subjects must include (1) the anatomy, pathology, and physiology of 
the human eye, and (2) the use of all instruments used for examining the human eye. An 
applicant who fails the examination may take it the next time the exam is scheduled so long 
as they pay a reexamination fee to the board. 
 
Inactive Status 
 
If a licensee submits to the board an application for inactive status and the inactive status 
fee, the board must place the licensee on inactive status. If the licensee on inactive status 
pays a reinstatement fee and meets any continuing education requirements set by the board, 
the board must issue the licensee an active license. 
 
If a license has been expired for five years or more and the licensee has not been placed on 
inactive status, the board may not reinstate that license unless the optometrist (1) passes 
the examination administered by the board, (2) meets the continuing education 
requirements set by the board, (3) meets the renewal requirements, and (4) pays the 
reinstatement fee. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although statute refers to “an examination given by the board,” 
in practice, an applicant must pass Parts I, II, and III of the National Board of Examiners 
in Optometry (NBEO) exams, which are given at Pearson testing centers. Applicants must 
also register with NBEO to take the Maryland Online State Law Exam. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 186 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 380/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3