START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 336 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 336 
(Delegate Addison, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure – District Court Commissioners and False Statements 
 
 
This bill prohibits a District Court commissioner from issuing an arrest warrant to an 
individual other than a police officer or a State’s Attorney. The bill also increases the 
incarceration penalty for making a false statement to a public official under § 9-503 of the 
Criminal Law Article from imprisonment for up to six months to imprisonment for up to 
three years; the bill retains the $500 maximum fine for that offense. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill may have an operational effect on the courts, as discussed below. 
Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Any potential operational effects, as discussed below, are anticipated to be 
minimal and not materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Charging Documents and Warrants 
 
The issuance of a charging document, regardless of whether an individual is arrested, 
formally initiates the criminal process. The charging document is a written accusation 
alleging that the defendant has committed a crime. A charging document may be in the 
form of a citation, a statement of charges, an information, or an indictment. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 336/ Page 2 
A judicial officer may file a statement of charges with the District Court based on an 
application by a law enforcement officer or any other individual. The application contains 
an affidavit required to demonstrate probable cause that the defendant committed the crime 
charged. Although the judicial officer may be a judge, it is more likely that the officer is a 
District Court commissioner. District Court commissioners are available 24 hours per day 
for judicial duties. The judicial officer has the authority to determine whether the 
application establishes probable cause, and, on such a finding, issues a summons or an 
arrest warrant. 
 
However, a District Court commissioner may issue an arrest warrant only if the 
commissioner finds that there is probable cause to believe that the defendant committed 
the offense charged in the charging document and (1) the defendant previously failed to 
respond to a summons that has been personally served or a citation; (2) the defendant’s 
whereabouts are unknown and the issuance of a warrant is necessary to subject the 
defendant to the court’s jurisdiction; (3) the defendant is in custody for another offense; or 
(4) there is probable cause to believe that the defendant poses a danger to another person 
or to the community. On a finding of good cause, a District Court or circuit court judge 
may recall an arrest warrant issued by a District Court commissioner and issue a summons 
in its place. 
 
A summons notifies the defendant of the time and place to appear in court for a preliminary 
hearing. It may be served on the defendant by mail or in person. 
 
Section 9-503 (False Statements – To Public Official Concerning Crime or Hazard) 
 
A person may not make or cause to be made a statement or report that the person knows to 
be false as a whole or in material part to an official or unit of government, as specified, 
concerning the commission of a crime or the existence of a condition that is imminently 
dangerous to public safety or health, with the intent that the official or unit investigate, 
consider, or act upon the statement or report. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, 
punishable by imprisonment for up to six months and/or a $500 maximum fine. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Exhibit 1 contains statistics on the number of applications for 
statement of charges and arrest warrants issued by District Court commissioners in 
fiscal 2024 and 2025. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 336/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
District Court Commissioners 
Applications for Statements of Charges and Arrest Warrants 
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Total Number of Applications for 
Statement of Charges Received 
by District Court Commissioners 
54,864 
53,300 
Nonpolice Applications for 
Statement of Charges Received 
by District Court Commissioners 
19,853 
18,394 
Total Number of Arrest Warrants 
Issued by District Court 
Commissioners (to everyone) 
25,752 
25,473 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
According to the Judiciary, law enforcement or other organizations often refer individuals 
to District Court commissioners to file an application for charges when an officer has not 
witnessed an alleged event. Individuals are also often referred to commissioners to obtain 
peace or protective orders (when the courts are closed) with very little involvement by law 
enforcement, if any. Commissioners sometimes issue warrants if they identify applicable 
charges through an application for a peace or protective order. 
 
The bill prohibits a commissioner from issuing an arrest warrant if an ordinary citizen files 
an application for a statement of charges, instead authorizing only the issuance of a 
summons. The Judiciary advises that if a summons is issued, it may or may not be served 
expeditiously, does not ensure presentment of the defendant to the court, and provides no 
protections for victims/complainants. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill may alter filing practices for local law enforcement and 
State’s Attorneys’ offices. As noted above, these entities often refer individuals to a 
commissioner to file an application for a statement of charges on their own. Under the bill, 
these entities may need to file these applications in certain cases. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 336/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 21 of 2025 and HB 1183 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4