START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 374

J2 6lr2334
CF 6lr2026

By: Delegate White Holland
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Acupuncture Board – Revisions

3 FOR the purpose of defining “manual therapies” as it relates to the practice of acupuncture;
4 requiring the State Acupuncture Board to make available proof of renewal, rather
5 than issuing a renewal certificate; prohibiting a person from employing an individual
6 to practice acupuncture without a license or aiding or abetting the unauthorized
7 practice of acupuncture; and generally relating to the practice of acupuncture.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Health Occupations
10 Section 1A–101, 1A–302(b), 1A–306(e), and 1A–403
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Health Occupations
15 Section 1A–403
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Health Occupations

21 1A–101.

22 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0374*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 374

1 (b) “Acupuncture” means a form of health care based on East Asian medical
2 theories of energetic physiology that describe the interrelationship of the body organs and
3 functions.

4 (c) “Auricular detoxification” means an acupuncture technique involving the
5 needling of the external auricle of the human ear for the purpose of assisting a person who
6 is undergoing detoxification to remove addictive substances from the body and restoring
7 health.

8 (d) “Board” means the State Acupuncture Board.

9 (e) “License” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a license issued by the
10 Board to practice acupuncture.

11 (F) (1) “MANUAL THERAPIES” MEANS TREATMENT MODALITIES THAT
12 APPLY PRESSURE OR MANIPULATION USING HANDS OR ANOTHER PART OF THE
13 BODY ALONG POINTS OR MERIDIANS THAT NORMALIZE ELECTROMAGNETIC OR
14 ENERGETIC FUNCTION.

15 (2) “MANUAL THERAPIES” INCLUDE ACUPRESSURE OR OTHER
16 PRESSURE TREATMENT TECHNIQUES BASED ON EAST ASIAN MEDICAL THERAPIES.

17 [(f)] (G) (1) “Practice acupuncture” means the use of East Asian medical
18 therapies for the purpose of normalizing energetic physiological functions including pain
19 control, and for the promotion, maintenance, and restoration of health.

20 (2) “Practice acupuncture” includes:

21 (i) Stimulation of the body by the insertion of needles;

22 (ii) The application of moxibustion; and

23 (iii) Manual THERAPIES, mechanical THERAPIES, thermal
24 THERAPIES, electrical THERAPIES, or other East Asian medical therapies only when
25 performed in accordance with the principles of East Asian medical theories and practices.

26 [(g)] (H) “Supervision” means:

27 (1) A formalized professional relationship between a licensed
28 acupuncturist and an individual performing auricular detoxification that provides
29 evaluation and direction of the individual to adequately ensure the safety and welfare of
30 clients during the course of treatment; and

31 (2) As defined by the Board in regulations:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 374 3

1 (i) Periodic direct supervision where the licensed acupuncturist is
2 present or on–site during treatment; and

3 (ii) General supervision where the licensed acupuncturist is neither
4 present nor on–site during treatment.

5 1A–302.

6 (b) The applicant shall:

7 (1) Be of good moral character;

8 (2) Be at least 18 years old;

9 (3) Demonstrate competence in performing acupuncture by meeting the
10 following standards for education or training:

11 (i) If the applicant is issued a license on or before May 31, 2026:

12 1. Graduation from at least a master’s level program or its
13 equivalent in acupuncture that is:

14 A. Approved by the Maryland Higher Education
15 Commission;

16 B. Accredited by the Accreditation Commission for
17 Acupuncture and [Oriental] HERBAL Medicine; or

18 C. Found by the Board to be equivalent to a course approved
19 or accredited under item A or B of this item; or

20 2. Achievement of a:

21 A. Diplomate in acupuncture from the National Certification
22 Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine; or

23 B. Passing score on an examination that is determined by the
24 Board to be equivalent to the examination given by the National Certification Commission
25 for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine; or

26 (ii) If the applicant is issued a license on or after June 1, 2026:

27 1. Graduation from at least a master’s level program or its
28 equivalent in acupuncture that is:

29 A. Approved by the Maryland Higher Education
30 Commission;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 374

1 B. Accredited by the Accreditation Commission for
2 Acupuncture and [Oriental] HERBAL Medicine; or

3 C. Found by the Board to be equivalent to a course approved
4 or accredited under item A or B of this item; and

5 2. Achievement of a passing score on an examination given
6 by the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine or
7 determined by the Board to be equivalent to the examination given by the National
8 Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine;

9 (4) Demonstrate the ability to communicate in the English language; and

10 (5) Meet any other qualifications that the Board establishes in regulations.

11 1A–306.

12 (e) The Board shall renew the license of and [issue a renewal certificate] MAKE
13 AVAILABLE PROOF OF RENEWAL to each licensee who meets the requirements of this
14 section.

15 1A–403.

16 EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS TITLE, A PERSON MAY NOT:

17 (1) EMPLOY AN INDIVIDUAL TO PRACTICE ACUPUNCTURE WITHOUT A
18 LICENSE; OR

19 (2) AID OR ABET THE UNAUTHORIZED PRACTICE OF ACUPUNCTURE
20 IN VIOLATION OF § 1A–401 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

21 [1A–403.] 1A–404.

22 (a) A person who violates [any provision] § 1A–401 OR § 1A–402 of this subtitle
23 is [guilty]:

24 (1) GUILTY of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not
25 exceeding $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 3 years or both[.

26 (b) A person who violates § 1A–401 or § 1A–402 of this subtitle is subject]; AND

27 (2) SUBJECT to a civil fine not to exceed $50,000 to be assessed by the
28 Board in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 374 5

1 (B) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES § 1A–403 OF THIS SUBTITLE IS:

2 (1) (I) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON
3 CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 OR IMPRISONMENT NOT
4 EXCEEDING 1 YEAR OR BOTH; AND

5 (II) FOR A SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, GUILTY OF A FELONY AND ON
6 CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 PER DAY OR
7 IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS OR BOTH; AND

8 (2) SUBJECT TO A CIVIL FINE NOT TO EXCEED $10,000 TO BE
9 ASSESSED BY THE BOARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE
10 BOARD.

11 (C) THE BOARD SHALL REMIT ANY PENALTY COLLECTED UNDER THIS
12 SECTION INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5