START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 324

D4 6lr2077
CF 6lr2080

By: Delegates Simpson and Taylor
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED,

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Family Law – Child Support – Assignment of Rights

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Child Support Administration to take action to secure
4 an assignment to the State of any rights to support on behalf of a child receiving
5 foster care maintenance payments under certain circumstances; requiring a court to
6 terminate a child support order that was previously established or assigned for a
7 child receiving a foster care maintenance payment under certain circumstances; and
8 generally relating to child support.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Family Law
11 Section 5–501(a) and (b) and 12–104
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Family Law
16 Section 5–525.4 and 12–104.2
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Family Law

22 5–501.

23 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

24 (b) “Administration” means:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0324*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 324

1 (1) the Social Services Administration of the Department; or

2 (2) any other unit within the Department to which the Secretary of Human
3 Services has delegated in writing specified responsibilities of the Administration under this
4 subtitle.

5 5–525.4.

6 (A) ONLY IN LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES, WHERE THE ADMINISTRATION
7 FINDS IT APPROPRIATE, MAY ACTION BE TAKEN TO SECURE AN ASSIGNMENT TO THE
8 STATE OF ANY RIGHTS TO SUPPORT ON BEHALF OF A CHILD RECEIVING FOSTER
9 CARE MAINTENANCE PAYMENTS UNDER THIS PART III OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10 (B) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY TAKE ACTION, WHEN APPROPRIATE, TO
11 DISCONTINUE AN ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS TO SUPPORT AND TERMINATE EXISTING
12 SUPPORT ORDERS FOR A CHILD RECEIVING FOSTER CARE MAINTENANCE
13 PAYMENTS.

14 (C) THE SECRETARY OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL ADOPT RULES AND
15 REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

16 12–104.

17 (a) The court may modify a child support award subsequent to the filing of a
18 motion for modification and upon a showing of a material change of circumstance.

19 (b) The court may not retroactively modify a child support award prior to the date
20 of the filing of the motion for modification.

21 (c) If a party becomes incarcerated, the court may determine that a material
22 change of circumstance warranting a modification of child support has occurred, provided
23 that the party’s ability to pay child support is sufficiently reduced due to incarceration.

24 12–104.2.

25 THE COURT SHALL TERMINATE A CHILD SUPPORT ORDER THAT WAS
26 PREVIOUSLY ESTABLISHED OR ASSIGNED FOR A CHILD RECEIVING A FOSTER CARE
27 MAINTENANCE PAYMENT, WITHOUT A SHOWING OF A MATERIAL CHANGE OF
28 CIRCUMSTANCE, ON THE FILING FOR A TERMINATION BY THE CHILD SUPPORT
29 ADMINISTRATION, LOCAL OFFICE OF CHILD SUPPORT, OR LOCAL DEPARTMENT,
30 AFTER THE SOCIAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION OR ITS DESIGNEE DETERMINES
31 THAT THE ORDER IS NO LONGER APPROPRIATE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 324 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3