START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 488 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 488 
(Delegate Wilson, et al.) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
 
Election Districts - General Assembly and Representatives in Congress 
 
 
This emergency bill alters the boundaries of the State’s eight congressional districts for the 
2026 election of members of the U.S. House of Representatives. The bill also proposes a 
constitutional amendment to (1) establish that specified provisions of the State Constitution 
regarding legislative districts apply explicitly for the election of a member of the Senate 
and members of the House of Delegates and (2) establish that the General Assembly has 
the power to grant original jurisdiction to the Supreme Court of Maryland to review the 
congressional districting of the State. The bill also proposes a temporary constitutional 
amendment to establish the boundaries of the eight congressional districts for the State 
proposed by the bill in the State constitution for statewide elections that occur between 
2026 and the effective date of legislation establishing districts for the election of the State’s 
representatives in Congress following the 2030 decennial census. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate but significant 
amount for FY 2026 and potentially for FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  While sufficient information was not available in time to fully analyze the 
impact of this legislation, it is assumed that the operations of local boards of elections are 
likely to be significantly affected, and expenditures for local boards of elections increase 
in FY 2026 and potentially in FY 2027 due to overtime and other costs, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 488/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Congressional district boundaries must be redrawn every 10 years 
following the decennial census to adjust for population changes. Congressional districts 
must comply with the U.S. Constitution and the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has held that congressional districts are subject to a strict population 
equality standard under Article I, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution. Accordingly, the 
populations of congressional districts must be as close to mathematical equality as 
practicable. 
 
Chapters 66 and 67 of 2010 require that population counts used to create the State’s 
congressional district plan exclude individuals incarcerated in State or federal correctional 
facilities, as determined by the decennial census, who were not State residents prior to their 
incarceration. Individuals incarcerated in State or federal correctional facilities who were 
residents of the State prior to their incarceration must be counted at their last known 
residence. 
 
The State’s current congressional districting plan was enacted as Chapter 16 of 2022. The 
enacted congressional district map can be found here. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  Early voting for the 2026 State primary election begins 
June 11, 2026, and continues through June 18, 2026. The State primary election is  
June 23, 2026, and the State general election is November 3, 2026. As such, the State Board 
of Elections (SBE) and local boards of elections must implement the new congressional 
districting plan, as established under the bill, within a significantly compressed timeframe 
(by the start of early voting for the primary). SBE advises that in order to meet this deadline, 
it must mail new voter identification cards to affected voters, contract mapping software 
services to identify the precincts affected by the change in congressional district 
boundaries, establish new polling and precinct locations, hire new election judges to staff 
the new precinct and polling locations, and conduct a public outreach and media campaign 
to alert the public to the changes in voter registrations. However, SBE cannot provide an 
estimate of those costs without first determining the changes in precinct locations 
established under the bill, which it is unable to do by the time this fiscal and policy note 
must be published. 
 
Therefore, for the purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that general fund expenditures 
for SBE increase in fiscal 2026 for it to conduct the aforementioned activities and 
implement the congressional district boundaries established under the bill in time for the 
June 2026 primary. Some expenses for the general election may carry over into fiscal 2027 
as well. It is also assumed that SBE can handle future elections with resources that are 
normally budgeted following a decennial census for redistricting and related costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 488/ Page 3 
Associated preliminary implementation work by local boards of elections for both the 
primary and general elections can each take up to several weeks, likely resulting in 
increased expenditures for the local boards, but a reliable estimate is not feasible at this 
time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
Revised - Clarification - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3