START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 417

J1 6lr2611
HB 1109/25 – HGO CF 6lr2869

By: Delegates Pippy and Kerr
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Health – Medetomidine and Xylazine Consumer Protection Act

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a retailer from distributing, selling, or exposing for sale a
4 medetomidine product or a xylazine product unless the purchaser provides to the
5 retailer certain proof; prohibiting a retailer from distributing, selling, or exposing for
6 sale a medetomidine product or a xylazine product to an individual under a certain
7 age; requiring a retailer that prepares, distributes, sells, or exposes for sale a
8 medetomidine product or a xylazine product to maintain certain records; requiring
9 the Maryland Department of Health to remit all civil penalties collected for a
10 violation of certain provisions of this Act to the Comptroller to be deposited in the
11 Maryland Substance Abuse Fund; and generally relating to medetomidine and
12 xylazine products.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Health – General
15 Section 8–6A–01(a)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Health – General
20 Section 8–6A–01(b)(3)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Health – General
25 Section 21–2G–01 through 21–2G–03 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 2G.
26 Medetomidine and Xylazine Consumer Protection Act”
27 Annotated Code of Maryland
28 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0417*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 417

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Health – General

4 8–6A–01.

5 (a) In this section, “Fund” means the Maryland Substance Abuse Fund.

6 (b) (3) The Fund consists of [the]:

7 (I) THE fee required under § 6–229 of the Criminal Procedure
8 Article[, money];

9 (II) CIVIL PENALTIES COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE
10 COMPTROLLER UNDER § 21–2G–02(E) OF THIS ARTICLE;

11 (III) MONEY appropriated in the State budget to the Fund[, all];

12 (IV) ALL earnings from investment of money in the Fund[,]; and
13 [other]

14 (V) ANY OTHER money accepted for the benefit of the Fund from a
15 governmental or private source.

16 SUBTITLE 2G. MEDETOMIDINE AND XYLAZINE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT.

17 21–2G–01.

18 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
19 INDICATED.

20 (B) “MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCT” MEANS A PRODUCT CONTAINING ANY
21 AMOUNT OF MEDETOMIDINE.

22 (C) (1) “RETAILER” MEANS A PERSON THAT:

23 (I) SELLS, PREPARES, OR MAINTAINS MEDETOMIDINE
24 PRODUCTS OR XYLAZINE PRODUCTS; OR

25 (II) ADVERTISES, REPRESENTS, OR HOLDS ITSELF OUT AS
26 SELLING, PREPARING, OR MAINTAINING MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCTS AND XYLAZINE
27 PRODUCTS.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 417 3

1 (2) “RETAILER” INCLUDES A MANUFACTURER, A WHOLESALER, A
2 CORPORATION, A PARTNERSHIP, A LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, A FIRM, AN
3 ONLINE PLATFORM, OR ANY OTHER BUSINESS ENTITY DOING BUSINESS WITHIN THE
4 STATE.

5 (D) “XYLAZINE PRODUCT” MEANS A PRODUCT CONTAINING ANY AMOUNT OF
6 XYLAZINE.

7 21–2G–02.

8 (A) A RETAILER MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE OR SELL A MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCT
9 OR XYLAZINE PRODUCT UNLESS THE PURCHASER PROVIDES TO THE RETAILER
10 PROOF OF THE PURCHASER’S INTENT TO USE THE MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCT OR
11 XYLAZINE PRODUCT FOR AN INSTITUTIONAL, VETERINARY, OR SCIENTIFIC
12 PURPOSE.

13 (B) A RETAILER MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE FOR SALE A
14 MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCT OR A XYLAZINE PRODUCT TO AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE
15 AGE OF 21 YEARS.

16 (C) A RETAILER THAT PREPARES, DISTRIBUTES, SELLS, OR EXPOSES FOR
17 SALE A MEDETOMIDINE PRODUCT OR A XYLAZINE PRODUCT SHALL MAINTAIN
18 RECORDS OF ALL SALES, INCLUDING A COPY OF:

19 (1) THE IDENTIFICATION USED AS PROOF OF THE PURCHASER’S AGE;
20 AND

21 (2) EACH DOCUMENT OR OTHER MATERIAL USED AS PROOF OF THE
22 PURCHASER’S INTENDED USE.

23 (D) A RETAILER THAT VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL
24 PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING:

25 (1) $3,000 FOR A FIRST VIOLATION; OR

26 (2) $6,500 FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION.

27 (E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REMIT ALL CIVIL PENALTIES COLLECTED
28 UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION TO THE COMPTROLLER TO BE DEPOSITED
29 IN THE MARYLAND SUBSTANCE ABUSE FUND.

30 21–2G–03.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 417

1 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
2 SUBTITLE.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4