START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 460

M5, C5 6lr1862

By: Delegates Beauchamp, Adams, Anderson, Arentz, Baker, Bouchat, Buckel,
Ciliberti, Ghrist, Griffith, Hartman, Hinebaugh, Hornberger, Howard,
Hutchinson, Jacobs, Kipke, R. Long, Mangione, McComas, Miller,
T. Morgan, Nkongolo, Pippy, Reilly, Rose, Schmidt, Tomlinson, Valentine,
and Wivell
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Solar Energy – Construction of Generating Stations in Priority Preservation
3 Areas and Study

4 FOR the purpose of reducing the percentage of priority preservation area acreage that may
5 be used for the construction of certain solar energy generating stations; requiring
6 the Maryland Department of the Environment to study the environmental impact of
7 the disposal of solar photovoltaic systems; and generally relating to solar energy.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Public Utilities
10 Section 7–218(h)(1)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Public Utilities
15 Section 7–218(h)(4)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Public Utilities

21 7–218.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0460*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 460

1 (h) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this subsection, a local
2 jurisdiction may not:

3 (i) adopt zoning laws or other laws or regulations that prohibit the
4 construction or operation of solar energy generating stations; or

5 (ii) deny site development plans for solar energy generating stations
6 that meet the requirements of subsection (f) of this section.

7 (4) (i) The total combined number of solar energy generating stations
8 that may be approved for construction in a priority preservation area that was established
9 before January 1, 2025, shall:

10 1. be limited in area to [5%] 2% of the total acreage of the
11 priority preservation area;

12 2. be located in the project area within the priority
13 preservation area; and

14 3. meet all requirements under this section.

15 (ii) The prohibitions in paragraph (1) of this subsection do not apply
16 to the remaining [95%] 98% of a priority preservation area once the [5%] 2% limitation
17 under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph has been achieved for the priority preservation
18 area.

19 (iii) A county shall report to the Commission when the [5%] 2%
20 limitation under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph has been achieved for a priority
21 preservation area.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

23 (a) The Maryland Department of the Environment shall study the environmental
24 impact of the disposal of solar photovoltaic systems at the end of their life cycle.

25 (b) On or before September 30, 2027, the Maryland Department of the
26 Environment shall report its findings under subsection (a) of this section to the General
27 Assembly in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

28 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2