START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 482

G1, P3, P5 CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT 6lr1124

By: Delegates Buckel, Pippy, Adams, Anderson, Arentz, Baker, Beauchamp,
Chisholm, Griffith, Hartman, Hinebaugh, Hornberger, Hutchinson, Jacobs,
Kipke, R. Long, Mangione, McComas, Metzgar, Miller, T. Morgan, Nkongolo,
Reilly, Rose, Schmidt, Tomlinson, Valentine, and Wivell
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Rules and Executive Nominations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Legislative and Congressional
3 Redistricting and Apportionment Commission
4 (Fair Districts for Maryland Act)

5 FOR the purpose of altering certain standards for the drawing of legislative districts;
6 establishing standards for the drawing of congressional districts; establishing the
7 Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Apportionment Commission as an
8 independent unit of State government to divide the State into certain legislative
9 districts and congressional districts subject to certain requirements and procedures;
10 providing that the Supreme Court of Maryland has original jurisdiction to establish
11 a certain plan or consider a certain petition under certain circumstances; altering
12 the cases with respect to which the Attorney General has the authority to prosecute
13 and defend the State; requiring the Redistricting Commission to petition the
14 Supreme Court of Maryland to establish certain plans under certain circumstances;
15 requiring the Redistricting Commission to represent the State in certain judicial
16 proceedings; requiring the Redistricting Commission to intervene in certain cases on
17 behalf of the State; and generally relating to legislative and congressional
18 redistricting and apportionment.

19 BY proposing an amendment to the Maryland Constitution
20 Article III – Legislative Department
21 Section 4

22 BY proposing a repeal of the Maryland Constitution
23 Article III – Legislative Department
24 Section 5

25 BY proposing an amendment to the Maryland Constitution

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0482*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 482

1 Article IV – Judiciary Department
2 Section 14

3 BY proposing an amendment to the Maryland Constitution
4 Article V – Attorney–General and State’s Attorneys
5 Section 3

6 BY proposing an addition to the Maryland Constitution
7 New Article XXI – Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Apportionment
8 Section 1 and 2

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Election Law
11 Section 1–101(a), (dd), (hh), (jj), and (kk)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Election Law
16 Section 8–7A–01 through 8–7A–11 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 7A.
17 Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Apportionment Commission”
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 (Three–fifths of all the members elected to each of the two Houses concurring), That it be
22 proposed that the Maryland Constitution read as follows:

23 Article III – Legislative Department

24 4.

25 Each legislative district [shall consist of adjoining territory, be compact in form, and
26 of substantially equal population. Due regard shall be given to natural boundaries and the
27 boundaries of political subdivisions]:

28 (1) SHALL RESPECT NATURAL BOUNDARIES AND THE GEOGRAPHIC
29 INTEGRITY AND CONTINUITY OF MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS, COUNTIES, AND
30 OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE;

31 (2) SHALL BE GEOGRAPHICALLY CONTIGUOUS AND COMPACT AND
32 INCLUDE NEARBY AREAS OF POPULATION TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE;

33 (3) SHALL REFLECT COMMUNITIES OF COMMON INTEREST;

34 (4) MAY NOT ACCOUNT FOR HOW INDIVIDUALS ARE REGISTERED TO
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 482 3

1 VOTE, HOW INDIVIDUALS VOTED IN THE PAST, OR THE POLITICAL PARTY TO WHICH
2 INDIVIDUALS BELONG; AND

3 (5) MAY NOT ACCOUNT FOR THE DOMICILE OR RESIDENCE OF ANY
4 INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING AN INCUMBENT OFFICEHOLDER OR A POTENTIAL
5 CANDIDATE FOR OFFICE.

6 [5.

7 Following each decennial census of the United States and after public hearings, the
8 Governor shall prepare a plan setting forth the boundaries of the legislative districts for
9 electing of the members of the Senate and the House of Delegates.

10 The Governor shall present the plan to the President of the Senate and Speaker of
11 the House of Delegates who shall introduce the Governor’s plan as a joint resolution to the
12 General Assembly, not later than the first day of its regular session in the second year
13 following every census, and the Governor may call a special session for the presentation of
14 his plan prior to the regular session. The plan shall conform to Sections 2, 3 and 4 of this
15 Article. Following each decennial census the General Assembly may by joint resolution
16 adopt a plan setting forth the boundaries of the legislative districts for the election of
17 members of the Senate and the House of Delegates, which plan shall conform to Sections
18 2, 3 and 4 of this Article. If a plan has been adopted by the General Assembly by the 45th
19 day after the opening of the regular session of the General Assembly in the second year
20 following every census, the plan adopted by the General Assembly shall become law. If no
21 plan has been adopted by the General Assembly for these purposes by the 45th day after
22 the opening of the regular session of the General Assembly in the second year following
23 every census, the Governor’s plan presented to the General Assembly shall become law.

24 Upon petition of any registered voter, the Supreme Court of Maryland shall have
25 original jurisdiction to review the legislative districting of the State and may grant
26 appropriate relief, if it finds that the districting of the State is not consistent with
27 requirements of either the Constitution of the United States of America, or the Constitution
28 of Maryland.]

29 Article IV – Judiciary Department

30 14.

31 The Supreme Court of Maryland shall be composed of seven justices, one from the
32 First Appellate Judicial Circuit consisting of Caroline, Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, Queen
33 Anne’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester Counties; one from the Second
34 Appellate Judicial Circuit consisting of Baltimore and Harford Counties; one from the Third
35 Appellate Judicial Circuit, consisting of Allegany, Carroll, Frederick, Garrett, Howard, and
36 Washington Counties; one from the Fourth Appellate Judicial Circuit, consisting of Prince
37 George’s County; one from the Fifth Appellate Judicial Circuit, consisting of Anne Arundel,
38 Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s Counties; one from the Sixth Appellate Judicial Circuit,
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 482

1 consisting of Baltimore City; and one from the Seventh Appellate Judicial Circuit,
2 consisting of Montgomery County. The Justices of the Supreme Court of Maryland shall be
3 residents of their respective Appellate Judicial Circuits. The term of each Justice of the
4 Supreme Court of Maryland shall begin on the date of the Justice’s qualification. One of
5 the Justices of the Supreme Court of Maryland shall be designated by the Governor as the
6 Chief Justice. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Maryland shall be co–extensive with
7 the limits of the State and such as now is or may hereafter be prescribed by law.
8 EXCLUSIVE AMONG THE STATE COURTS, THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND
9 SHALL HAVE ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: (1) TO ESTABLISH THE LEGISLATIVE
10 DISTRICT PLAN AND THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN IN THE EVENT THAT A
11 PLAN IS NOT ENACTED UNDER ARTICLE XXI, SECTION 2 OF THIS CONSTITUTION;
12 AND (2) TO CONSIDER A PETITION SEEKING REVIEW OF THE LEGALITY OF A PLAN TO
13 ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE OR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS ENACTED UNDER
14 ARTICLE XXI, SECTION 2 OF THIS CONSTITUTION. It shall hold its sessions in the City
15 of Annapolis at such time or times as it shall from time to time by rule prescribe. Its session
16 or sessions shall continue not less than ten months in each year, if the business before it
17 shall so require, and it shall be competent for the judges temporarily to transfer their
18 sittings elsewhere upon sufficient cause. The salary of each Justice of the Supreme Court
19 of Maryland shall be that now or hereafter prescribed by the General Assembly and shall
20 not be diminished during his continuance in office. Five of the justices shall constitute a
21 quorum, and five justices shall sit in each case unless the Court shall direct that an
22 additional justice or justices sit for any case. The concurrence of a majority of those sitting
23 shall be sufficient for the decision of any cause, and an equal division of those sitting in a
24 case has the effect of affirming the decision appealed from if there is no application for
25 reargument as hereinafter provided. In any case where there is an equal division or a three
26 to two division of the Court a reargument before the full Court of seven justices shall be
27 granted to the losing party upon application as a matter of right.

28 Article V – Attorney–General and State’s Attorneys

29 3.

30 (a) The Attorney General shall:

31 (1) [Prosecute] EXCEPT FOR PROCEEDINGS TO ESTABLISH THE
32 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN AND THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN IN THE
33 EVENT THAT A PLAN IS NOT ENACTED UNDER ARTICLE XXI, SECTION 2 OF THIS
34 CONSTITUTION OR A PETITION SEEKING REVIEW OF THE LEGALITY OF A PLAN TO
35 ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS ENACTED
36 UNDER ARTICLE XXI, SECTION 2 OF THIS CONSTITUTION, PROSECUTE and defend
37 on the part of the State all cases pending in the appellate courts of the State, in the Supreme
38 Court of the United States or the inferior Federal Courts, by or against the State, or in
39 which the State may be interested, except those criminal appeals otherwise prescribed by
40 the General Assembly.

41 (2) Investigate, commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or criminal
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 482 5

1 suit or action or category of such suits or actions in any of the Federal Courts or in any
2 Court of this State, or before administrative agencies and quasi legislative bodies, on the
3 part of the State or in which the State may be interested, which the General Assembly by
4 law or joint resolution, or the Governor, shall have directed or shall direct to be
5 investigated, commenced and prosecuted or defended.

6 (3) When required by the General Assembly by law or joint resolution, or
7 by the Governor, aid any State’s Attorney or other authorized prosecuting officer in
8 investigating, commencing, and prosecuting any criminal suit or action or category of such
9 suits or actions brought by the State in any Court of this State.

10 (4) Give his opinion in writing whenever required by the General Assembly
11 or either branch thereof, the Governor, the Comptroller, the Treasurer or any State’s
12 Attorney on any legal matter or subject.

13 (b) The Attorney General shall have and perform any other duties and possess
14 any other powers, and appoint the number of deputies or assistants, as the General
15 Assembly from time to time may prescribe by law.

16 (c) The Attorney General shall receive for his services the annual salary as the
17 General Assembly from time to time may prescribe by law, but he may not receive any fees,
18 perquisites or rewards whatever, in addition to his salary, for the performance of any
19 official duty.

20 (d) The Governor may not employ any additional counsel, in any case whatever,
21 unless authorized by the General Assembly.

22 ARTICLE XXI – LEGISLATIVE AND CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AND
23 APPORTIONMENT

24 1.

25 EACH CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT:

26 (1) SHALL RESPECT NATURAL BOUNDARIES AND THE GEOGRAPHIC
27 INTEGRITY AND CONTINUITY OF MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS, COUNTIES, AND
28 OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE;

29 (2) SHALL BE GEOGRAPHICALLY CONTIGUOUS AND COMPACT AND
30 INCLUDE NEARBY AREAS OF POPULATION TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE;

31 (3) SHALL REFLECT COMMUNITIES OF COMMON INTEREST;

32 (4) MAY NOT ACCOUNT FOR HOW INDIVIDUALS ARE REGISTERED TO
33 VOTE, HOW INDIVIDUALS VOTED IN THE PAST, OR THE POLITICAL PARTY TO WHICH
34 INDIVIDUALS BELONG; AND
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 482

1 (5) MAY NOT ACCOUNT FOR THE DOMICILE OR RESIDENCE OF ANY
2 INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING AN INCUMBENT OFFICEHOLDER OR A POTENTIAL
3 CANDIDATE FOR OFFICE.

4 2.

5 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “REDISTRICTING COMMISSION” MEANS THE
6 LEGISLATIVE AND CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AND APPORTIONMENT
7 COMMISSION.

8 (B) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION AND ANY LAWS ENACTED TO CARRY
9 OUT THIS SECTION ARE THE EXCLUSIVE MEANS TO ADOPT ANY PLAN TO ALTER
10 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS.

11 (C) (1) THERE IS A LEGISLATIVE AND CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING
12 AND APPORTIONMENT COMMISSION.

13 (2) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF
14 STATE GOVERNMENT, ESTABLISHED BY LAW.

15 (D) IN THE YEAR FOLLOWING EACH DECENNIAL CENSUS OF THE UNITED
16 STATES, THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL:

17 (1) DIVIDE THE STATE INTO CONSECUTIVELY NUMBERED
18 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS THAT CONFORM TO ARTICLE III, SECTIONS 2, 3, AND 4 OF
19 THIS CONSTITUTION; AND

20 (2) DIVIDE THE STATE INTO AS MANY CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS
21 THAT CONFORM TO SECTION 1 OF THIS ARTICLE AS THERE ARE REPRESENTATIVES
22 IN CONGRESS APPORTIONED TO THE STATE.

23 (E) (1) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS SHALL BE AS NEARLY EQUAL IN
24 POPULATION AS PRACTICABLE BUT MAY NOT DEVIATE MORE THAN 2% IN
25 POPULATION BETWEEN LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS.

26 (2) EACH DELEGATE DISTRICT SHALL BE AS NEARLY EQUAL IN
27 POPULATION AS PRACTICABLE BUT MAY NOT DEVIATE MORE THAN 2% IN
28 POPULATION BETWEEN THE OTHER DELEGATE DISTRICTS IN THE LEGISLATIVE
29 DISTRICT.

30 (F) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL:

31 (1) ADOPT ONE PLAN FOR LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND ONE PLAN
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 482 7

1 FOR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS;

2 (2) CERTIFY THAT EACH PLAN IS THE PLAN ADOPTED BY THE
3 REDISTRICTING COMMISSION; AND

4 (3) SEND EACH CERTIFIED PLAN TO THE PRESIDING OFFICERS OF
5 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

6 (G) ON RECEIPT OF THE CERTIFIED LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN AND THE
7 CERTIFIED CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN FROM THE REDISTRICTING
8 COMMISSION, THE PRESIDING OFFICERS SHALL INTRODUCE EACH PLAN
9 SEPARATELY FOR CONSIDERATION BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

10 (H) UNLESS THE GOVERNOR FINDS THAT A SPECIAL SESSION IS NOT
11 REQUIRED, THE GOVERNOR SHALL ISSUE A PROCLAMATION CONVENING A SPECIAL
12 SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO CONSIDER THE PLANS REQUIRED TO BE
13 INTRODUCED UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION.

14 (I) THE PRESIDING OFFICERS SHALL INTRODUCE THE CERTIFIED
15 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN AND THE CERTIFIED CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN
16 AT THE FOLLOWING TIME:

17 (1) IF THE GOVERNOR DOES NOT CONVENE A SPECIAL SESSION, ON
18 THE FIRST DAY OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN THE YEAR
19 ENDING IN THE NUMERAL 2; OR

20 (2) IF THE GOVERNOR CONVENES A SPECIAL SESSION, ON THE FIRST
21 DAY OF THE SPECIAL SESSION.

22 (J) EXCEPT FOR THE PLANS REQUIRED TO BE INTRODUCED BY THE
23 PRESIDING OFFICERS UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION, A MEMBER OF THE
24 GENERAL ASSEMBLY MAY NOT INTRODUCE A BILL PROPOSING A PLAN FOR
25 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS.

26 (K) (1) (I) DURING A REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
27 EACH HOUSE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY SHALL PASS A LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT
28 PLAN AND A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN BY A VOTE OF THREE–FIFTHS OF THE
29 MEMBERS ELECTED TO THAT HOUSE BY THE 45TH DAY AFTER THE OPENING OF THE
30 REGULAR SESSION.

31 (II) DURING A SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
32 EACH HOUSE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY SHALL PASS A LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT
33 PLAN AND A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN BY A VOTE OF THREE–FIFTHS OF THE
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 482

1 MEMBERS ELECTED TO THAT HOUSE BY THE 15TH DAY AFTER THE OPENING OF THE
2 SPECIAL SESSION.

3 (2) THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN AND CONGRESSIONAL
4 DISTRICT PLAN PASSED BY THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES AND THE SENATE SHALL BE
5 PRESENTED TO THE GOVERNOR FOR APPROVAL WITHIN 1 DAY AFTER PASSAGE.

6 (L) IF THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT
7 PLAN DO NOT RECEIVE A VOTE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
8 WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD SET FORTH UNDER SUBSECTION (K)(1) OF THIS SECTION,
9 THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN SHALL
10 BE CONSIDERED AS NOT PASSED.

11 (M) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY SHALL PRESENT THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT
12 PLAN OR THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN PASSED UNDER THIS SECTION TO
13 THE GOVERNOR WITHIN 1 DAY AFTER PASSAGE.

14 (N) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL SIGN OR VETO THE LEGISLATIVE
15 DISTRICT PLAN OR THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN WITHIN 6 DAYS AFTER
16 PRESENTMENT.

17 (2) IF THE GOVERNOR DOES NOT SIGN OR VETO A PLAN WITHIN 6
18 DAYS AFTER PRESENTMENT, THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR THE
19 CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN SHALL BE A LAW IN LIKE MANNER AS IF SIGNED BY
20 THE GOVERNOR.

21 (O) A LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN
22 ADOPTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE:

23 (1) ON THE DATE THE GOVERNOR SIGNS THE PLAN;

24 (2) IF THE GOVERNOR DOES NOT SIGN OR VETO THE PLAN, ON THE
25 6TH DAY AFTER PRESENTMENT TO THE GOVERNOR; OR

26 (3) IF THERE IS A PROCEEDING INVOLVING THE LEGISLATIVE
27 DISTRICT PLAN OR THE CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN IN THE SUPREME COURT
28 OF MARYLAND UNDER ARTICLE IV, SECTION 14 OF THIS CONSTITUTION, ON THE
29 DATE ORDERED BY THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND.

30 (P) AS PROVIDED IN ARTICLE IV, SECTION 14 OF THIS CONSTITUTION, THE
31 SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND SHALL ADOPT A LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR
32 A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN IN A PROCEEDING IF:
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 482 9

1 (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION FAILS TO APPROVE A
2 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN; OR

3 (2) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DOES NOT PASS A PLAN UNDER THIS
4 SECTION WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (K)(1) OF THIS
5 SECTION.

6 (Q) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL BE THE REPRESENTATIVE OF
7 THE STATE:

8 (1) IN A PROCEEDING UNDER SUBSECTION (P) OF THIS SECTION; OR

9 (2) IN A PETITION TO REVIEW THE LEGALITY OF A PLAN UNDER
10 ARTICLE IV, SECTION 14 OF THIS CONSTITUTION.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
12 as follows:

13 Article – Election Law

14 1–101.

15 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated unless a
16 different meaning is clearly intended from the context.

17 (dd) “Majority party” means the political party to which the incumbent Governor
18 belongs, if the incumbent Governor is a member of a principal political party. If the
19 incumbent Governor is not a member of one of the two principal political parties, “majority
20 party” means the principal political party whose candidate for Governor received the
21 highest number of votes of any party candidate at the last preceding general election.

22 (hh) “Political party” means an organized group that is qualified as a political party
23 in accordance with Title 4 of this article.

24 (jj) “Principal minority party” means the principal political party whose candidate
25 for Governor received the second highest number of votes of any party candidate at the last
26 preceding general election.

27 (kk) “Principal political parties” means the majority party and the principal
28 minority party.

29 SUBTITLE 7A. LEGISLATIVE AND CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AND
30 APPORTIONMENT COMMISSION.

31 8–7A–01.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 482

1 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (B) “PLAN” MEANS THE PROPOSED LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR THE
4 PROPOSED CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN ADOPTED BY THE REDISTRICTING
5 COMMISSION.

6 (C) “REDISTRICTING COMMISSION” MEANS THE LEGISLATIVE AND
7 CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AND APPORTIONMENT COMMISSION.

8 8–7A–02.

9 IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT:

10 (1) NEITHER THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS NOR THE CONGRESSIONAL
11 DISTRICTS BE ESTABLISHED FOR THE PURPOSE OF FAVORING OR DISCRIMINATING
12 AGAINST AN INCUMBENT OFFICEHOLDER, A CANDIDATE FOR OFFICE, OR A
13 POLITICAL PARTY; AND

14 (2) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE COMPLY WITH AND
15 IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF ARTICLE III, §§ 2, 3, AND 4, ARTICLE IV, § 14, AND
16 ARTICLE XXI, §§ 1 AND 2 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

17 8–7A–03.

18 THERE IS A LEGISLATIVE AND CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING AND
19 APPORTIONMENT COMMISSION AS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

20 8–7A–04.

21 ON OR BEFORE MARCH 1, 2031, AND EACH YEAR ENDING IN THE NUMERAL 1
22 THEREAFTER, A REDISTRICTING COMMISSION WITH THE MEMBERSHIP
23 ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 8–7A–05 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL CONVENE.

24 8–7A–05.

25 (A) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING 10
26 MEMBERS:

27 (1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION, TWO MEMBERS
28 APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR, SUBJECT TO THE UNANIMOUS APPROVAL OF THE
29 SENATE EXECUTIVE NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE RULES AND
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 482 11

1 EXECUTIVE NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE;

2 (2) THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

3 (3) THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

4 (4) THE MINORITY LEADER OF THE SENATE;

5 (5) THE MINORITY LEADER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES;

6 (6) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

7 (7) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

8 (8) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE MINORITY LEADER OF THE
9 SENATE; AND

10 (9) ONE MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE MINORITY LEADER OF THE
11 HOUSE OF DELEGATES.

12 (B) (1) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1)
13 OF THIS SECTION MUST BE A REGISTERED VOTER WHO, FOR AT LEAST 7 YEARS
14 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE DATE THAT THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION
15 CONVENES, HAS BEEN CONTINUOUSLY REGISTERED WITH A POLITICAL PARTY
16 OTHER THAN A PRINCIPAL POLITICAL PARTY OR HAS REMAINED UNAFFILIATED.

17 (2) A MEMBER OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION APPOINTED
18 UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE:

19 (I) A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS ELECTED FROM THE
20 STATE OR A CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE;

21 (II) A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OR A CANDIDATE
22 FOR THAT OFFICE;

23 (III) AN ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL OR A
24 CANDIDATE FOR AN ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICE;

25 (IV) AN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF A POLITICAL PARTY OR
26 POLITICAL COMMITTEE;

27 (V) 1. A CONTRACTOR PROVIDING PROFESSIONAL
28 SERVICES TO:
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 482

1 A. THE GOVERNOR OR A CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE;

2 B. A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OR A
3 CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE; OR

4 C. A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS ELECTED FROM
5 THE STATE OR A CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE; OR

6 2. A CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEE OF OR A
7 CONSULTANT TO AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEM 1 OF THIS ITEM;

8 (VI) AN IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER OF THE GOVERNOR OR OF
9 AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEM (I), (II), (III), OR (IV) OF THIS PARAGRAPH;

10 (VII) A STAFF MEMBER OF:

11 1. THE GOVERNOR OR A CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE;

12 2. A MEMBER OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OR A
13 CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE;

14 3. A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS ELECTED FROM
15 THE STATE OR A CANDIDATE FOR THAT OFFICE; OR

16 4. AN ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL OR A
17 CANDIDATE FOR AN ELECTED LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICE; OR

18 (VIII) A CURRENT OR FORMER REGISTERED LOBBYIST.

19 (3) TO BE APPOINTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION,
20 AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT BE AT THE TIME OF APPOINTMENT OR HAVE BEEN WITHIN
21 THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 7 YEARS AN EMPLOYEE OF:

22 (I) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE;

23 (II) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; OR

24 (III) AN OFFICE OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

25 (C) EACH MEMBER OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL APPLY
26 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE IN A MANNER THAT IS IMPARTIAL AND THAT
27 REINFORCES PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN THE INTEGRITY OF THE REDISTRICTING
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 482 13

1 PROCESS.

2 (D) A MEMBER OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION:

3 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
4 REDISTRICTING COMMISSION; BUT

5 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
6 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

7 8–7A–06.

8 (A) (1) SEVEN MEMBERS OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION ARE A
9 QUORUM.

10 (2) SEVEN OR MORE AFFIRMATIVE VOTES OF THE MEMBERS ARE
11 REQUIRED FOR ANY OFFICIAL ACTION OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION,
12 INCLUDING APPROVAL OF:

13 (I) ANY PLAN FOR LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR
14 CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS ADOPTED BY THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION; AND

15 (II) ANY CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PLAN.

16 (B) FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERS, THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL
17 ELECT ONE MEMBER TO SERVE AS CHAIR.

18 (C) (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION MAY HIRE STAFF, ATTORNEYS,
19 AND CONSULTANTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

20 (2) EMPLOYEES OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL BE
21 INDEPENDENT OF THE STATE PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.

22 (D) A FINDING OF A POSSIBLE CRIMINAL VIOLATION BY A MEMBER OR AN
23 EMPLOYEE OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION MAY RESULT IN REFERRAL TO THE
24 STATE PROSECUTOR FOR CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.

25 8–7A–07.

26 (A) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL:

27 (1) CONDUCT A PROCESS THAT IS OPEN AND TRANSPARENT TO
28 ENABLE FULL PUBLIC CONSIDERATION OF AND COMMENT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 482

1 OF LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS;

2 (2) ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND CONGRESSIONAL
3 DISTRICTS ACCORDING TO THE REDISTRICTING STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS
4 SUBTITLE AND ARTICLE III, §§ 3 AND 4 AND ARTICLE XXI, § 1 OF THE MARYLAND
5 CONSTITUTION; AND

6 (3) CONDUCT BUSINESS WITH INTEGRITY AND FAIRNESS.

7 (B) THE ACTIVITIES OF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION ARE SUBJECT TO
8 THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT AND THE MARYLAND PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT.

9 (C) (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH AND
10 IMPLEMENT A HEARING PROCESS THAT IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC FOR PUBLIC INPUT
11 AND DELIBERATION THAT IS:

12 (I) SUBJECT TO PUBLIC NOTICE; AND

13 (II) DESIGNED TO ENCOURAGE CITIZEN OUTREACH AND TO
14 SOLICIT BROAD PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN THE REDISTRICTING PROCESS.

15 (2) (I) THE HEARING PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH
16 (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE THE SCHEDULING OF HEARINGS:

17 1. TO RECEIVE PUBLIC INPUT BEFORE THE
18 CONSIDERATION OF ANY PLAN BY THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION; AND

19 2. FOLLOWING THE PROPOSAL OF A PLAN BY THE
20 REDISTRICTING COMMISSION.

21 (II) HEARINGS MAY BE SUPPLEMENTED WITH OTHER
22 ACTIVITIES AS DETERMINED APPROPRIATE BY THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION
23 TO FURTHER INCREASE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE PUBLIC TO OBSERVE AND
24 PARTICIPATE IN THE REDISTRICTING PROCESS.

25 (D) (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL ENSURE THAT THE
26 PROPOSED PLANS ARE READILY ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC.

27 (2) BEFORE ADOPTING A PLAN, THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION
28 SHALL ALLOW 14 DAYS FOR THE PUBLIC TO PROVIDE WRITTEN COMMENT.

29 (E) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL TAKE ALL STEPS NECESSARY
30 TO ENSURE THAT A COMPLETE AND ACCURATE COMPUTERIZED POPULATION
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 482 15

1 DATABASE IS AVAILABLE FOR REDISTRICTING AND THAT PROCEDURES ARE IN
2 PLACE TO PROVIDE THE PUBLIC READY ACCESS TO REDISTRICTING DATA AND
3 COMPUTER SOFTWARE FOR DRAWING MAPS.

4 8–7A–08.

5 (A) (1) IN THE YEAR FOLLOWING EACH DECENNIAL CENSUS OF THE
6 UNITED STATES, OR WHEN OTHERWISE REQUIRED BY LAW, THE REDISTRICTING
7 COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT A PLAN TO ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND
8 CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS IN CONFORMANCE WITH THE STANDARDS AND
9 PROCESSES SET FORTH IN THIS SUBTITLE AND THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

10 (2) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR ENDING IN THE NUMERAL
11 1, THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL APPROVE TWO PLANS:

12 (I) ONE PLAN SHALL DESCRIBE THE DISTRICT BOUNDARY
13 LINES FOR THE ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF
14 DELEGATES; AND

15 (II) ONE PLAN SHALL DESCRIBE THE DISTRICT BOUNDARY
16 LINES FOR THE STATE’S REPRESENTATIVES IN CONGRESS.

17 (B) LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS SHALL BE NUMBERED CONSECUTIVELY
18 COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWESTERN BOUNDARY OF THE STATE AND ENDING AT
19 THE SOUTHEASTERN BOUNDARY OF THE STATE.

20 (C) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL ISSUE WITH EACH PLAN:

21 (1) MAPS SHOWING THE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND THE
22 CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS; AND

23 (2) A REPORT THAT:

24 (I) EXPLAINS THE BASIS ON WHICH THE REDISTRICTING
25 COMMISSION MADE ITS DECISIONS TO ACHIEVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE CRITERIA
26 SPECIFIED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

27 (II) INCLUDES DEFINITIONS OF THE TERMS AND STANDARDS
28 USED IN DRAWING EACH PLAN.

29 (D) ON ADOPTION OF A PLAN, THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL:

30 (1) CERTIFY THAT THE PLAN IS THE PLAN ADOPTED BY THE
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 482

1 REDISTRICTING COMMISSION; AND

2 (2) SEND THE CERTIFIED PLAN TO THE PRESIDING OFFICERS OF THE
3 GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

4 (E) ON RECEIPT OF A CERTIFIED PLAN SENT UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF
5 THIS SECTION, THE PRESIDING OFFICERS SHALL PREPARE THE PLAN FOR
6 CONSIDERATION BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AS PROVIDED IN ARTICLE XXI, § 2 OF
7 THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

8 (F) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE OR ARTICLE XXI, § 2 OF THE
9 MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, A PLAN CONSIDERED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
10 SHALL BE TREATED IN THE SAME MANNER AS A BILL FOR PURPOSES OF
11 PUBLICATION, CODIFICATION, NOTIFICATION, AND DISTRIBUTION.

12 8–7A–09.

13 (A) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL PETITION THE SUPREME
14 COURT OF MARYLAND TO ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR CONGRESSIONAL
15 DISTRICTS ACCORDING TO THE STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBTITLE AND
16 ARTICLE III, §§ 3 AND 4 AND ARTICLE XX OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION IF:

17 (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION FAILS TO ADOPT AND CERTIFY
18 A PLAN UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; OR

19 (2) A PLAN IS NOT ENACTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE XXI, § 2
20 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

21 (B) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL REPRESENT THE STATE
22 REGARDING ANY PETITION SEEKING A REVIEW OF A CERTIFIED PLAN OR A LAW
23 ENACTED ESTABLISHING LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OR CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS
24 UNDER ARTICLE XXI, § 2 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

25 (C) IN ANY CASE BROUGHT IN A FEDERAL COURT TO REVIEW A PLAN, IF THE
26 REDISTRICTING COMMISSION IS NOT A PARTY TO THE CASE, THE REDISTRICTING
27 COMMISSION SHALL MOVE TO INTERVENE IN THE CASE ON BEHALF OF THE STATE.

28 8–7A–10.

29 (A) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND SHALL HAVE ORIGINAL
30 JURISDICTION TO ESTABLISH LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND CONGRESSIONAL
31 DISTRICTS ACCORDING TO THE STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBTITLE AND
32 ARTICLE III, §§ 3 AND 4 AND ARTICLE XXI OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION IF:
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 482 17

1 (1) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION FAILS TO APPROVE A PLAN
2 UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

3 (2) A PLAN IS NOT ENACTED UNDER ARTICLE XXI, § 2 OF THE
4 MARYLAND CONSTITUTION; OR

5 (3) A REGISTERED VOTER FILES A PETITION UNDER SUBSECTION (B)
6 OF THIS SECTION.

7 (B) (1) ON THE ENACTMENT OF A LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT PLAN OR A
8 CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT PLAN, ANY REGISTERED VOTER IN THE STATE MAY FILE
9 A PETITION WITH THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND TO BAR THE PLAN FROM
10 TAKING EFFECT ON THE GROUNDS THAT THE PLAN VIOLATES THE MARYLAND
11 CONSTITUTION, THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION, OR A FEDERAL OR STATE
12 STATUTE.

13 (2) THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION SHALL BE THE DEFENDANT IN
14 A PETITION FILED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

15 (C) SUBJECT TO THE MARYLAND RULES, ANY REGISTERED VOTER OF THE
16 STATE MAY PARTICIPATE IN THE PROCEEDING AS AN AMICUS CURIAE.

17 (D) (1) IF A PETITION IS FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
18 THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND:

19 (I) SHALL SET DEADLINES FOR THE FILING OF PLEADINGS AND
20 AMICUS CURIAE BRIEFS; AND

21 (II) MAY APPOINT A SPECIAL MASTER TO MAKE
22 RECOMMENDATIONS.

23 (2) A SPECIAL MASTER APPOINTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
24 SUBSECTION SHALL:

25 (I) HOLD A HEARING;

26 (II) CONSIDER A PLAN APPROVED BY THE REDISTRICTING
27 COMMISSION, IF ANY; AND

28 (III) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE SUPREME COURT OF
29 MARYLAND.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 482

1 (3) WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD ESTABLISHED BY THE SUPREME
2 COURT OF MARYLAND UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PARTY MAY
3 FILE EXCEPTIONS TO THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SPECIAL MASTER.

4 (4) BEFORE ORDERING ANY RELIEF, THE SUPREME COURT OF
5 MARYLAND SHALL:

6 (I) HOLD A HEARING;

7 (II) CONSIDER A PLAN APPROVED BY THE REDISTRICTING
8 COMMISSION, IF ANY; AND

9 (III) CONSIDER ANY RECOMMENDATIONS OF A SPECIAL MASTER.

10 (E) (1) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND MAY ORDER ANY RELIEF
11 CONSIDERED APPROPRIATE.

12 (2) IN ORDERING RELIEF:

13 (I) IF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION ADOPTED AND
14 CERTIFIED A PLAN, THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND MAY APPROVE, MODIFY,
15 OR ADOPT A NEW PLAN; OR

16 (II) IF THE REDISTRICTING COMMISSION HAS NOT ADOPTED
17 AND CERTIFIED A PLAN, THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND SHALL ESTABLISH
18 LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS AND CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS ACCORDING TO THE
19 STANDARDS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBTITLE AND ARTICLE III, §§ 3 AND 4 AND
20 ARTICLE XXI OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

21 (F) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO RULING
22 ON A PETITION FILED UNDER THIS SECTION.

23 8–7A–11.

24 THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE FUNDS IN THE STATE BUDGET TO CARRY
25 OUT THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING THE COSTS OF ANY LITIGATION.

26 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the General Assembly
27 determines that the amendment to the Maryland Constitution proposed by Section 1 of this
28 Act affects multiple jurisdictions and that the provisions of Article XIV, § 1 of the Maryland
29 Constitution concerning local approval of constitutional amendments do not apply.

30 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the amendment to the
31 Maryland Constitution proposed by Section 1 of this Act shall be submitted to the qualified
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 482 19

1 voters of the State at the next general election to be held in November 2026 for adoption or
2 rejection pursuant to Article XIV of the Maryland Constitution. At that general election,
3 the vote on the proposed amendment to the Constitution shall be by ballot, and on each
4 ballot there shall be printed the words “For the Constitutional Amendment” and “Against
5 the Constitutional Amendment”, as now provided by law. Immediately after the election,
6 all returns shall be made to the Governor of the vote for and against the proposed
7 amendment, as directed by Article XIV of the Maryland Constitution, and further
8 proceedings had in accordance with Article XIV.

9 SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act is
10 contingent on the passage of Section 1 of this Act, a constitutional amendment, and its
11 ratification by the voters of the State.

12 SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 5 of this
13 Act, Section 2 of this Act shall take effect on the proclamation of the Governor that the
14 constitutional amendment, having received a majority of the votes cast at the general
15 election, has been adopted by the people of Maryland.
END OF PAGE 19