START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 449

E3 6lr1945
HB 622/25 – JUD

By: Delegates Schmidt, Adams, Anderson, Arentz, Baker, Beauchamp, Buckel,
Ciliberti, Ghrist, Griffith, Hartman, Hinebaugh, Hornberger, Howard,
Hutchinson, Jacobs, Kipke, R. Long, Mangione, McComas, Metzgar, Miller,
T. Morgan, Nkongolo, Pippy, Reilly, Rose, Tomlinson, and Wivell
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Juvenile Justice Restoration Act

3 FOR the purpose of altering a certain provision of law authorizing a law enforcement officer
4 to conduct an otherwise lawful custodial interrogation of a child under certain
5 circumstances; and generally relating to juvenile law.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
8 Section 3–8A–14.2
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

14 3–8A–14.2.

15 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (2) “Custodial interrogation” retains its judicially determined meaning.

17 (3) (i) “Law enforcement officer” has the meaning stated in § 1–101 of
18 the Public Safety Article.

19 (ii) “Law enforcement officer” includes a school resource officer, as
20 defined in § 7–1501 of the Education Article.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0449*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 449

1 (b) A law enforcement officer may not conduct a custodial interrogation of a child
2 until:

3 (1) The child has consulted with an attorney who is:

4 (i) Retained by the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child; or

5 (ii) Provided by the Office of the Public Defender; and

6 (2) The law enforcement officer has made an effort reasonably calculated
7 to give actual notice to the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child that the child will be
8 interrogated.

9 (c) A consultation with an attorney under this section:

10 (1) Shall be:

11 (i) Conducted in a manner consistent with the Maryland Rules of
12 Professional Conduct; and

13 (ii) Confidential; and

14 (2) May be:

15 (i) In person; or

16 (ii) By telephone or video conference.

17 (d) To the extent practicable and consistent with the Maryland Rules of
18 Professional Conduct, an attorney providing consultation under this section shall
19 communicate and coordinate with the parent, guardian, or custodian of the child in custody.

20 (e) The requirement of consultation with an attorney under this section:

21 (1) May not be waived; and

22 (2) Applies regardless of whether the child is proceeded against as a child
23 under this subtitle or is charged as an adult.

24 (f) (1) A law enforcement agency conducting an interrogation under this
25 section shall maintain a record of the notification or attempted notification of a parent,
26 guardian, or custodian under this section, including:

27 (i) A signed statement by a duly authorized law enforcement officer
28 employed by the agency that an attempt to notify a parent, guardian, or custodian was
29 made;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 449 3

1 (ii) The name of the person sought to be notified; and

2 (iii) The method of attempted notification.

3 (2) (i) A law enforcement agency conducting an interrogation under
4 this section shall maintain a record of the name of the attorney contacted and the county
5 or counties in which the attorney provided the consultation.

6 (ii) An attorney contacted to provide legal consultation to a child
7 under this subtitle shall provide to a law enforcement officer the information required for
8 the record required to be maintained under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

9 (g) (1) Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, a law enforcement
10 officer may conduct an otherwise lawful custodial interrogation of a child if:

11 (i) 1. The law enforcement officer reasonably believes that the
12 information sought is necessary to protect against a threat to public safety; and

13 [(ii)] 2. The questions posed to the child by the law enforcement
14 officer are limited to those questions reasonably necessary to obtain the information
15 necessary to protect against the threat to public safety; OR

16 (II) THE CHILD’S PARENT, GUARDIAN, OR CUSTODIAN
17 CONSENTS TO THE CUSTODIAL INTERROGATION OF THE CHILD WITHOUT THE
18 CHILD’S CONSULTATION WITH AN ATTORNEY.

19 (2) (i) Unless it is impossible, impracticable, or unsafe to do so, an
20 interrogation conducted under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be recorded.

21 (ii) In a jurisdiction that has adopted the use of body–worn digital
22 recording devices by law enforcement officers, the interrogation of a child may be recorded
23 using a body–worn digital recording device in a manner that is consistent with
24 departmental policies regarding the use of body–worn digital recording devices.

25 (iii) In a jurisdiction that has not adopted the use of body–worn
26 digital recording devices, the interrogation of a child may be recorded using other video and
27 audio recording technology in a manner that is consistent with any policies of the law
28 enforcement agency regarding the use of video and audio recording technology.

29 (iv) A child being interrogated under this subsection shall be
30 informed if the interrogation is being recorded.

31 (h) (1) There is a rebuttable presumption that a statement made by a child
32 during a custodial interrogation is inadmissible in a delinquency proceeding or a criminal
33 prosecution against that child if a law enforcement officer willfully failed to comply with
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 449

1 the requirements of this section.

2 (2) The State may overcome the presumption by showing, by clear and
3 convincing evidence, that the statement was made knowingly, intelligently, and
4 voluntarily.

5 (3) This subsection may not be construed to render a statement by that
6 child inadmissible in a proceeding against another individual.

7 (i) The Office of the Public Defender shall:

8 (1) Develop and implement policies to provide guidance and instruction to
9 attorneys to meet the requirements of this section; and

10 (2) On or before October 1, 2022, publish on its website, or provide to law
11 enforcement on request, information on attorneys available to act as counsel to a child in
12 accordance with this section.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4