START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 439

P1 6lr2030

By: Delegates Kaufman, Embry, Lopez, Patterson, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing and Maryland Advisory Council on Deaf
3 and Hard of Hearing – Renaming

4 FOR the purpose of renaming the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing to be the Office
5 of the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing; renaming the Maryland Advisory
6 Council on Deaf and Hard of Hearing to be the Maryland Advisory Council on Deaf,
7 Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing; and generally relating to renaming the Office of the
8 Deaf and Hard of Hearing and the Maryland Advisory Council on Deaf and Hard of
9 Hearing.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Education
12 Section 23–109(b)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – Health – General
17 Section 7.5–302 and 13–603(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
21 Article – Health – General
22 Section 7.5–303(a)(1)(xiii) and 13–603(b)(2)(ix)
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
26 Article – Human Services
27 Section 7–127(a) and 7–802

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0439*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 439

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

3 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
4 Article – Human Services
5 Section 7–128(13), 7–803(a)(8), and 10–1002(e)
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – State Government
10 Section 9–2401(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – State Government
15 Section 9–2401(e) and (o), 9–2402(a), and 9–2404(a) to be under the amended subtitle
16 “Subtitle 24. Office of the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing”; and
17 10–1103.1(c)(2)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
21 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
22 Section 29–304(10)
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
26 Article – Transportation
27 Section 7–1109(b)
28 Annotated Code of Maryland
29 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

30 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
31 Article – Transportation
32 Section 7–1109(c)(10)
33 Annotated Code of Maryland
34 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

35 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
36 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

37 Article – Education

38 23–109.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 439 3

1 (b) The Deaf Culture Digital Library shall:

2 (1) Conduct a needs assessment to identify gaps in library services for deaf
3 patrons and to implement strategies to fill the gaps and better coordinate library services
4 for the deaf;

5 (2) In coordination with the Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND,
6 and Hard of Hearing, develop and provide sensitivity training for State and county library
7 staff to help them better understand deaf patrons and their needs;

8 (3) Develop a website that will allow for information sharing and
9 coordination between the Deaf Culture Digital Library and county library systems;

10 (4) In coordination with the State Library Agency, develop deaf–related
11 programs and materials and share them with county library systems and other libraries in
12 the State;

13 (5) Develop partnerships and strategic alliances with other entities,
14 including:

15 (i) The Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of
16 Hearing;

17 (ii) County library systems;

18 (iii) The State Library Agency;

19 (iv) Veterans’ groups;

20 (v) State and local arts councils;

21 (vi) Senior citizens organizations; and

22 (vii) Deaf and hard of hearing organizations, including:

23 1. The National Association of the Deaf;

24 2. The Hearing Loss Association of America; and

25 3. The Maryland Association of the Deaf;

26 (6) Encourage partnerships and collaborations with information service
27 providers to help provide virtual access to information and research;

28 (7) Form a Deaf Culture Digital Library Advisory Board to provide advice
29 on initiatives that further advance the mission and goals of the Deaf Culture Digital
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 439

1 Library and the majority of whose members are deaf or hard of hearing and selected from
2 the following entities:

3 (i) County library systems;

4 (ii) The State Library Agency;

5 (iii) The Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of
6 Hearing;

7 (iv) Statewide deaf and hard of hearing organizations; and

8 (v) Other organizations as agreed on by the Governor’s Office of the
9 Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing and the State Library Agency; and

10 (8) Establish a Deaf Culture Digital Library “Friends of the Library” group
11 composed of individuals who are strongly committed, well–positioned, and able to promote
12 community involvement, advocacy, and funding for the Deaf Culture Digital Library.

13 Article – Health – General

14 7.5–302.

15 There is a Behavioral Health Advisory Council in the Office of the Governor.

16 7.5–303.

17 (a) (1) The Council consists of the following members:

18 (xiii) The [Executive] Director of the Governor’s Office of the Deaf,
19 DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing, or the [Executive] Director’s designee;

20 13–603.

21 (a) There is an Early Hearing Detection and Intervention Advisory Council for
22 the Program.

23 (b) (2) Of the 12 members:

24 (ix) 1 shall be from the Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND,
25 and Hard of Hearing.

26 Article – Human Services

27 7–127.

28 (a) There is an Interagency Disabilities Board convened by the Governor.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 439 5

1 7–128.

2 The Board consists of the following members:

3 (13) the Director of the Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and
4 Hard of Hearing, or the Director’s designee;

5 7–802.

6 There is a Governor’s Advisory Board for Telecommunications Relay in the
7 Department.

8 7–803.

9 (a) The Board shall be composed of 14 individuals appointed by the Governor,
10 who shall designate the chair, including:

11 (8) one representative from the Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND,
12 and Hard of Hearing.

13 10–1002.

14 (e) The Department shall administer, supervise, and coordinate the Program
15 with the cooperation of the Department of Disabilities, the Department of Human Services,
16 the Governor’s Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing, and the Maryland
17 Department of Health.

18 Article – State Government

19 Subtitle 24. Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing.

20 9–2401.

21 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (e) “Council” means the Maryland Advisory Council on Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and
23 Hard of Hearing Individuals.

24 (o) “Office” means the Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing.

25 9–2402.

26 (a) In the Office of the Governor, there is an Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and
27 Hard of Hearing.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 439

1 9–2404.

2 (a) There is a Maryland Advisory Council on the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of
3 Hearing.

4 10–1103.1.

5 (c) The Advisory Group shall include:

6 (2) the Director of the Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of
7 Hearing, or the Director’s designee;

8 Article – State Personnel and Pensions

9 29–304.

10 An individual shall have immediate vesting rights on taking office in the State
11 system in which the individual is a member if the individual is the:

12 (10) Director of the Office of the Deaf, DEAFBLIND, and Hard of Hearing;

13 Article – Transportation

14 7–1109.

15 (b) There is a State Coordinating Committee for Health and Human Services
16 Transportation.

17 (c) The Committee consists of the following members:

18 (10) The Director of the [Governor’s] Office [for] OF the Deaf, DEAFBLIND,
19 and Hard of Hearing, or the Director’s designee;

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, as provided in this Act:

21 (a) The Office of the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing is the successor of the
22 Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing.

23 (b) In every law, executive order, rule, regulation, policy, or document created by
24 an official, an employee, or a unit of this State, the names and titles of those agencies and
25 officials mean the names and titles of the successor agency or official.

26 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That nothing in this Act affects the
27 term of office of an appointed or elected member of any commission, office, department,
28 agency, or other unit. An individual who is a member of a unit on the effective date of this
29 Act shall remain for the balance of the term to which appointed or elected, unless the
30 member sooner dies, resigns, or is removed under provisions of law.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 439 7

1 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That any transaction or
2 employment status affected by or flowing from any change of nomenclature or any statute
3 amended by this Act and validly entered into or existing before the effective date of this Act
4 and every right, duty, or interest flowing from a statute amended by this Act remains valid
5 after the effective date of this Act and may be terminated, completed, consummated, or
6 enforced as required or allowed by any statute amended by this Act as though the
7 amendment had not occurred. If a change in nomenclature involves a change in name or
8 designation of any State unit, the successor unit shall be considered in all respects as
9 having the powers and obligations granted the former unit.

10 SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

11 (a) The continuity of every commission, office, department, agency, or other unit
12 is retained.

13 (b) The personnel, records, files, furniture, fixtures, and other properties and all
14 appropriations, credits, assets, liabilities, and obligations of each retained unit are
15 continued as the personnel, records, files, furniture, fixtures, properties, appropriations,
16 credits, assets, liabilities, and obligations of the unit under the laws enacted by this Act.

17 SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That letterhead, business cards,
18 and other documents reflecting the renaming of the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
19 to be the Office of the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing may not be used until all
20 letterhead, business cards, and other documents already in print and reflecting the name
21 of the Office before the effective date of this Act have been used.

22 SECTION 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
23 Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
24 Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
25 General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
26 publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
27 the section affected.

28 SECTION 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7