START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 492

D1 6lr2569
CF 6lr2499

By: Chair, Judiciary Committee (By Request – Maryland Judicial Conference)
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Courtroom Security – Minimum Adequate Security Standard

3 FOR the purpose of establishing minimum adequate security standards for courtroom
4 security at all courthouse facilities; and generally relating to courtroom security.

5 BY adding to
6 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
7 Section 1–206
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
11 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

12 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

13 1–206.

14 (A) THERE IS A MINIMUM ADEQUATE SECURITY STANDARD FOR
15 COURTROOM SECURITY AT ALL COURTHOUSE FACILITIES IN THE STATE.

16 (B) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, A COURT SECURITY OFFICER
17 MUST MEET THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR A SPECIAL PEACE OFFICER AS DEFINED IN §
18 3–301 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

19 (C) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2027, DURING COURT PROCEEDINGS, ANY ENTITY
20 RESPONSIBLE FOR PROVIDING COURTHOUSE SECURITY SHALL USE BEST EFFORTS
21 TO HAVE PRESENT A MINIMUM OF:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0492*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 492

1 (1) ONE COURT SECURITY OFFICER IN EACH COURTROOM FOR ANY
2 CRIMINAL, FAMILY, OR JUVENILE PROCEEDING;

3 (2) TWO COURT SECURITY OFFICERS IN EACH COURTROOM FOR ANY
4 PROCEEDING INVOLVING AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL OR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO
5 MAY BE REMANDED TO CUSTODY AS A RESULT OF THE PROCEEDING; AND

6 (3) ONE ADDITIONAL COURT SECURITY OFFICER FOR EVERY FOUR OR
7 FEWER COURTROOMS ON EACH FLOOR OF A COURTHOUSE.

8 (D) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2029, DURING COURT PROCEEDINGS, ANY ENTITY
9 RESPONSIBLE FOR PROVIDING COURTHOUSE SECURITY SHALL USE BEST EFFORTS
10 TO HAVE PRESENT A MINIMUM OF:

11 (1) ONE COURT SECURITY OFFICER IN EACH COURTROOM FOR ANY
12 TYPE OF PROCEEDING;

13 (2) TWO COURT SECURITY OFFICERS IN EACH COURTROOM FOR ANY
14 PROCEEDING INVOLVING AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL OR ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO
15 MAY BE REMANDED INTO CUSTODY AS A RESULT OF THE PROCEEDING; AND

16 (3) ONE ADDITIONAL COURT SECURITY OFFICER FOR EVERY FOUR OR
17 FEWER COURTROOMS ON EACH FLOOR OF A COURTHOUSE.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
19 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2