START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 435 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 435 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Places of Public Accommodation - Open Movie Captioning 
 
 
This bill extends statutory provisions that govern movie captioning requirements to apply 
to a motion picture house with at least four screens.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A place of public accommodation that is a motion picture house must 
provide access to fully operational and well-maintained closed movie captioning 
technology for the general public for each screening of a motion picture that is produced 
and available with closed movie captioning, as required by Title III of the federal 
Americans with Disabilities Act. 
 
If a motion picture is produced and available with open movie captioning, a place of public 
accommodation that controls, operates, owns, or leases a motion picture house with  
eight or more screens in the State must provide open movie captioning for at least 
two screenings for each motion picture it screens each week; this requirement does not 
apply to motion pictures screened fewer than five times during a seven-day period, as 
specified, and is applicable only to the first three weeks after premiering in the motion 
picture house. Beginning three weeks after the premiere, a place of public accommodation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 435/ Page 2 
that controls, operates, owns, or leases a motion picture house with eight or more screens 
in the State may provide open movie captioning with reasonable notice. 
 
“Closed movie captioning” means the written display of the dialogue and certain 
nonspeech information of a motion picture that is generally delivered to individual patrons 
on a captioning device in a motion picture house. 
 
“Open movie captioning” means a transcript or dialog of the audio portion of a motion 
picture that is displayed on a motion picture screen that cannot be turned off by a viewer. 
 
Discrimination in Public Accommodation Enforcement and Remedies 
 
The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights is the State agency generally charged with the 
enforcement of laws prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations, employment, 
housing, and State contracting. Under State law, an owner or operator of a place of public 
accommodation, or an agent or employee of the owner or operator, may not refuse, 
withhold from, or deny to any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, 
or privileges of the place of public accommodation because of the person’s race, sex, age, 
color, creed, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. 
Any structural changes, modifications, or special equipment that is necessary to 
accommodate an individual with a disability must be reasonable. A reasonable 
accommodation is defined as making a place of public accommodation suitable for access, 
use, and patronage by an individual with a disability without danger to the individual’s 
health or safety and undue hardship or expense to the person making the accommodation. 
 
State law generally requires a place of public accommodation, on request, to keep closed 
captioning activated on any closed-captioning television receiver that is in use during 
regular hours in any public area. 
 
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act requires places of public accommodation, 
including movie theaters, to provide effective communication through the use of auxiliary 
aids and services. Pursuant to a Final Rule issued by the U.S. Department of Justice 
in 2016, movie theaters must provide closed captioning equipment whenever showing a 
movie produced, distributed, or otherwise made available with these features. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that open movie captioning deters viewers from a 
particular showing, any movie theater that qualifies as a small business (and that is not 
already subject to the existing requirements based on its number of screens) may 
experience decreased revenues; conversely, to the extent that open movie captioning 
attracts hearing impaired or other customers, revenues may increase.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 435/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1363 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 259 (Senator Jackson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3