START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 427 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 427 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Task Force on Responsible Use of Natural Psychedelic Substances - Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the Task Force on Responsible Use of Natural Psychedelic Substances 
for an additional year and requires the task force to submit an updated report of its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by October 31, 2026. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and the task force terminates December 31, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) can continue to provide staff 
support to the task force with existing budgeted resources. Any expense reimbursements 
for members of the task force are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: Chapters 792 and 793 of 2024 established the Task Force on Responsible 
Use 
of 
Natural 
Psychedelic 
Substances, 
which 
is 
scheduled 
to 
terminate 
December 31, 2026. The task force must (1) study the use of natural psychedelic 
substances (including naturally derived psilocybin, psilocin, dimethyltryptamine, 
mescaline, and any other substance the task force determines to be a natural psychedelic 
substance, but not including peyote); (2) make recommendations regarding any changes to 
State law, policy, and practices needed to create a Maryland Natural Psychedelic Substance 
Access Program; and (3) make recommendations to transition from criminalizing conduct 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 427/ Page 2 
involving natural psychedelic substances. The task force may consult with experts and 
stakeholders in conducting its duties. MCA is responsible for providing staff for the task 
force. In October 2025, the task force released a report of its findings and 
recommendations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 336 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Maryland Department of 
Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2