START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 457

F2 6lr0631

By: Delegates Feldmark, Allen, Coley, Embry, Fair, Guzzone, Hill, Ivey, D. Jones,
Lehman, Palakovich Carr, Ross, Ruth, Terrasa, and Ziegler
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations and Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Institutions of Higher Education – Provision of Menstrual Hygiene Products –
3 Requirement

4 FOR the purpose of requiring each institution of higher education to provide, free of charge,
5 menstrual hygiene products in restrooms at the institution; and generally relating
6 to the provision of menstrual hygiene products at institutions of higher education.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Education
9 Section 11–2001 and 11–2002 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 20.
10 Miscellaneous Programs for Institutions of Higher Education”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Education

16 SUBTITLE 20. MISCELLANEOUS PROGRAMS FOR INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
17 EDUCATION.

18 11–2001.

19 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “MENSTRUAL HYGIENE PRODUCTS” MEANS
20 SIZE–APPROPRIATE TAMPONS OR SANITARY NAPKINS FOR USE IN CONNECTION
21 WITH THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE.

22 11–2002.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0457*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 457

1 ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1, 2028, EACH INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION
2 SHALL PROVIDE, FREE OF CHARGE, MENSTRUAL HYGIENE PRODUCTS IN ALL
3 RESTROOMS.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2