START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 493

D1 6lr2501
CF 6lr2493

By: Chair, Judiciary Committee (By Request – Maryland Judicial Conference)
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Judgeships – Circuit Court and District Court

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the number of resident judges of the Circuit Court for St.
4 Mary’s County; increasing the number of associate judges of the District Court in a
5 certain district appointed from Washington County; and generally relating to
6 judgeships in the circuit courts and the District Court.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
9 Section 1–503(a)(18) and 1–603(b)(11)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

15 1–503.

16 (a) In each county in the first seven judicial circuits there shall be the number of
17 resident judges of the circuit court set forth below, including the judge or judges provided
18 for by the Constitution:

19 (18) St. Mary’s .......................................................................................... [3] 4

20 1–603.

21 (b) In each of the districts provided for in § 1–602 of this subtitle, there shall be
22 the following number of associate judges of the District Court:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0493*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 493

1 (11) District 11 — [5] 6, three to be appointed from Frederick County and
2 [two] THREE to be appointed from Washington County

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2