START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 487 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 487 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Investments - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) to adopt, 
as part of establishing the responsibilities of the investment committee, a process for 
considering remedies, including divestment, for investments in a business that no longer 
meets the definition of a qualified business. The bill also authorizes, rather than requires, 
TEDCO to divest or instead pursue another remedy that is in TEDCO’s best interest within 
15 years after making an equity investment. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While financial investment returns to TEDCO may increase, the provisions 
are not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland 
General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of technology from universities and 
federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the growth of companies in critical or 
high-growth sectors. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a company’s 
stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
TEDCO must adopt regulations establishing an investment committee, its responsibilities, 
and the procedures for appointing its members. TEDCO investments must meet statutory 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 487/ Page 2 
eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently maintain a 
presence in the State. 
 
Generally, whenever TEDCO is authorized by law to make a grant, including from the 
Economic Development Opportunities Program Account (also known as the Sunny Day 
Fund), TEDCO may use money appropriated for the grant to make an equity investment in 
a qualified business. In making an equity investment, TEDCO may not acquire an 
ownership interest in an enterprise that exceeds 25%. However, TEDCO may acquire an 
ownership interest exceeding 25% when making an equity investment in one or more 
venture or private equity firms. 
 
Within 15 years after making an equity investment, TEDCO must divest itself from that 
investment. The liability of the State and TEDCO in making an equity investment is limited 
to the amount of that investment. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 427 and HB 498 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 248 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2