START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 406

A2 6lr1264
HB 281/20 – ECM

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Multiple Licenses Prohibition –
3 Exceptions

4 PG 313–26

5 FOR the purpose of adding Class B (on–sale) beer and wine and Class B (on–sale) beer,
6 wine, and liquor licenses to the list of alcoholic beverages licenses for which the
7 prohibition against issuing multiple licenses for the same person or premises in
8 Prince George’s County does not apply; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages
9 licenses in Prince George’s County.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
12 Section 26–102
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
17 Section 26–1505
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

23 26–102.

24 This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0406*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 406

1 26–1505.

2 (a) Unless otherwise authorized by this article, a person may not have an interest
3 in more than one license issued by the Board, regardless of whether the person acts on the
4 person’s own behalf or on behalf of another person.

5 (b) The prohibition against issuing multiple licenses for the same premises or to
6 an individual for the use of that individual, a partnership, a corporation, an unincorporated
7 association, or a limited liability company does not apply if:

8 (1) each premises is a bowling establishment that has at least 30 lanes with
9 automatic pinsetters; and

10 (2) the licenses were issued before June 1, 1982.

11 (c) The prohibition against issuing multiple licenses for the same person or
12 premises does not apply to a Class B–ECF/DS license, CLASS B (ON–SALE) BEER AND
13 WINE LICENSE, OR CLASS B (ON–SALE) BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2