START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 497

D4 6lr1871
CF 6lr1873

By: Delegate Simpson
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Family Law – Temporary and Final Protective Orders – Duration and Relief

3 FOR the purpose of extending the time period during which a temporary protective order
4 is effective after service of the order; extending the time period for which a final
5 protective order hearing is required to be held after service of the temporary
6 protective order; providing that a final protective order may order the respondent to
7 pay to a person eligible for relief certain losses or expenses incurred as a result of
8 abuse; providing that a certain monetary award does not preclude a petitioner from
9 bringing a subsequent claim for certain losses or expenses; and generally relating to
10 temporary and final protective orders.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Family Law
13 Section 4–505(a)(1)(i) and 4–506(a)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Family Law
18 Section 4–505(c) and 4–506(b)(1) and (d)(13) and (14)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Family Law
23 Section 4–506(d)(14) and (l)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
27 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0497*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 497

1 Article – Family Law

2 4–505.

3 (a) (1) (i) If, after a hearing on a petition, whether ex parte or otherwise, a
4 judge finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person eligible for relief has
5 been abused, the judge may enter a temporary protective order to protect any person
6 eligible for relief from abuse.

7 (c) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the temporary
8 protective order shall be effective for not more than [7] 14 days after service of the order.

9 (2) The judge may extend the temporary protective order as needed, but
10 not to exceed 6 months, to effectuate service of the order where necessary to provide
11 protection or for other good cause.

12 (3) If the court is closed on the day on which the temporary protective order
13 is due to expire, the temporary protective order shall be effective until the second day on
14 which the court is open, by which time the court shall hold a final protective order hearing.

15 4–506.

16 (a) A respondent under § 4–505 of this subtitle shall have an opportunity to be
17 heard on the question of whether the judge should issue a final protective order.

18 (b) (1) (i) The temporary protective order shall state the date and time of
19 the final protective order hearing.

20 (ii) Except as provided in § 4–505(c) of this subtitle, or unless
21 continued for good cause, the final protective order hearing shall be held no later than [7]
22 14 days after the temporary protective order is served on the respondent.

23 (d) The final protective order may include any or all of the following relief:

24 (13) award temporary possession of any pet of the person eligible for relief
25 or the respondent; [or]

26 (14) ORDER THE RESPONDENT TO PAY TO A PERSON ELIGIBLE FOR
27 RELIEF, BY A DATE FIXED BY THE COURT, ANY LOSSES OR EXPENSES INCURRED AS
28 A DIRECT RESULT OF THE ABUSE, INCLUDING:

29 (I) MEDICAL, DENTAL, OR MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT
30 COSTS;

31 (II) COSTS TO REPAIR OR REPLACE DAMAGED PROPERTY;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 497 3

1 (III) FOOD, TEMPORARY SHELTER, OR RELOCATION COSTS;

2 (IV) TRANSPORTATION COSTS;

3 (V) FILING FEES AND COURT COSTS; AND

4 (VI) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES; OR

5 [(14)] (15) order any other relief that the judge determines is necessary to
6 protect a person eligible for relief from abuse.

7 (L) A MONETARY AWARD UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(14) OF THIS SECTION
8 DOES NOT PRECLUDE A PETITIONER FROM BRINGING A SUBSEQUENT CLAIM FOR
9 ADDITIONAL LOSSES OR EXPENSES NOT AWARDED IN THE FINAL PROTECTIVE
10 ORDER.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
12 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3