START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 405

N1 6lr2406
HB 673/25 – ENT

By: Delegates Terrasa, Boyce, Feldmark, Kaufman, Korman, Lehman, Ruth, and
Taveras
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Condominiums and Homeowners Associations – Governing Documents –
3 Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting provisions of the governing documents of a condominium
5 or homeowners association from unreasonably restricting the governing body of the
6 condominium or homeowners association from installing or authorizing the
7 installation of electric vehicle recharging equipment; establishing that the
8 installation or authorization of installation of electric vehicle recharging equipment
9 by a governing body is subject to the ordinary budget processes of the condominium
10 or homeowners association and requiring the governing body to consider the
11 availability of sufficient parking to meet the needs of the community before
12 installation or authorization; applying this Act retroactively; authorizing the
13 governing body of a condominium or homeowners association to grant a certain
14 license; and generally relating to electric vehicle recharging equipment in
15 condominiums and homeowners associations.

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Real Property
18 Section 11–111.6 and 11B–111.13
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Real Property

24 11–111.6.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0405*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 405

1 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT” HAS
2 THE MEANING STATED IN § 11–111.4 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

3 (B) A RECORDED COVENANT OR RESTRICTION, A PROVISION IN A
4 DECLARATION, OR A PROVISION IN THE BYLAWS OR RULES OF A CONDOMINIUM MAY
5 NOT PROHIBIT OR UNREASONABLY RESTRICT THE GOVERNING BODY FROM
6 INSTALLING OR AUTHORIZING THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE
7 RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN COMMON USE OR LIMITED COMMON USE PARKING
8 SPACES.

9 (C) THE INSTALLATION OR AUTHORIZATION OF INSTALLATION OF
10 ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT BY A GOVERNING BODY SHALL BE
11 SUBJECT TO THE ORDINARY BUDGET PROCESS OF THE CONDOMINIUM.

12 (D) A GOVERNING BODY SHALL CONSIDER THE AVAILABILITY OF
13 SUFFICIENT PARKING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY BEFORE
14 INSTALLING OR AUTHORIZING THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE
15 RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN COMMON USE OR LIMITED COMMON USE PARKING
16 SPACES.

17 (E) NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF § 11–125 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
18 THE GOVERNING BODY MAY GRANT A LICENSE FOR UP TO 3 YEARS, RENEWABLE AT
19 THE DISCRETION OF THE GOVERNING BODY, ON ANY COMMON ELEMENT NECESSARY
20 FOR THE INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT OR FOR THE SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY TO
21 ANY ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

22 11B–111.13.

23 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT” HAS
24 THE MEANING STATED IN § 11–111.4 OF THIS ARTICLE.

25 (B) A RECORDED COVENANT OR RESTRICTION, A PROVISION IN A
26 DECLARATION, OR A PROVISION IN THE BYLAWS OR RULES OF A HOMEOWNERS
27 ASSOCIATION MAY NOT PROHIBIT OR UNREASONABLY RESTRICT THE GOVERNING
28 BODY FROM INSTALLING OR AUTHORIZING THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC
29 VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN COMMON USE OR LIMITED COMMON USE
30 PARKING SPACES.

31 (C) THE INSTALLATION OR AUTHORIZATION OF INSTALLATION OF
32 ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT BY A GOVERNING BODY SHALL BE
33 SUBJECT TO THE ORDINARY BUDGET PROCESS OF THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.

34 (D) A GOVERNING BODY SHALL CONSIDER THE AVAILABILITY OF
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 405 3

1 SUFFICIENT PARKING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF THE COMMUNITY BEFORE
2 INSTALLING OR AUTHORIZING THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE
3 RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN COMMON USE OR LIMITED COMMON USE PARKING
4 SPACES.

5 (E) THE GOVERNING BODY MAY GRANT A LICENSE FOR UP TO 3 YEARS,
6 RENEWABLE AT THE DISCRETION OF THE GOVERNING BODY, ON ANY COMMON
7 ELEMENT NECESSARY FOR THE INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT OR FOR THE SUPPLY
8 OF ELECTRICITY TO ANY ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
10 apply retroactively and shall be applied to and interpreted to affect any covenant or
11 restriction, or provision in a declaration, bylaws, or rules, recorded or adopted before the
12 effective date of this Act.

13 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3