START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 463

E5 6lr2206

By: Delegates Buckel, Anderson, Arentz, Baker, Beauchamp, Chisholm, Griffith,
Hartman, Hinebaugh, Hornberger, Hutchinson, Jacobs, Kipke, R. Long,
McComas, Metzgar, T. Morgan, Nkongolo, Pippy, Reilly, Rose, Schmidt,
Tomlinson, Valentine, and Wivell
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 First Degree Murder – Diminution Credits – Prohibition

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the earning of diminution credits to reduce the term of
4 confinement of an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for murder in
5 the first degree in a State or local correctional facility; and generally relating to
6 diminution credits.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Correctional Services
9 Section 3–702
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Correctional Services

15 3–702.

16 (a) Subject to subsections (b) [and], (c), AND (D) of this section, § 3–711 of this
17 subtitle, and Title 7, Subtitle 5 of this article, an incarcerated individual committed to the
18 custody of the Commissioner is entitled to a diminution of the incarcerated individual’s
19 term of confinement as provided under this subtitle.

20 (b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, an incarcerated individual
21 who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–303 or § 3–304 of the Criminal Law Article

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0463*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 463

1 involving a victim who is a child under the age of 16 years, or an incarcerated individual
2 who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–305 or § 3–306 of the Criminal Law Article,
3 as the sections existed before October 1, 2017, involving a victim who is a child under the
4 age of 16 years, is not entitled to a diminution of the incarcerated individual’s term of
5 confinement as provided under this subtitle.

6 (2) An incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of
7 § 3–303 of the Criminal Law Article that occurred on or after October 1, 2024, is not entitled
8 to a diminution of the incarcerated individual’s term of confinement as provided under this
9 subtitle.

10 (c) An incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–307
11 of the Criminal Law Article involving a victim who is a child under the age of 16 years is
12 not entitled to a diminution of the incarcerated individual’s term of confinement as provided
13 under this subtitle, if the incarcerated individual was previously convicted of a violation of
14 § 3–307 of the Criminal Law Article involving a victim who is a child under the age of 16
15 years.

16 (D) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SERVING A SENTENCE FOR A
17 VIOLATION OF § 2–201 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE IS NOT ENTITLED TO A
18 DIMINUTION OF THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S TERM OF CONFINEMENT AS
19 PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
21 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
22 application to any offense committed before the effective date of this Act.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
24 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2