START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 456

A2 6lr0788

By: Howard County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Howard County – Alcoholic Beverages – Gift Basket Permit

3 Ho. Co. 2–26

4 FOR the purpose of establishing, in Howard County, a gift basket permit that authorizes a
5 permit holder to sell and deliver gift baskets containing beer, wine, or liquor to
6 certain individuals under certain circumstances; providing that certain distance
7 requirements do not apply to the issuance of the permit; and generally relating to
8 alcoholic beverages in Howard County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 23–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 23–1003.1
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
21 Section 23–1602
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0456*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 456

1 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

2 23–102.

3 This title applies only in Howard County.

4 23–1003.1.

5 (A) THERE IS A GIFT BASKET PERMIT.

6 (B) (1) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE PERMIT TO A PERSON:

7 (I) WHOSE PRIMARY BUSINESS IS THE SALE AND DELIVERY OF
8 FLOWERS;

9 (II) WHOSE BUSINESS INCLUDES THE SALE AND DELIVERY OF
10 GIFT BASKETS OF FLOWERS, FOOD, OR OTHER ITEMS; AND

11 (III) WHO DOES NOT HOLD ANY OTHER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
12 LICENSE OR PERMIT UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

13 (2) THE BOARD MAY NOT ISSUE THE PERMIT FOR USE IN
14 CONJUNCTION WITH OR ON THE PREMISES OF A CHAIN STORE, SUPERMARKET, OR
15 DISCOUNT HOUSE.

16 (C) A HOLDER OF THE PERMIT:

17 (1) MAY SELL AND DELIVER, TO CONSUMERS OF A LEGAL DRINKING
18 AGE LOCATED IN THE COUNTY, GIFT BASKETS CONTAINING:

19 (I) NOT MORE THAN 72 OUNCES OF BEER;

20 (II) NOT MORE THAN 2.25 LITERS OF WINE; OR

21 (III) NOT MORE THAN 2.25 LITERS OF LIQUOR; AND

22 (2) SHALL MAINTAIN RECORDS AND SUBMIT REPORTS AS REQUIRED
23 BY THE BOARD.

24 (D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PERMIT
25 HOLDER OR AN EMPLOYEE OF THE PERMIT HOLDER SHALL:

26 (I) DELIVER THE GIFT BASKET CONTAINING ALCOHOLIC
27 BEVERAGES; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 456 3

1 (II) REQUIRE THE PERSON RECEIVING A DELIVERY OF A GIFT
2 BASKET CONTAINING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO DISPLAY PROOF THAT THE
3 PERSON IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

4 (2) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO DELIVERS A GIFT BASKET CONTAINING
5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SHALL BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

6 (E) THE HOLDER’S ANNUAL SALES FROM ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY NOT
7 EXCEED 10% OF THE HOLDER’S ANNUAL GROSS SALES.

8 (F) THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES CONTAINED IN A GIFT BASKET SHALL BE
9 PURCHASED FROM A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER.

10 (G) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

11 (H) THE FEE FOR A GIFT BASKET PERMIT IS $100.

12 23–1602.

13 (a) (1) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the Board may not issue:

14 (i) a Class B license for a restaurant that is within 400 feet of the
15 nearest point of a public school building; or

16 (ii) any other license for an establishment that is within 500 feet of
17 the nearest point of a public school building.

18 (2) A decision of the County Board of Education to locate a public school
19 building within 500 feet of the premises of a license holder may not be the basis to revoke
20 or deny the renewal or transfer of the license.

21 (b) For a license issued on or before June 30, 1971, the Board may renew the
22 license or approve the transfer of the license to a new license holder for the same
23 establishment and type of license.

24 (C) THE PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUING A LICENSE IN SUBSECTION (A) OF
25 THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO THE ISSUANCE OF A GIFT BASKET PERMIT.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
27 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3