START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 465 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 465 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Civil Actions - Immunity - Disclosure of Allegations of Sexually Assaultive 
Behavior (Stop Silencing Survivors Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes that a person acting in good faith may not be held liable for disclosing 
any information about allegations of sexually assaultive behavior (as defined in  
§ 10-923 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article) to another person. Such a person 
is presumed to have acted in good faith unless it is shown by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the person (1) acted with actual malice toward the person alleged to have 
committed the sexually assaultive behavior or (2) intentionally or recklessly disclosed false 
information about the alleged perpetrator. The court must award reasonable attorney’s fees 
and costs to a person who successfully defends a claim of not acting in good faith in 
disclosing information about the allegations, unless the party from whom the fees and costs 
are sought establishes that the award would be clearly inappropriate.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 465/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Sexually Assaultive Behavior 
 
“Sexually assaultive behavior” means an act that would constitute a sexual crime under 
Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article; sexual abuse of a minor under  
§ 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article; sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult under  
§ 3-604 of the Criminal Law Article; a violation of 18 U. S. Code Chapter 109A; or a 
violation of a law of another state, the United States, or a foreign country that is equivalent 
to any of these offenses. 
 
Similar Provisions 
 
Section 5-423 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article contains provisions similar to 
the bill that apply to the disclosure of information by an employer regarding an employee 
or former employee’s job performance or reason for termination of employment. 
 
An employer acting in good faith may not be held liable for disclosing any information 
about the job performance or the reason for termination of employment of an employee or 
former employee of the employer: 
 
 
to a prospective employer of the employee or former employee at the request of the 
prospective employer, the employee, or former employee; or 
 
if requested or required by a federal, State, or industry regulatory authority or if the 
information is disclosed in a report, filing, or other document required by law, rule, 
order, or regulation of the regulatory authority. 
 
An employer who discloses information under these circumstances must be presumed to 
be acting in good faith unless it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the 
employer (1) acted with actual malice toward the employee or former employee or 
(2) intentionally or recklessly disclosed false information about the employee or former 
employee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 549 and HB 629 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 295 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 465/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3