START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 448

J3 6lr1413
CF 6lr1411

By: Delegates Rosenberg, Ruff, and Stinnett
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Facilities – Certified Recovery Residences – Unannounced Inspections

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to conduct at least a
4 certain number of unannounced on–site inspections of each certified recovery
5 residence annually; requiring the Department to allow a certified recovery residence
6 that is found after an inspection to be noncompliant with statutory or regulatory
7 requirements a certain remediation period to correct the deficiencies; authorizing the
8 Department to direct the recovery residence credentialing entity to revoke the
9 certification of a certified recovery residence that fails to correct a deficiency within
10 a certain period of time; and generally relating to certified recovery residences.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Health – General
13 Section 19–2502
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Health – General
18 Section 19–2502.1
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Health – General

24 19–2502.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0448*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 448

1 (a) The Department shall approve a credentialing entity to develop and
2 administer a certification process for recovery residences.

3 (b) The credentialing entity shall:

4 (1) Establish recovery residence certification requirements;

5 (2) Establish processes to administer the application, certification, and
6 recertification process;

7 (3) Establish processes to monitor and inspect a recovery residence;

8 (4) Conduct an on–site inspection of a recovery residence:

9 (i) Before issuing a certificate of compliance; and

10 (ii) At least once during each certification renewal period; and

11 (5) Issue a certificate of compliance on approval of the application process
12 and the inspection of the recovery residence.

13 (c) A certificate of compliance issued by the credentialing entity is valid for 1 year
14 from the date of issuance.

15 (d) The credentialing entity may revoke the certificate of compliance of a certified
16 recovery residence if [the]:

17 (1) THE credentialing entity finds that the recovery residence is not in
18 compliance with the requirements established by the credentialing entity; OR

19 (2) INSTRUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 19–2502.1(B)(2) OF
20 THIS SUBTITLE.

21 19–2502.1.

22 (A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONDUCT AT LEAST TWO
23 UNANNOUNCED ON–SITE INSPECTIONS OF EACH CERTIFIED RECOVERY RESIDENCE
24 EACH YEAR TO ENSURE THE CERTIFIED RECOVERY RESIDENCE’S COMPLIANCE WITH
25 STATUTORY AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS.

26 (2) THE UNANNOUNCED ON–SITE INSPECTIONS REQUIRED UNDER
27 THIS SUBSECTION ARE IN ADDITION TO THE ON–SITE INSPECTION CONDUCTED BY
28 THE CREDENTIALING ENTITY FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECERTIFICATION UNDER §
29 19–2502(B)(4)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 448 3

1 (B) (1) IF, AFTER AN INSPECTION IS CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
2 OF THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT A CERTIFIED RECOVERY
3 RESIDENCE IS NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTORY OR REGULATORY
4 REQUIREMENTS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

5 (I) PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE CERTIFIED RECOVERY
6 RESIDENCE OF THE DEFICIENCIES IDENTIFIED; AND

7 (II) ALLOW THE CERTIFIED RECOVERY RESIDENCE 1 MONTH
8 AFTER THE NOTICE IS PROVIDED TO ADDRESS THE DEFICIENCIES.

9 (2) IF THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES A DEFICIENCY EXISTS AND,
10 AFTER THE 1–MONTH PERIOD, THE CERTIFIED RECOVERY RESIDENCE FAILS TO
11 TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY INSTRUCT THE CREDENTIALING
12 ENTITY TO REVOKE THE CERTIFICATION OF THE CERTIFIED RECOVERY RESIDENCE.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3