START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 469

N1 6lr1701
HB 1541/25 – ENT

By: Delegate Holmes
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Condominiums – Mandatory Insurance Coverage

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a certain condominium unit owner to obtain a certain
4 insurance policy for the unit; requiring a certain insurance policy to include certain
5 provisions; authorizing a council of unit owners to acquire a certain insurance policy
6 and charge a certain assessment under certain circumstances; and generally relating
7 to mandatory insurance coverage for condominiums.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Real Property
10 Section 11–114.3
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Real Property

16 11–114.3.

17 (A) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A CONDOMINIUM COMPOSED
18 ENTIRELY OF UNITS INTENDED FOR RESIDENTIAL USE.

19 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO DETACHED UNITS OF A
20 CONDOMINIUM.

21 (B) (1) A UNIT OWNER SHALL MAINTAIN A CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNER
22 INSURANCE POLICY OR A SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR PROPERTY INSURANCE POLICY
23 ON THE UNIT.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0469*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 469

1 (2) AN INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
2 THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

3 (I) COVERAGE FOR THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS’ PROPERTY
4 INSURANCE DEDUCTIBLE OR A PORTION OF THE DEDUCTIBLE REQUIRED UNDER §
5 11–114 OF THIS TITLE;

6 (II) A COVERAGE LIMIT THAT IS SUFFICIENT TO REPAIR OR
7 REPLACE THE UNIT OWNER’S PERSONAL PROPERTY OR THE CONTENTS OF THE UNIT;

8 (III) LOSS OF USE COVERAGE IN AN AMOUNT SUFFICIENT TO
9 PROVIDE ALTERNATE HOUSING FOR AT LEAST 12 MONTHS IF THE UNIT OWNER
10 CANNOT LIVE IN THE UNIT;

11 (IV) PERSONAL LIABILITY COVERAGE OF AT LEAST $500,000;

12 (V) LOSS ASSESSMENT COVERAGE OF AT LEAST $25,000; AND

13 (VI) DWELLING OR BUILDING PROPERTY COVERAGE OF AT
14 LEAST THE GREATER OF:

15 1. $25,000; OR

16 2. THE AMOUNT NECESSARY TO REPAIR AND REPLACE:

17 A. ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS, BETTERMENTS, AND
18 INVESTMENTS MADE OR ACQUIRED BY THE CURRENT UNIT OWNER; AND

19 B. UPGRADES CONVEYED TO THE UNIT OWNER THAT
20 ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE UNIT OWNER TO INSURE UNDER THE BYLAWS OF
21 THE CONDOMINIUM.

22 (C) THE BYLAWS OF A CONDOMINIUM MAY REQUIRE A UNIT OWNER TO
23 MAINTAIN AN INSURANCE POLICY THAT INCLUDES COVERAGE AMOUNTS IN EXCESS
24 OF THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

25 (D) EACH UNIT OWNER SHALL PROVIDE EVIDENCE OF THE INSURANCE
26 POLICY REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO THE COUNCIL OF
27 UNIT OWNERS:

28 (1) ANNUALLY; AND

29 (2) ON REQUEST BY THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 469 3

1 (E) (1) IF A UNIT OWNER DOES NOT MAINTAIN AN INSURANCE POLICY AS
2 REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE COUNCIL OF UNIT
3 OWNERS MAY ACQUIRE AN INSURANCE POLICY ON BEHALF OF THE UNIT OWNER.

4 (2) A COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS THAT ACQUIRES AN INSURANCE
5 POLICY ON BEHALF OF A UNIT OWNER UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
6 MAY CHARGE THE INSURANCE PREMIUM AS AN ASSESSMENT TO THE UNIT OWNER.

7 (3) FOR AN INSURANCE POLICY ACQUIRED ON BEHALF OF A UNIT
8 OWNER UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE INSURANCE CARRIER SHALL PAY DIRECTLY
9 TO THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS THE PORTION OF THE COUNCIL’S DEDUCTIBLE
10 THAT THE UNIT OWNER IS RESPONSIBLE FOR UNDER § 11–114 OF THIS TITLE.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
12 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3