START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 444 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 444 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Immigration Enforcement Agreements - Prohibition 
 
   
This bill prohibits the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or any agency, 
officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government from entering into an 
“immigration enforcement agreement.” By July 1, 2026, the State, a unit of local 
government, a county sheriff, or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of the State or a 
unit of local government with an existing immigration enforcement agreement must 
exercise the agreement’s termination provision. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Immigration enforcement agreement” means a contract, an agreement, 
an intergovernmental service agreement, or a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with 
the federal government that authorizes the State, a unit of local government, a county 
sheriff, or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government 
to enforce civil immigration law. “Immigration enforcement agreement” includes an 
agreement made in accordance with (1) 8 U.S.C. § 1103; (2) 8 U.S.C. § 1357; or (3) any 
other federal law. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 444/ Page 2 
Current Law:  While immigration is controlled by federal law, the U.S. Immigration, 
Customs, and Enforcement Division (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
have initiated numerous programs that involve state and local law enforcement agencies as 
allies and additional resources. For example, the Criminal Alien Program (CAP) supports 
ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations in executing its mission through the arrest and 
removal of undocumented immigrants who threaten the safety of the nation’s communities 
and the integrity of U.S. immigration laws. CAP focuses on the identification, arrest, and 
removal of incarcerated undocumented immigrants at federal, state, and local levels, as 
well as at‑large criminal undocumented immigrants. 
 
Federal law does not mandate that state and local law enforcement agencies become 
involved in immigration efforts. However, federal law does prohibit a state or local 
government from prohibiting or in any way restricting any government entity or official 
from sending to or receiving from ICE information regarding the citizenship or 
immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual. It also prohibits restrictions on 
any of the following with respect to information regarding the immigration status, lawful 
or unlawful, of any individual:  (1) sending such information to, or requesting or receiving 
such information from, ICE; (2) maintaining such information; or (3) exchanging such 
information with any other federal, state, or local government authority. 
 
287(g) Agreements and Immigration Detainers 
 
Section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (codified as 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g)) 
authorizes the Attorney General of the United States to enter into agreements, commonly 
referred to as “287(g) agreements,” with state and local governments authorizing state or 
local personnel “to perform a function of an immigration officer in relation to the 
investigation, apprehension, or detention of aliens in the United States.” A 287(g) 
agreement is not required for a local jurisdiction to cooperate with federal immigration 
authorities; however, federal law does require that each agreement provide that 
participating personnel have adequate training regarding immigration law. There are 
currently three distinct models of 287(g) agreements. The Jail Enforcement Model allows 
for correctional officers to be trained to screen individuals entering a correctional facility 
for citizenship or immigration status, to notify DHS of individuals suspected of being in 
the country without lawful status, and to execute detainers and administrative warrants 
issued by DHS. The Warrant Service Officer Model is similar to the Jail Enforcement 
Model, but more limited in scope. Under a Warrant Service Officer Model, correctional 
officers are trained only to screen for and execute detainers and administrative warrants 
issued by DHS. Finally, under the Task Force Model, state and local law enforcement 
officers are trained to investigate the immigration status of individuals and enforce federal 
immigration law during routine policing in the field. An immigration detainer is a 
document issued by DHS advising a law enforcement agency that DHS believes the agency 
has custody of an individual who is deportable. The detainer requests that the agency 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 444/ Page 3 
maintain custody of the individual for up to 48 hours beyond the time when the individual 
would otherwise be released, and notify DHS as early as practicable before the individual 
is released. Under current DHS policy, each detainer must be accompanied by an 
administrative warrant alleging that the individual is deportable. Immigration detainers and 
administrative warrants are issued by DHS and are not reviewed by a court.  
 
According to DHS, the following jurisdictions in Maryland have active 287(g) agreements: 
 
 
Allegany County – Warrant Service Officer Model 
 
Carroll County – Warrant Service Officer Model  
 
Cecil County – Jail Enforcement Model  
 
Frederick County – Jail Enforcement Model  
 
Garrett County – Warrant Service Officer Model  
 
Harford County – Jail Enforcement Model  
 
St. Mary’s County – Warrant Service Officer Model  
 
Washington County – Warrant Service Officer Model  
 
Guidance for Interacting or Partnering with Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 
 
In October 2025, the Office of the Attorney General of Maryland issued a guidance 
memorandum for State and local law enforcement agencies that addresses the application 
of State law when interacting or partnering with federal law enforcement agencies. The 
guidance describes requirements and prohibitions for police officers in the State when 
working with federal agents.  
 
Federal Immigration Detention Agreements 
 
Chapter 19 of the 2021 special session prohibits the State, local governments, and specified 
State and local agents from (1) entering into an agreement of any kind for the detention of 
individuals in an immigration detention facility owned, managed, or operated, in whole or 
in part, by a private entity; (2) paying, reimbursing, subsidizing, or defraying in any way 
any costs related to the sale, purchase, construction, development, ownership, 
management, or operation of an immigration detention facility that is or will be owned, 
managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity; (3) receiving any payment 
related to the detention of individuals in an immigration detention facility owned, managed, 
or operated in whole or in part, by a private entity; or (4) otherwise giving any financial 
incentive or benefit to any private entity or person in connection with the sale, purchase, 
construction, development, ownership, management, or operation of an immigration 
detention facility that is or will be owned, managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a 
private entity. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 444/ Page 4 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
approving a zoning variance or issuing a permit for the construction of a building or the 
reuse of existing buildings or structures by any private entity for use as an immigration 
detention facility unless the entity (1) provides notice to the public of the proposed zoning 
variance or permit action at least 180 days before authorizing the variance or issuing the 
permit and (2) solicits and hears public comments on the proposed zoning variance or 
permit action in at least two separate meetings open to the public. 
 
The State, local governments, and specified State and local agents are prohibited from 
entering into or renewing an immigration detention agreement. Those with an existing 
immigration detention agreement must exercise the termination provision contained in the 
immigration detention agreement no later than October 1, 2022. In any dispute over an 
immigration detention agreement with the State, these provisions govern. However, the 
provisions may not be construed to authorize or prohibit the State, local governments, and 
specified State and local agents from entering into an agreement with the 
federal government under 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g). 
 
“Immigration detention agreement” means any contract, agreement, intergovernmental 
service agreement, or MOU that authorizes a State or local government agency to house or 
detain individuals for federal civil immigration violations. “Immigration detention facility” 
means any building, facility, or structure used, in whole or in part, to house or detain 
individuals for federal civil immigration violations. 
 
Immigration Status and Law Enforcement Agents 
 
Chapter 19 further prohibits a law enforcement agent, during the performance of regular 
police functions from (1) inquiring about an individual’s citizenship, immigration status, 
or place of birth during a stop, a search, or an arrest; (2) detaining, or prolonging the 
detention of an individual for the purpose of investigating the individual’s citizenship or 
immigration status, or based on the suspicion that the individual has committed a civil 
immigration violation; (3) transferring an individual to federal immigration authorities 
unless required by federal law; or (4) coercing, intimidating, or threatening any individual 
based on the actual or perceived citizenship or immigration status of the individual or 
specified individuals that are generally related to the individual. 
 
Nothing in the provisions prevent a law enforcement agent from inquiring about any 
information that is material to a criminal investigation. 
 
If the citizenship or immigration status of an individual is relevant to a protection accorded 
to the individual under State or federal law, or subject to a requirement imposed by 
international treaty, a law enforcement agent may (1) notify the individual of the protection 
or requirement and (2) provide the individual an opportunity to voluntarily disclose the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 444/ Page 5 
individual’s citizenship or immigration status for the purpose of receiving the protection or 
complying with the requirement. 
 
 “Civil immigration violation” means a violation of federal civil immigration law. 
 
“Law enforcement agent” means an individual who is certified by the Maryland Police 
Training and Standards Commission. “Law enforcement agent” does not include an agent 
or employee of a State correctional facility or local correctional facility. “Arrest” does not 
include a routine booking procedure. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 245 (Senator Smith, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll, Garrett, Harford, and St. Mary’s counties; Town of Bel 
Air; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5