START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 476

D3 6lr1385
HB 113/25 – JUD CF 6lr2942

By: Delegates Ziegler, Stewart, Boyce, Charkoudian, Foley, Kaufman, Ruff, and
Terrasa
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Civil Actions – Noneconomic Damages – Personal Injury and Wrongful Death

3 FOR the purpose of repealing certain limitations on noneconomic damages in civil actions
4 for personal injury or wrongful death; and generally relating to noneconomic
5 damages.

6 BY repealing
7 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
8 Section 11–108
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

14 [11–108.

15 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (2) (i) “Noneconomic damages” means:

17 1. In an action for personal injury, pain, suffering,
18 inconvenience, physical impairment, disfigurement, loss of consortium, or other
19 nonpecuniary injury; and

20 2. In an action for wrongful death, mental anguish,
21 emotional pain and suffering, loss of society, companionship, comfort, protection, care,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0476*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 476

1 marital care, parental care, filial care, attention, advice, counsel, training, guidance, or
2 education, or other noneconomic damages authorized under Title 3, Subtitle 9 of this
3 article.

4 (ii) “Noneconomic damages” does not include punitive damages.

5 (3) “Primary claimant” means a claimant in an action for the death of a
6 person described under § 3–904(d) of this article.

7 (4) “Secondary claimant” means a claimant in an action for the death of a
8 person described under § 3–904(e) of this article.

9 (b) (1) In any action for damages for personal injury in which the cause of
10 action arises on or after July 1, 1986, an award for noneconomic damages may not exceed
11 $350,000.

12 (2) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (3)(ii) of this subsection, in any
13 action for damages for personal injury or wrongful death in which the cause of action arises
14 on or after October 1, 1994, an award for noneconomic damages may not exceed $500,000.

15 (ii) The limitation on noneconomic damages provided under
16 subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall increase by $15,000 on October 1 of each year
17 beginning on October 1, 1995. The increased amount shall apply to causes of action arising
18 between October 1 of that year and September 30 of the following year, inclusive.

19 (3) (i) The limitation established under paragraph (2) of this subsection
20 shall apply in a personal injury action to each direct victim of tortious conduct and all
21 persons who claim injury by or through that victim.

22 (ii) In a wrongful death action in which there are two or more
23 claimants or beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not exceed 150% of the
24 limitation established under paragraph (2) of this subsection, regardless of the number of
25 claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award.

26 (c) An award by the health claims arbitration panel in accordance with §
27 3–2A–05 of this article for damages in which the cause of action arose before January 1,
28 2005, shall be considered an award for purposes of this section.

29 (d) (1) In a jury trial, the jury may not be informed of the limitation
30 established under subsection (b) of this section.

31 (2) (i) If the jury awards an amount for noneconomic damages that
32 exceeds the limitation established under subsection (b) of this section, the court shall
33 reduce the amount to conform to the limitation.

34 (ii) In a wrongful death action in which there are two or more
35 claimants or beneficiaries, if the jury awards an amount for noneconomic damages that
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 476 3

1 exceeds the limitation established under subsection (b)(3)(ii) of this section, the court shall:

2 1. If the amount of noneconomic damages for the primary
3 claimants equals or exceeds the limitation under subsection (b)(3)(ii) of this section:

4 A. Reduce each individual award of a primary claimant
5 proportionately to the total award of all of the primary claimants so that the total award to
6 all claimants or beneficiaries conforms to the limitation; and

7 B. Reduce each award, if any, to a secondary claimant to zero
8 dollars; or

9 2. If the amount of noneconomic damages for the primary
10 claimants does not exceed the limitation under subsection (b)(3)(ii) of this section or if there
11 is no award to a primary claimant:

12 A. Enter an award to the primary claimant, if any, as
13 directed by the verdict; and

14 B. Reduce each individual award of a secondary claimant
15 proportionately to the total award of all of the secondary claimants so that the total award
16 to all claimants or beneficiaries conforms to the limitation.

17 (e) The provisions of this section do not apply to a verdict under Title 3, Subtitle
18 2A of this article for damages in which the cause of action arises on or after January 1,
19 2005.]

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
21 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
22 application to any cause of action arising before the effective date of this Act.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
24 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3