START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 414 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 414 
(Delegate Roberson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courts - Jury Service - Disqualification 
 
 
This bill alters the circumstances under which an individual is disqualified from jury 
service. The bill repeals a provision that disqualifies an individual who has previously 
received a sentence of imprisonment for more than one year. Instead, an individual is not 
qualified for jury service if the individual has been convicted of a crime punishable by 
imprisonment exceeding one year and is currently serving the sentence imposed for the 
conviction, including a term of parole or probation. The bill also disqualifies an individual 
for jury service if the individual was convicted of a crime involving or related to perjury, 
witness intimidation, jury intimidation, or a crime under Title 8 of the Criminal Law Article 
(Fraud and Related Crimes). Finally, the bill repeals a provision providing that an 
individual with a disqualifying conviction who has been pardoned qualifies for jury service. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $28,100 in FY 2027 only for one‑time 
programming costs incurred by the Judiciary to update the online and printed versions of 
the juror qualification forms. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each adult citizen of the State has both the opportunity for jury service 
and, when summoned, the duty to serve. However, an individual is not qualified for jury 
service in specified circumstances, including if the individual has been convicted, in a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 414/ Page 2 
federal or State court, of a crime punishable by imprisonment exceeding one year and 
received a sentence of imprisonment for more than one year. An individual who has a 
charge pending in a federal or State court for a crime punishable by imprisonment 
exceeding one year is also not qualified for jury service. An individual with a disqualifying 
conviction who has been pardoned qualifies for jury service.  
 
Additional Comments:  For more information on the collateral consequences of a criminal 
conviction, including those that impact jury service, please see this 2021 report. 
 
The Judiciary advises that in fiscal 2025, there were 665 convictions based on the specific 
offenses added in the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 435 of 2025; HB 446 of 2024; and SB 97 and HB 156 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 322 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2