START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 451

R7 6lr1832

By: Delegates Fraser–Hidalgo, Solomon, and Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council – Reporting
3 and Sunset Extension

4 FOR the purpose of altering the deadlines for the interim and final reporting requirements
5 for the Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council; extending
6 the termination date for the Council; and generally relating to the Maryland Zero
7 Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Transportation
10 Section 2–113(b)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Transportation
15 Section 2–113(h)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Chapter 447 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2024
20 Section 2

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Transportation

24 2–113.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0451*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 451

1 (b) There is a Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council.

2 (h) (1) On or before December 1, [2024, and] 2027, AND ON OR BEFORE
3 December 1[, 2025,] EACH YEAR THROUGH 2031, the Council shall submit interim
4 reports of its work and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257
5 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

6 (2) On or before June 30, [2026] 2031, the Council shall submit a final
7 report of its work and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257
8 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

9 Chapter 447 of the Acts of 2024

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
11 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of [2] 7 years and, at the end of June 30,
12 [2026] 2031, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
13 abrogated and of no further force and effect.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2