START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 408

L2, M3 6lr1005

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections and Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Authority to Retain Fee for Single–Use and Reusable
3 Bags

4 PG 403–26

5 FOR the purpose of authorizing Prince George’s County to retain, by local law, a portion of
6 a certain fee that retail establishments in the county are required by local law to
7 charge a customer for providing a single–use or reusable carryout bag; and generally
8 relating to the use of fees for providing carryout bags to customers of retail
9 establishments in Prince George’s County.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Local Government
12 Section 13–1002
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Local Government

18 13–1002.

19 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

20 (B) IF THE COUNTY ENACTS A LOCAL LAW THAT REQUIRES A RETAIL
21 ESTABLISHMENT TO CHARGE AT THE POINT OF SALE A FEE FOR PROVIDING A
22 SINGLE–USE OR REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG TO A CUSTOMER, THE COUNTY MAY
23 RETAIN, BY LOCAL LAW, A PORTION OF THE FEE CHARGED IN AN AMOUNT NOT

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0408*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 408

1 EXCEEDING 10 CENTS FOR EACH BAG.

2 (C) ANY FEES RETAINED BY THE COUNTY UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
3 PAID TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE COUNTY.

4 (D) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PRECLUDE THE COUNTY FROM ALLOWING A
5 RETAILER TO RETAIN A PORTION OF THE FEES CHARGED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
6 LOCAL LAW.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
8 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2