START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 458

P1, J1 6lr2258

By: Delegates Patterson, Toles, Fennell, Guyton, Kaufman, Odom, Pasteur,
Terrasa, Wims, and Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Provisions – Commemorative Months – Water Safety Month

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to annually proclaim a certain month as Water
4 Safety Month; and generally relating to commemorative months.

5 BY renumbering
6 Article – General Provisions
7 Section 7–504 through 7–507
8 to be Section 7–505 through 7–508, respectively
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – General Provisions
13 Section 7–504
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That Section(s) 7–504 through 7–507 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code
18 of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–505 through 7–508, respectively.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
20 as follows:

21 Article – General Provisions

22 7–504.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0458*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 458

1 (A) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF MAY AS
2 WATER SAFETY MONTH.

3 (B) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL URGE EDUCATIONAL AND CIVIC
4 ORGANIZATIONS TO OBSERVE WATER SAFETY MONTH PROPERLY WITH
5 APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS, EVENTS, AND ACTIVITIES DESIGNED TO RAISE
6 AWARENESS ABOUT DROWNING PREVENTION AND PROMOTE SAFE PRACTICES
7 AROUND ALL BODIES OF WATER.

8 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2