START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 412

D4 6lr2078
HB 110/25 – JUD CF 6lr2079

By: Delegates Simpson, Taylor, and Crutchfield
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Child Support – Suspension of Driver’s Licenses

3 FOR the purpose of altering provisions of law relating to the authority of the Child Support
4 Enforcement Administration to notify the Motor Vehicle Administration of an
5 individual’s child support arrearages for the purpose of suspending the individual’s
6 driver’s license or privilege to drive under certain circumstances; and generally
7 relating to the suspension of an individual’s driver’s license or privilege to drive for
8 child support arrearages.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Family Law
11 Section 10–119(a) and 12–201(q)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Family Law
16 Section 10–119(b) and (c)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Transportation
21 Section 16–203
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Family Law

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0412*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 412

1 10–119.

2 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

3 (2) “License” has the meaning stated in § 11–128 of the Transportation
4 Article.

5 (3) “Motor Vehicle Administration” means the Motor Vehicle
6 Administration of the Department of Transportation.

7 (b) (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the
8 Administration may notify the Motor Vehicle Administration of an obligor with a
9 noncommercial or commercial license who is 120 days or more out of compliance[,] with the
10 most recent order of the court in making child support payments if:

11 (i) the Administration has accepted an assignment of support under
12 § 5–312(b)(2) of the Human Services Article; or

13 (ii) 1. the recipient of support payments has filed an application
14 for support enforcement services with the Administration; AND

15 2. A. THE ADMINISTRATION VERIFIES THAT
16 SUSPENSION OF THE OBLIGOR’S LICENSE OR PRIVILEGE TO DRIVE IS APPROPRIATE
17 BECAUSE THE OBLIGOR HAS THE FUNDS TO PAY BUT IS MAKING THE FREE AND
18 CONSCIOUS CHOICE TO WITHHOLD PAYMENT; AND

19 B. OTHER COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
20 MECHANISMS HAVE BEEN UNSUCCESSFUL.

21 (2) Upon notification by the Administration under this subsection, the
22 Motor Vehicle Administration:

23 (i) shall suspend the obligor’s license or privilege to drive in the
24 State; and

25 (ii) may issue a work–restricted license or work–restricted privilege
26 to drive in the State in accordance with § 16–203 of the Transportation Article.

27 (c) (1) Before supplying any information to the Motor Vehicle Administration
28 under this section, the Administration shall:

29 (i) VERIFY THAT SUSPENSION OF THE OBLIGOR’S LICENSE OR
30 PRIVILEGE TO DRIVE IS APPROPRIATE AND send written AND ELECTRONIC notice of
31 the proposed action to the obligor, including notice of the obligor’s right to request an
32 investigation on any of the following grounds:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 412 3

1 1. the information regarding the reported arrearage is
2 inaccurate;

3 2. THE MINOR CHILD IS RESIDING PRIMARILY WITH THE
4 OBLIGOR;

5 3. THE ADMINISTRATION REACHED AN AGREEMENT
6 WITH THE OBLIGOR, OR THE COURT ISSUED AN ORDER FOR A SCHEDULED PAYMENT
7 OF THE ARREARAGES, AND THE OBLIGOR IS COMPLYING WITH THE AGREEMENT OR
8 THE ORDER;

9 [2.] 4.suspension of the obligor’s license or privilege to drive
10 would be an impediment to the obligor’s current or potential employment; or

11 [3.] 5.suspension of the obligor’s license or privilege to drive
12 would place an undue hardship on the MINOR CHILD, THE CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENT
13 RECIPIENT, OR THE obligor because of the obligor’s:

14 A. documented disability resulting in a verified inability to
15 work; or

16 B. inability to comply with the court order; and

17 (ii) give the obligor a reasonable opportunity to request an
18 investigation of the proposed action of the Administration.

19 (2) (i) Upon receipt of a request for investigation from the obligor, the
20 Administration shall conduct an investigation to determine if any of the grounds under
21 paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection exist.

22 (ii) The Administration shall:

23 1. send a copy of the obligor’s request for an investigation to
24 the obligee by first–class mail;

25 2. give the obligee a reasonable opportunity to respond; and

26 3. consider the obligee’s response.

27 (iii) Upon completion of the investigation, the Administration shall
28 notify the obligor IN WRITING AND ELECTRONICALLY of the results of the investigation
29 and the obligor’s right to appeal to the Office of Administrative Hearings.

30 (3) (i) An appeal under this section shall be conducted in accordance
31 with Title 10, Subtitle 2 of the State Government Article.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 412

1 (ii) An appeal shall be made in writing and shall be received by the
2 Office of Administrative Hearings within 20 days after the notice to the obligor of the
3 results of the investigation.

4 (4) If, after the investigation or appeal to the Office of Administrative
5 Hearings, the Administration finds that one of the grounds under paragraph (1)(i) of this
6 subsection exists, the Administration may not send any information about the obligor to
7 the Motor Vehicle Administration.

8 (5) The Administration may not send any information about an obligor to
9 the Motor Vehicle Administration if:

10 (i) 1. the Administration reaches an agreement with the obligor
11 regarding a scheduled payment of the obligor’s child support arrearage or a court issues an
12 order for a scheduled payment of the child support arrearage; and

13 [(ii)] 2. the obligor is complying with the agreement or court order;
14 OR

15 (II) THE ADMINISTRATION INVESTIGATES ONE OF THE
16 GROUNDS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND DETERMINES THAT
17 SUSPENSION OF THE OBLIGOR’S LICENSE OR PRIVILEGE IS NOT APPROPRIATE.

18 12–201.

19 (q) “Voluntarily impoverished” means that a parent has made the free and
20 conscious choice, not compelled by factors beyond the parent’s control, to render the parent
21 without adequate resources.

22 Article – Transportation

23 16–203.

24 (a) In this section, “Child Support Administration” means the Child Support
25 Administration of the Department of Human Services.

26 (b) On notification by the Child Support Administration in accordance with §
27 10–119 of the Family Law Article that an obligor is 120 days or more out of compliance
28 with the most recent order of the court in making child support payments, the
29 Administration:

30 (1) Shall suspend an obligor’s license or privilege to drive in the State; and

31 (2) May issue a work–restricted license or work–restricted privilege to
32 drive.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 412 5

1 (c) (1) Prior to the suspension of a license or the privilege to drive in the State
2 and the issuance of a work–restricted license or work–restricted privilege to drive under
3 subsection (b) of this section, the Administration shall send written AND ELECTRONIC
4 notice of the proposed action to the obligor, including notice of the obligor’s right to contest
5 the accuracy of the information.

6 (2) Any contest under this subsection shall be limited to whether the
7 Administration has mistaken the identity of the obligor or the individual whose license or
8 privilege to drive has been suspended.

9 (d) (1) An obligor may appeal a decision of the Administration to suspend the
10 obligor’s license or privilege to drive.

11 (2) At a hearing under this subsection, the issue shall be limited to whether
12 the Administration has mistaken the identity of the obligor or the individual whose license
13 or privilege to drive has been suspended.

14 (e) The Administration shall reinstate an obligor’s license or privilege to drive in
15 the State if:

16 (1) The Administration receives a court order to reinstate the license or
17 privilege to drive; or

18 (2) The Child Support Administration notifies the Administration that:

19 (i) The individual whose license or privilege to drive was suspended
20 is not in arrears in making child support payments;

21 (ii) The obligor has paid the support arrearage in full;

22 (iii) The obligor has demonstrated good faith by paying the ordered
23 amount of support for 6 consecutive months;

24 (iv) The obligor is a participant in full compliance in an employment
25 program approved by the Child Support Administration; or

26 (v) One of the grounds under § 10–119(c)(1)(i) of the Family Law
27 Article exists.

28 (f) The Secretary of Transportation, in cooperation with the Secretary of Human
29 Services and the Office of Administrative Hearings, shall adopt regulations to implement
30 this section.

31 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
32 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5