START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 413

C8 6lr1893
CF 6lr2683

By: Delegates Kerr, Watson, Lehman, Bagnall, Cullison, Healey, D. Jones, and
Stewart
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission – Membership and Termination – Altered
3 and Extended

4 FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission;
5 extending the termination date of the Commission; and generally relating to the
6 Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Economic Development
9 Section 5–2501 and 5–2502
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Economic Development
14 Section 5–2503 and 5–2504
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Chapter 409 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2024
19 Section 2

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Economic Development

23 5–2501.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0413*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 413

1 In this subtitle, “Commission” means the Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission.

2 5–2502.

3 (a) There is a Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission in the Department.

4 (b) The purpose of the Commission is to study and promote trade between
5 Maryland and Ireland.

6 5–2503.

7 (a) The Commission consists of the following members:

8 (1) the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee;

9 (2) the Secretary of State, or the Secretary of State’s designee;

10 (3) [two members] ONE MEMBER of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by
11 the President of the Senate, who [have] HAS knowledge of organizations that promote Irish
12 affairs, or current or past involvement in organizations that promote Irish affairs, or [have]
13 HAS an interest in the well–being of trade relations between Maryland and Ireland;

14 (4) [two members] ONE MEMBER of the House of Delegates, appointed by
15 the Speaker of the House, who [have] HAS knowledge of organizations that promote Irish
16 affairs, or current or past involvement in organizations that promote Irish affairs, or [have]
17 HAS an interest in the well–being of trade relations between Maryland and Ireland; and

18 (5) the following members, appointed by the Governor, with the advice and
19 consent of the Senate:

20 (i) one representative of a public institution of higher education;

21 (ii) one representative of the Maryland Chamber of Commerce or its
22 successor organization; [and]

23 (iii) two representatives of the Irish–American community, who may
24 not be of the same political party; AND

25 (IV) TWO MEMBERS OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR.

26 (b) The chair and vice chair of the Commission shall be elected from among the
27 members of the Commission.

28 (c) A member of the Commission:

29 (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 413 3

1 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
2 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

3 (d) The Governor may remove an appointed member for incompetence,
4 misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the position.

5 5–2504.

6 (a) The Commission shall study and make recommendations regarding:

7 (1) advancing bilateral trade and investment between Maryland and
8 Ireland;

9 (2) initiating joint action on policy issues of mutual interest to Maryland
10 and Ireland;

11 (3) promoting business and academic exchanges between Maryland and
12 Ireland;

13 (4) encouraging mutual economic support between Maryland and Ireland;

14 (5) encouraging mutual investment in the infrastructure of Maryland and
15 Ireland; and

16 (6) other issues as determined by the Commission.

17 (b) On or before December 1, 2025, AND EACH DECEMBER 1 THEREAFTER, the
18 Commission shall report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in
19 accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

20 Chapter 409 of the Acts of 2024

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of [2] 4 years and, at the end of
23 September 30, [2026] 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General
24 Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
26 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3