START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 461

C8 6lr1486
CF SB 300

By: Delegates Ziegler, Adams, Behler, Fair, Foley, Ghrist, Guyton, Kerr,
Patterson, Qi, Queen, and Sample–Hughes
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Economic Development – Rural Readiness Program and Rural Maryland
3 Capacity Building Fund – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Rural Readiness Program administered by the Rural
5 Maryland Council to provide assistance to rural communities to enhance their
6 capacity for economic development; requiring priority to be given when making
7 certain grants to entities that have completed the Rural Readiness Program;
8 establishing the Rural Maryland Capacity Building Fund as a special, nonlapsing
9 fund to be administered by the Council to provide grants to support certain planning
10 and capacity building initiatives; and generally relating to rural communities.

11 BY renumbering
12 Article – Economic Development
13 Section 13–416
14 to be Section 13–417
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
18 Article – Economic Development
19 Section 13–401
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY adding to
23 Article – Economic Development
24 Section 13–416
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0461*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 461

1 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
2 Article – State Finance and Procurement
3 Section 2–206(e)(1) and 2–207(c)(1) and (g)(2)(i)
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – State Finance and Procurement
8 Section 2–206(e)(5)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – State Finance and Procurement
13 Section 2–207.1
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That Section(s) 13–416 of Article – Economic Development of the Annotated Code of
18 Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 13–417.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
20 as follows:

21 Article – Economic Development

22 13–401.

23 In this subtitle, “Council” means the Rural Maryland Council.

24 13–416.

25 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
26 INDICATED.

27 (2) (I) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” MEANS:

28 1. A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION;

29 2. A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT;

30 3. A STATE–RECOGNIZED TRIBE;

31 4. AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE
32 STATE;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 461 3

1 5. A REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY; OR

2 6. AN ECONOMIC OR WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
3 ORGANIZATION.

4 (II) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” DOES NOT INCLUDE STATE
5 GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.

6 (3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE RURAL READINESS PROGRAM.

7 (4) “RURAL COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–207 OF
8 THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

9 (B) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS THAT:

10 (1) RURAL COMMUNITIES ARE OFTEN DISADVANTAGED WHEN
11 COMPETING FOR FINANCIAL AND OTHER RESOURCES DUE TO:

12 (I) A LACK OF CAPACITY AND POPULATION DENSITY
13 RESULTING IN LIMITED RESOURCES DUE TO A SMALLER TAX BASE; AND

14 (II) LIMITED ACCESS TO CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE,
15 INCLUDING BROADBAND AND TRANSPORTATION;

16 (2) A DEFICIENCY EXISTS IN THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS NEEDED FOR
17 RURAL COMMUNITIES TO THRIVE AND ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF THE RURAL
18 COMMUNITY;

19 (3) RURAL COMMUNITIES STRUGGLE TO RECRUIT AND RETAIN
20 SKILLED STAFF NEEDED TO IMPLEMENT AND MANAGE PROJECTS PARTICULARLY IN
21 TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT;

22 (4) RURAL COMMUNITIES EXPERIENCE CHALLENGES IN SOCIAL
23 COHESION AND NETWORKS THAT MAKE IT HARD TO MOBILIZE RESOURCES AND
24 COLLECTIVELY ADDRESS ISSUES;

25 (5) THE POPULATION OF RURAL COMMUNITIES IS LIKELY TO BE
26 OLDER, POORER, AND SICKER DUE TO AGE AND AN OUTMIGRATION OF YOUNGER
27 PEOPLE; AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 461

1 (6) NOT ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES OF RURAL COMMUNITIES
2 WILL MANIFEST AS DISPARITIES IN HEALTH CARE ACCESS, EDUCATIONAL
3 ATTAINMENT, ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES, AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT.

4 (C) THERE IS A RURAL READINESS PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE
5 COUNCIL.

6 (D) (1) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ENHANCE THE CAPACITY
7 IN RURAL COMMUNITIES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BY ASSISTING ELIGIBLE
8 APPLICANTS ACCEPTED INTO THE PROGRAM WITH GRANT APPLICATIONS AND
9 DEVELOPING PROJECTS THAT GENERATE REVENUE.

10 (2) THE COUNCIL SHALL ESTABLISH ASSESSMENTS, TOOLKITS, AND
11 OTHER RESOURCES TO SUPPORT THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM.

12 (E) (1) ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS MAY APPLY TO THE COUNCIL TO
13 PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM.

14 (2) THE COUNCIL’S EXECUTIVE BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH:

15 (I) CRITERIA TO EVALUATE ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS FOR
16 ACCEPTANCE INTO THE PROGRAM; AND

17 (II) PARTICIPATION GUIDELINES.

18 (F) (1) THE COUNCIL’S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL CERTIFY THE
19 ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS THAT HAVE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED THE PROGRAM.

20 (2) ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS THAT HAVE RECEIVED A COMPLETION
21 CERTIFICATE SHALL BE GIVEN PRIORITY FOR THE FOLLOWING GRANT PROGRAMS:

22 (I) THE MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION AND RURAL
23 DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–206 OF THE STATE
24 FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE;

25 (II) THE RURAL MARYLAND PROSPERITY INVESTMENT FUND
26 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–207 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
27 ARTICLE; AND

28 (III) THE RURAL MARYLAND CAPACITY BUILDING FUND
29 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–207.1 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
30 ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 461 5

1 Article – State Finance and Procurement

2 2–206.

3 (e) (1) There is a Maryland Agricultural Education and Rural Development
4 Assistance Board.

5 (5) The Board shall give funding priority to organizations described in
6 subsection (c)(2)(i) of this section that have:

7 (i) obtained an equal matching amount of funding from a source
8 other than the State in the immediate prior fiscal year; [or]

9 (ii) sufficient evidence of a commitment of a third party funding
10 source to provide an equal matching amount of funding in the current fiscal year; OR

11 (III) RECEIVED A COMPLETION CERTIFICATE UNDER § 13–416
12 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

13 2–207.

14 (c) (1) There is a Rural Maryland Prosperity Investment Fund.

15 (g) (2) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the Board shall
16 award grants from the Fund under subsection (f)(1)(ii) of this section on a competitive basis
17 in accordance with the procedures in § 2–206(e) of this subtitle.

18 2–207.1.

19 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (2) “BOARD” MEANS THE MARYLAND AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION
22 AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE BOARD ESTABLISHED IN § 2–206 OF THIS
23 SUBTITLE.

24 (3) “COUNCIL” MEANS THE RURAL MARYLAND COUNCIL
25 ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
26 ARTICLE.

27 (4) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–416
28 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

29 (5) “FUND” MEANS THE RURAL MARYLAND CAPACITY BUILDING
30 FUND.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 461

1 (6) “RURAL COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–207 OF
2 THIS SUBTITLE.

3 (B) (1) THERE IS A RURAL MARYLAND CAPACITY BUILDING FUND.

4 (2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO SUPPORT COLLABORATIVE
5 PLANNING AND CAPACITY BUILDING INITIATIVES THAT ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF
6 RURAL COMMUNITIES.

7 (3) THE COUNCIL SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

8 (4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
9 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

10 (II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
11 SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

12 (5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

13 (I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
14 FUND; AND

15 (II) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
16 FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

17 (6) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR GRANTS PROVIDED UNDER
18 THIS SECTION.

19 (7) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
20 FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

21 (II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
22 CREDITED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

23 (8) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
24 ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

25 (C) (1) THE BOARD SHALL:

26 (I) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATIONS FOR GRANTS
27 PROVIDED UNDER THIS SECTION;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 461 7

1 (II) REVIEW APPLICATIONS FOR GRANTS; AND

2 (III) APPROVE GRANT RECIPIENTS AND THE AMOUNT OF THE
3 GRANT AWARD.

4 (2) GRANTS MAY NOT BE AWARDED TO ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS THAT
5 HAVE NOT COMPLETED THE RURAL READINESS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER §
6 13–416 OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

7 (3) GRANTS SHALL BE AWARDED ON A COMPETITIVE BASIS.

8 (4) THE BOARD SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS
9 THAT HAVE:

10 (I) MULTIJURISDICTIONAL AND MULTISECTOR PROJECTS; AND

11 (II) PROVIDED SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE OF A COMMITMENT TO A
12 FUNDING MATCH OF AT LEAST 20% OF THE GRANT AMOUNT.

13 (5) A GRANT AMOUNT MAY NOT EXCEED $50,000.

14 (D) ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS MUST APPLY FOR A GRANT IN A MANNER
15 CONSISTENT WITH THE PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD.

16 (E) (1) GRANT FUNDS MAY BE USED TO SUPPORT:

17 (I) COLLABORATIVE PLANNING AND CAPACITY BUILDING
18 INITIATIVES THAT ADVANCE EFFORTS TO ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF RURAL
19 COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING:

20 1. HOUSING;

21 2. BROADBAND SERVICES;

22 3. PLACEMAKING;

23 4. ENERGY;

24 5. TRANSPORTATION;

25 6. HEALTH;

26 7. INFRASTRUCTURE;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 461

1 8 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT; AND

2 9. WORKFORCE;

3 (II) READINESS FOR INVESTMENT IN AND DEVELOPMENT OF A
4 RURAL COMMUNITY OR PROPERTY IN A RURAL COMMUNITY, INCLUDING:

5 1. DEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY INVENTORIES;

6 2. SITE DEVELOPMENT STUDIES;

7 3. SITE MATERIAL DEVELOPMENT;

8 4. SITE IMPLEMENTATION OR LAND ASSEMBLY
9 ACTIVITIES; AND

10 5. FEASIBILITY OR MARKET STUDIES;

11 (III) PARTNERSHIPS AND PLANNING TO BUILD READINESS FOR
12 FUTURE PROJECTS AND COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES; AND

13 (IV) CROSS–SECTOR COLLABORATION FOR COMMUNITY AND
14 STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT THAT FOSTERS PLANNING AND DIALOGUE.

15 (2) GRANT FUNDS MAY NOT BE USED TO:

16 (I) PAY OR REIMBURSE THE GRANTEE FOR EMPLOYEE SALARY,
17 WAGES, BENEFITS, OR OTHER INDIRECT COSTS OF THE GRANTEE THAT ARE NOT
18 RELATED TO THE PROJECT FOR WHICH A GRANT WAS AWARDED;

19 (II) FUND OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES AT A FOR–PROFIT ENTITY;

20 (III) PURCHASE OR LEASE REAL PROPERTY; OR

21 (IV) SUPPORT A NONRURAL AREA.

22 (F) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE COUNCIL SHALL SUBMIT
23 TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
24 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT ON:

25 (1) THE NUMBER OF GRANTS MADE IN THE PREVIOUS FISCAL YEAR;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 461 9

1 (2) THE NAME OF EACH GRANT RECIPIENT; AND

2 (3) THE PURPOSE AND USE OF EACH GRANT.

3 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9