START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 419

R2 6lr1020

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Comprehensive Traffic Safety Audit – Maryland Route
3 202 and Maryland Route 704

4 PG 303–26

5 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Transportation to conduct a
6 comprehensive traffic safety audit of certain roads in Prince George’s County;
7 requiring the Department to report its findings and recommendations to the Prince
8 George’s County Delegation to the General Assembly on or before a certain date; and
9 generally relating to a comprehensive traffic safety audit in Prince George’s County.

10 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
11 That:

12 (a) The Maryland Department of Transportation shall conduct a comprehensive
13 traffic safety audit of Maryland Route 202 and Maryland Route 704 in Prince George’s
14 County.

15 (b) The comprehensive traffic safety audit under subsection (a) of this section
16 shall:

17 (1) include strategies for improving roadway safety for drivers and
18 passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians;

19 (2) include data on crash history and overall trends in traffic risks;

20 (3) identify safety needs and deficiencies in infrastructure, engineering,
21 traffic control, and traffic operations;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0419*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 419

1 (4) recommend appropriate corrective actions and crash reduction
2 countermeasures with a focus on projects that can be implemented quickly to improve
3 safety; and

4 (5) include community input on improving roadway safety.

5 (c) On or before December 31, 2026, the Department shall report the findings and
6 recommendations resulting from the comprehensive traffic safety audit under subsection
7 (a) of this section to the Prince George’s County Delegation to the General Assembly in
8 accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
10 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
11 30, 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
12 abrogated and of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2