START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 442 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 442 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Professional Liability Insurance Coverage - Nursing Homes, Assisted Living 
Facilities, and Nurse Midwives - Disclosure 
 
 
This bill requires each nursing home, assisted living program, and nurse midwife to provide 
notification if professional liability insurance coverage is not maintained or such coverage 
has lapsed or not been renewed. Each nursing home, assisted living program, and nurse 
midwife that does not maintain professional liability insurance coverage must post such 
information in a conspicuous location, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Programs 
 
Each nursing home and assisted living program in the State must notify each resident and 
prospective resident in writing or by written electronic communication if (1) the nursing 
home or assisted living program does not maintain professional liability insurance coverage 
or (2) such coverage has lapsed for any period of time and has not been renewed.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 442/ Page 2 
The notification must be provided to a prospective resident (1) at their first visit during any 
period during which the nursing home or assisted living program does not maintain 
professional liability insurance coverage and (2) if the nursing home or assisted living 
program does not maintain such coverage at the time the prospective resident applies for 
admission, at the time of the application. If the coverage lapses, notification must also be 
provided to each resident within 30 days after the date the coverage has lapsed. The 
notification must be signed by the prospective resident at the time of application for 
admission or by the resident at the time of notification of the lapse in coverage. 
Notifications must be retained by the nursing home or assisted living program as a part of 
the nursing home or assisted living program’s records.  
 
Each nursing home or facility-based assisted living program operating in the State that does 
not maintain professional liability insurance coverage must post in a conspicuous place 
visible to residents and guests that the nursing home or facility‑based assisted living 
program does not maintain such coverage. 
 
Nurse Midwives 
 
Each nurse midwife practicing as a nurse midwife in the State must notify a patient in 
writing or by written electronic communication if (1) the nurse midwife does not maintain 
professional liability insurance coverage or (2) such coverage has lapsed for any period of 
time and has not been renewed.  
 
The notification must be provided to the patient (1) at their first visit during any period in 
which the nurse midwife does not maintain professional liability insurance, unless the visit 
is for the purpose of receiving incidental medical care that will be rendered free of charge, 
and (2) as part of each informed consent obtained before any procedure discussed or offered 
for the patient’s consideration is performed. The notification must be signed by the patient 
at the time of the patient’s visit or at the time the informed consent is signed. Notifications 
must be retained by the nurse midwife as a part of the nurse midwife’s patient records.  
 
Each nurse midwife who does not maintain professional liability insurance coverage must 
post this information in a conspicuous location in the nurse midwife’s place of practice. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Assisted Living Programs 
 
An assisted living program is a residential or facility-based program that provides housing 
and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, health-related services, or a 
combination of such services that meets the needs of individuals who need assistance with 
the activities of daily living. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 442/ Page 3 
Nursing Homes 
 
“Nursing home” means a facility (other than a facility offering domiciliary or personal 
care) that offers nonacute inpatient care to patients suffering from a disease, chronic illness, 
condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease requiring maximal nursing care 
without continuous hospital services, and who require medical services and nursing 
services rendered by or under the supervision of a licensed nurse together with 
convalescent, restorative, or rehabilitative services.  
 
Nurse Midwife 
 
In general, an individual must be licensed as a certified nurse-midwife by the State Board 
of Nursing (MBON) to practice nurse midwifery in the State or licensed as a direct‑entry 
midwife by MBON to practice direct-entry midwifery in the State. Direct-entry midwifery 
refers to an educational path that does not require prior nursing training to enter the 
profession. 
 
Medical Professional Liability Insurance 
 
Medical professional liability insurance (also known as medical malpractice insurance) 
provides coverage against damages due to medical injury arising out of the performance of 
professional services rendered or which should have been rendered by a health care 
professional.  
 
Chapter 770 of 2017, among other things, required licensed physicians to (1) provide 
written notification regarding professional liability insurance to patients; (2) maintain a 
signed written notification in the patient’s records; and (3) conspicuously post information 
regarding professional liability insurance.  
 
Chapters 869 and 870 of 2024 required each advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) 
practicing in the State to notify a patient in writing if (1) they do not maintain professional 
liability insurance coverage or (2) their professional liability insurance coverage has lapsed 
for any period of time and has not been renewed. Each APRN who does not maintain 
professional liability insurance coverage must post such information in a conspicuous 
location in their place of practice.  
 
Chapter 751 of 2025 required an insurer that issues or delivers medical professional 
liability insurance policies in the State to provide MDH, on request, with information 
regarding the insurer’s policy related to coverage of obstetric services, including coverage 
for a vaginal birth after cesarean.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 442/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 293 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Care 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4