START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 432

L3 6lr1748
HB 734/24 – JUD CF 6lr2799

By: Delegates Mireku–North, Embry, Roberson, and Woods
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Municipalities – Vagrancy – Repeal of Authority to Prohibit

3 FOR the purpose of repealing the authority of a municipality to prohibit vagrancy; and
4 generally relating to vagrancy.

5 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
6 Article – Local Government
7 Section 5–207
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
11 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

12 Article – Local Government

13 5–207.

14 (a) A municipality may establish and maintain:

15 (1) a fire department; and

16 (2) a police force.

17 (b) A municipality may:

18 (1) provide for the removal of fire hazards;

19 (2) control the use and handling of dangerous and explosive materials; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0432*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 432

1 (3) prevent the discharge of firearms or other explosive instruments.

2 (c) A municipality may:

3 (1) pay rewards for information relating to crime committed in the
4 municipality;

5 (2) prohibit [vagrancy,] vice, gambling, and houses of prostitution in the
6 municipality;

7 (3) enforce all ordinances relating to disorderly conduct and nuisances
8 equally:

9 (i) within the municipality; and

10 (ii) up to one–half mile outside the municipal limits, except where
11 there is a conflict with the powers of another municipality; and

12 (4) prohibit minors from being on the streets and in public places at certain
13 hours of the night.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
15 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2