START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 485

C3 6lr2050
CF SB 256

By: Delegate S. Johnson
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Professional Landscape Architects – Revisions

3 FOR the purpose of altering the name of the State Board of Examiners of Landscape
4 Architects to be the State Board of Professional Landscape Architects; altering the
5 defined term “licensed landscape architects” to be “professional landscape
6 architects”; altering certain qualifications for membership on the Board; altering
7 certain duties of the Board; altering certain educational and experience
8 requirements of applicants for a license to practice landscape architecture; altering
9 certain examination administration requirements; altering certain term, renewal,
10 and fee payment requirements for certain licenses or permits issued by the Board;
11 authorizing the Board to issue a certain emeritus status license; and generally
12 relating to the State Board of Professional Landscape Architects.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
15 Section 9–101(a) and 9–206.1(a)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
20 Section 9–101(b), (h), (i), and (j); 9–201, 9–202(a) and (b), 9–206, and 9–206.1(b) and
21 (d) to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 2. State Board of Professional
22 Landscape Architects”; and 9–301 through 9–305, 9–308, 9–309(f), 9–310,
23 9–311(b), 9–314(b), 9–402(a) and (b), 9–403, 9–404(b), 9–407, 9–410, 9–414(a),
24 9–501, 9–602 through 9–604, and 9–701
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

27 BY repealing
28 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0485*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 485

1 Section 9–101(g), 9–305.1, 9–309(a), and 9–408(a)
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

4 BY adding to
5 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
6 Section 9–101(j), 9–309(a), 9–309.1, and 9–408(a)
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Business Regulation
11 Section 2–106.1(a)(3) and 2–108(a)(17)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
16 Section 3–2C–01(c)(3)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Environment
21 Section 4–308(a)
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
25 Article – Natural Resources
26 Section 5–1604(a) and 5–1605(b)
27 Annotated Code of Maryland
28 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

29 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
30 Article – Public Utilities
31 Section 12–101(a)
32 Annotated Code of Maryland
33 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

34 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
35 Article – Public Utilities
36 Section 12–101(i)
37 Annotated Code of Maryland
38 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

39 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 485 3

1 Article – State Government
2 Section 8–403(34)
3 Annotated Code of Maryland
4 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

5 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
6 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

7 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

8 9–101.

9 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

10 (b) “Board” means the State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL Landscape
11 Architects.

12 [(g) “Licensed landscape architect” means a landscape architect who is licensed by
13 the Board to practice landscape architecture.]

14 [(h)] (G) “Permit” means a permit issued by the Board to allow a partnership or
15 corporation to operate a business through which an individual may practice landscape
16 architecture.

17 [(i)] (H) “Permit fee” means, as applicable, the fee paid in connection with the
18 issuance and renewal of a permit.

19 [(j)] (I) (1) “Practice landscape architecture” means:

20 (i) to provide any service or creative work in the analysis or design
21 of land and natural resources that requires training and experience in the application of
22 the biological, physical, mathematical, and social sciences; and

23 (ii) to perform design coordination of a project or portion of a project
24 provided that the [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect holds a current license
25 issued by the Board and has adequate education and experience in, and understanding of,
26 the project or portion of the project being coordinated.

27 (2) “Practice landscape architecture” includes:

28 (i) consultation, research, analysis, assessment, selection, and
29 allocation of land and natural resources;

30 (ii) development of graphic, written, digital, and other appropriate
31 criteria to govern the planning and design of land development and construction programs,
32 including:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 485

1 1. preparation, review, and analysis of master plans, site
2 plans, and land development plans;

3 2. reconnaissance, planning, design, and preparation of
4 construction documents;

5 3. construction, observation, administration, and project
6 management;

7 4. preservation, restoration, conservation, reclamation,
8 rehabilitation, and management of land and natural resources;

9 5. preparation of feasibility and site selection studies,
10 environmental studies, and cost estimate reports; and

11 6. design and analysis of grading and drainage, irrigation,
12 erosion and sediment control systems, and pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems;
13 and

14 (iii) in conjunction with site plan preparation, the performance of the
15 following:

16 1. determining a grade;

17 2. determining drainage; and

18 3. preparing and designing stormwater drainage systems
19 provided that the preparation and design:

20 A. are in accordance with design manuals, details, and
21 standards accepted by the State or local authorities; and

22 B. do not require a hydraulic or structural design of system
23 components.

24 (J) “PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT” MEANS A LANDSCAPE
25 ARCHITECT WHO IS LICENSED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE LANDSCAPE
26 ARCHITECTURE.

27 Subtitle 2. State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects.

28 9–201.

29 There is a State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects in
30 the Department.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 485 5

1 9–202.

2 (a) (1) The Board consists of [5] FIVE members.

3 (2) Of the [5] FIVE members of the Board:

4 (i) [3] THREE shall be [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape
5 architects; and

6 (ii) [2] TWO shall be consumer members.

7 (3) The Governor shall appoint the members with the advice of the
8 Secretary and the advice and consent of the Senate.

9 (b) [Each] OF THE PROFESSIONAL landscape architect [member] MEMBERS:

10 (1) TWO MEMBERS shall be [a licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape
11 [architect] ARCHITECTS who [has] HAVE practiced landscape architecture in the State for
12 at least 10 YEARS, WITH 5 years OF EXPERIENCE AS RESPONSIBLE CHARGE; AND

13 (2) ONE MEMBER SHALL BE A PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
14 WHO HAS PRACTICED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE IN THE STATE FOR AT LEAST 5
15 YEARS.

16 9–206.

17 (a) In addition to any powers set forth elsewhere, the Board may adopt:

18 (1) any regulation to carry out this title; and

19 (2) a seal.

20 (b) In addition to any duties set forth elsewhere, the Board shall keep a record of
21 its proceedings.

22 (c) (1) [With the advice of the established landscape architect associations,
23 the] THE Board shall adopt, by regulation, a code of ethics for practicing landscape
24 architecture.

25 (2) The Board shall distribute a copy of the code of ethics:

26 (i) to each applicant for a license; and

27 (ii) on each renewal of a license, to each licensee.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 485

1 (3) In addition to complying with the publication requirements of Title 10,
2 Subtitle 1 of the State Government Article, the Board shall distribute a copy of any
3 amendment to the code of ethics to each licensee.

4 9–206.1.

5 (a) In this section, “code official” means a public official responsible for the review
6 of building permit documents or the issuance of building permits.

7 (b) The Board shall:

8 (1) keep a list of the names and mailing addresses of all licensees;

9 (2) provide each code official with:

10 (I) a copy of the list annually; and

11 (II) ACCESS TO THE LIST UPON REQUEST; AND

12 (3) provide any other person who makes a request with a copy of the list at
13 a reasonable fee set by the Board.

14 (d) The Board shall distribute:

15 (1) to each applicant for a license and each code official, a copy of the
16 Maryland PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects Act and the Board’s [rules and]
17 regulations;

18 (2) on each renewal of a license, to each licensee, a copy of any amendments
19 to the Maryland PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects Act and the Board’s [rules and]
20 regulations that took effect during the 2–year period ending on the date of renewal; and

21 (3) to each code official, a copy of any amendments to the Maryland
22 PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects Act and the Board’s [rules and] regulations.

23 9–301.

24 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual shall be licensed by
25 the Board before the individual may practice landscape architecture in the State.

26 (b) This section does not apply to:

27 (1) an individual who practices landscape architecture while performing
28 official duties as an employee of the federal government;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 485 7

1 (2) an individual while practicing landscape architecture under the
2 supervision of a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect, if the individual does not
3 assume responsible charge of design or supervision; or

4 (3) an individual while practicing landscape architecture as an employee
5 of a person who is authorized to practice landscape architecture, if the employee does not
6 assume responsible charge of design or supervision.

7 9–302.

8 (a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall be an individual who meets the
9 requirements of this section.

10 (b) An applicant shall be at least 18 years old.

11 (c) An applicant shall meet the educational and experience requirements under
12 § 9–303 of this subtitle.

13 (d) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant shall pass the
14 examination [given] REQUIRED by the Board under this subtitle.

15 9–303.

16 (a) Before an applicant takes the examination [given] REQUIRED by the Board,
17 the applicant shall qualify under this section by meeting the educational and experience
18 requirements set forth in subsection (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section.

19 (b) An applicant qualifies under this section if the applicant:

20 (1) has [been] graduated from a college or school of landscape architecture
21 that holds accredited status from the national Landscape Architectural Accreditation
22 Board; and

23 (2) has at least 2 years of work experience in landscape architecture that
24 is:

25 (i) under the responsible charge of a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
26 landscape architect or other [authorized individual] LICENSED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL;
27 and

28 (ii) otherwise satisfactory to the Board.

29 (c) An applicant qualifies under this section if the applicant:

30 (1) has [been] graduated on completion of at least a 4–year curriculum in
31 a design–related discipline from a college or university that is accredited by, or is a
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 485

1 constituent unit of an institution accredited by, the [Middle States Association of Colleges
2 and Schools] COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION ACCREDITATION or the equivalent
3 regional accrediting association of other regional areas; and

4 (2) has at least 4 years of work experience in landscape architecture that
5 is:

6 (i) under the responsible charge of a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
7 landscape architect or other [authorized individual] LICENSED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL;
8 and

9 (ii) otherwise satisfactory to the Board.

10 (d) An applicant qualifies under this section if the applicant:

11 (1) has [been] graduated on completion of at least a 4–year curriculum in
12 a nondesign–related discipline from a college or university that is accredited by, or is a
13 constituent unit of an institution accredited by, the [Middle States Association of Colleges
14 and Schools] COUNCIL FOR HIGHER EDUCATION ACCREDITATION or the equivalent
15 regional accrediting association of other regional areas; and

16 (2) has at least 6 years of practical work experience in landscape
17 architecture that is:

18 (i) under the responsible charge of a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
19 landscape architect or other [authorized individual] LICENSED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL;
20 and

21 (ii) otherwise satisfactory to the Board.

22 (e) (1) An applicant qualifies under this section if the applicant:

23 (i) is a high school graduate or the equivalent; and

24 (ii) has at least 8 years of practical work experience in landscape
25 architecture that is:

26 1. under the responsible charge of a [licensed]
27 PROFESSIONAL landscape architect or other [authorized individual] LICENSED DESIGN
28 PROFESSIONAL; and

29 2. otherwise satisfactory to the Board.

30 (2) The Board may count each full year of study at a college or school of
31 landscape architecture that meets the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section as
32 one of the years of the work experience required under this subsection.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 485 9

1 9–304.

2 An applicant for a license shall:

3 (1) submit to the Board an application on the form that the Board provides;
4 and

5 (2) pay to the Board [or the Board’s designee:

6 (i)] a nonrefundable application fee [set by the Board; and

7 (ii) an examination fee set by the Board in an amount not to exceed
8 the cost of the required examination].

9 9–305.

10 (a) [Except as otherwise provided in § 9–305.1 of this subtitle, an] AN applicant
11 who otherwise qualifies for a license is entitled to be examined as provided in this section.

12 (b) The Board PERIODICALLY shall [give written examinations] OFFER THE
13 EXAMINATIONS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION to qualified applicants at least once a
14 year at the time and place that the Board determines.

15 (c) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D)(2)(I) OF THIS SECTION,
16 THE Board shall give each qualified applicant notice of the time and place of examination.

17 (D) (1) THE BOARD MAY USE A TESTING SERVICE TO ADMINISTER THE
18 EXAMINATIONS UNDER THIS SECTION.

19 (2) IF THE BOARD USES A TESTING SERVICE TO ADMINISTER
20 EXAMINATIONS UNDER THIS SECTION, THE TESTING SERVICE, SUBJECT TO THE
21 REQUIREMENTS SET BY THE BOARD, MAY:

22 (I) SET THE TIME AND PLACE OF EXAMINATIONS;

23 (II) SEND QUALIFIED APPLICANTS NOTICE OF THE TIME AND
24 PLACE OF EXAMINATIONS; AND

25 (III) PROVIDE ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT THE BOARD MAY
26 REQUIRE THE TESTING SERVICE TO PROVIDE.

27 (3) IF NECESSARY TO DETERMINE THE COMPETENCY OF
28 APPLICANTS, THE BOARD MAY USE A TESTING SERVICE TO ADMINISTER
29 SUPPLEMENTAL EXAMINATIONS WITH ADDITIONAL SUBJECTS.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 485

1 [(d) (1)] (E) The Board shall determine, by regulation, the subjects, scope,
2 and form of and the passing score for examinations given under this title.

3 [(2) The Board shall structure the examination to test the competency of an
4 applicant to plan, design, and supervise the installation of landscape projects.

5 (3) The Board may supplement a written examination given under this
6 section with an oral examination.]

7 [9–305.1.

8 (a) The Board may use a testing service to administer the examinations given
9 under this title.

10 (b) If the Board uses a testing service under this subsection, the testing service,
11 subject to the requirements set by the Board, may:

12 (1) set the time and place of examinations;

13 (2) give qualified applicants notice of the time and place of examinations;
14 and

15 (3) furnish any other information that the Board may require the testing
16 service to provide.]

17 9–308.

18 (a) While a license is in effect, it authorizes the licensee to practice landscape
19 architecture.

20 (b) A [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect is not authorized to practice
21 architecture, engineering, or land surveying.

22 9–309.

23 [(a) Unless a license is renewed for a 2–year term as provided in this section, the
24 license expires on the first June 30 that comes:

25 (1) after the effective date of the license; and

26 (2) in an even–numbered year.]

27 (A) A LICENSE IS VALID FOR A 2–YEAR TERM FROM ISSUANCE OF THE
28 LICENSE AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 485 11

1 (f) (1) The Board shall adopt regulations[:

2 (1)] to require a licensee to demonstrate continuing professional
3 competency by completing at least 24 hours of professional development activities as a
4 condition of renewal of a license under this section[; and

5 (2) in accordance with the following:

6 (i) the continuing professional competency requirement does not
7 apply to the first renewal of a license;

8 (ii) if a license expires on or before September 30, 2015, a licensee is
9 not required to fulfill the continuing professional competency requirement;

10 (iii) if a license expires between October 1, 2015, and September 30,
11 2016, a licensee is required to fulfill 50% of the continuing professional competency
12 requirement as provided in regulations adopted by the Board under this subsection; and

13 (iv) if a license expires on or after October 1, 2016, a licensee is
14 required to fulfill the full continuing professional competency requirement as provided in
15 regulations adopted by the Board under this subsection].

16 (2) THE CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCY REQUIREMENT
17 UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO THE FIRST
18 RENEWAL OF A LICENSE.

19 9–309.1.

20 (A) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE AN EMERITUS STATUS LICENSE TO AN
21 INDIVIDUAL WHO SUBMITS TO THE BOARD AN APPLICATION FOR EMERITUS STATUS
22 ON THE FORM REQUIRED BY THE BOARD.

23 (B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE AN EMERITUS STATUS LICENSE IF THE
24 INDIVIDUAL:

25 (1) (I) IS CURRENTLY LICENSED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE
26 LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE; OR

27 (II) WAS PREVIOUSLY LICENSED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE
28 LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE AND ALLOWED THE LICENSE TO EXPIRE BUT IS
29 OTHERWISE ENTITLED TO RENEWAL UNDER § 9–309 OF THIS SUBTITLE AT THE TIME
30 OF EXPIRATION;

31 (2) HAS BEEN A PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT FOR AT
32 LEAST 25 YEARS, OF WHICH 5 YEARS HAVE BEEN IN THE STATE;
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 485

1 (3) IS NOT THE SUBJECT OF ANY PENDING DISCIPLINARY ACTION
2 RELATED TO THE PRACTICE OF LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE IN THE STATE OR
3 ANOTHER STATE; AND

4 (4) PAYS TO THE BOARD A FEE SET BY THE BOARD.

5 (C) THE HOLDER OF AN EMERITUS STATUS LICENSE UNDER THIS SECTION:

6 (1) MAY USE THE DESIGNATION OF “LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
7 EMERITUS”; AND

8 (2) MAY NOT ENGAGE IN THE PRACTICE OF LANDSCAPE
9 ARCHITECTURE.

10 (D) THE BOARD MAY REINSTATE THE LICENSE TO PRACTICE LANDSCAPE
11 ARCHITECTURE OF THE HOLDER OF AN EMERITUS STATUS LICENSE IF THE
12 INDIVIDUAL:

13 (1) SUBMITS TO THE BOARD AN APPLICATION FOR REINSTATEMENT
14 ON THE FORM PROVIDED BY THE BOARD;

15 (2) MEETS THE CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCY
16 REQUIREMENTS FOR RENEWAL OF A LICENSE UNDER § 9–309 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

17 (3) IS NOT THE SUBJECT OF ANY PENDING DISCIPLINARY ACTION
18 RELATED TO THE PRACTICE OF LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE IN THE STATE OR
19 ANOTHER STATE; AND

20 (4) PAYS TO THE BOARD A REINSTATEMENT FEE SET BY THE BOARD.

21 9–310.

22 (a) (1) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 9–312 of this subtitle, the Board,
23 on the affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license to any
24 applicant, reprimand any licensee, or suspend or revoke a license if:

25 (i) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
26 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED fraudulently or deceptively obtains or attempts to obtain a
27 license for the applicant or licensee or for another;

28 (ii) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
29 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED fraudulently or deceptively uses a license;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 485 13

1 (iii) under the laws of the United States or of any state, the [applicant
2 or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED is convicted
3 of:

4 1. a felony; or

5 2. a misdemeanor that is directly related to the fitness and
6 qualification of the applicant or licensee to practice landscape architecture;

7 (iv) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
8 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED is guilty of gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct
9 while practicing landscape architecture;

10 (v) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
11 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED has had a license to practice landscape architecture in
12 another state revoked or suspended by the other state for a cause that would justify
13 revocation or suspension under this title, except for the failure to pay a license fee;

14 (vi) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
15 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED violates any regulation adopted by the Board; or

16 (vii) the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
17 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED violates any provision of this title.

18 (2) (i) Instead of or in addition to reprimanding [a licensee] AN
19 INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED or suspending or
20 revoking a license under this subsection, the Board may impose a penalty not exceeding
21 $5,000 for each violation.

22 (ii) To determine the amount of the penalty imposed under this
23 subsection, the Board shall consider:

24 1. the seriousness of the violation;

25 2. the harm caused by the violation;

26 3. the good faith of the licensee; and

27 4. any history of previous violations by the licensee.

28 (3) The Board shall pay any penalty collected under this subsection into
29 the General Fund of the State.

30 (b) The Board shall consider the following facts in the granting, denial, renewal,
31 suspension, or revocation of a license or the reprimand of [a licensee] AN INDIVIDUAL
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 485

1 AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED when an applicant or licensee is
2 convicted of a felony or misdemeanor described in subsection (a)(1)(iii) of this section:

3 (1) the nature of the crime;

4 (2) the relationship of the crime to the activities authorized by the license;

5 (3) with respect to a felony, the relevance of the conviction to the fitness
6 and qualification of the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION
7 IS CONTEMPLATED to practice landscape architecture;

8 (4) the length of time since the conviction; and

9 (5) the behavior and activities of the [applicant or licensee] INDIVIDUAL
10 AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED before and after the conviction.

11 9–311.

12 (b) (1) A complaint shall:

13 (i) be in writing;

14 (ii) state specifically the facts on which the complaint is based; and

15 (iii) be submitted to [the Secretary of] the Board.

16 (2) If the complaint is made by any person other than a member of the
17 Board, the complaint shall be made under oath by the person who submits the complaint.

18 9–314.

19 (b) (1) If an individual has failed to renew a license for any reason and then
20 applies to the Board for reinstatement more than 2 years after the license has expired, the
21 Board may:

22 (i) require the individual to reapply for a license in the same manner
23 that an applicant applies for an original license under this subtitle; or

24 (ii) subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, reinstate the license.

25 (2) The Board may reinstate a license under paragraph (1)(ii) of this
26 subsection, if the individual:

27 (i) meets the renewal requirements of § 9–309 of this subtitle,
28 INCLUDING THE PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCY REQUIREMENTS THAT WOULD HAVE
29 BEEN REQUIRED FOR RENEWAL OF THE LICENSE;
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 485 15

1 (ii) if required by the Board, states reasons why reinstatement
2 should be granted; and

3 (iii) pays to the Board a reinstatement fee set by the Board.

4 9–402.

5 (a) (1) Subject to the provisions of this subtitle, a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
6 landscape architect may practice landscape architecture for others through:

7 (i) a corporation as an officer, employee, or agent of the corporation;

8 (ii) a partnership as a partner, an employee, or an agent of the
9 partnership; or

10 (iii) a limited liability company as a member, an employee, or an
11 agent of the limited liability company.

12 (2) Subject to the provisions of this subtitle, a corporation, partnership, or
13 limited liability company may provide landscape architectural services through a [licensed]
14 PROFESSIONAL landscape architect.

15 (b) A [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect who practices landscape
16 architecture through a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company under this
17 subtitle is subject to all of the provisions of this title that relate to practicing landscape
18 architecture.

19 9–403.

20 [(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a] A corporation,
21 partnership, or limited liability company shall hold a permit issued by the Board before the
22 corporation, partnership, or limited liability company may operate a business through
23 which landscape architecture is practiced.

24 [(b) A corporation, partnership, or limited liability company may provide
25 landscape architectural services for itself or for an affiliated corporation, partnership, or
26 limited liability company without a permit issued by the Board.]

27 9–404.

28 (b) (1) A corporation, partnership, or limited liability company shall appoint
29 at least one person in responsible charge of the landscape architectural services performed
30 or offered to be performed through the corporation, partnership, or limited liability
31 company.
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 485

1 (2) A person in responsible charge shall be:

2 (i) in direct control of landscape architectural services performed or
3 offered to be performed through the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company;

4 (ii) in a position to act on behalf of, and be responsible for, the
5 corporation, partnership, or limited liability company in matters related to the practice of
6 landscape architecture; and

7 (iii) a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect in good
8 standing WHO IS LICENSED BY THE BOARD.

9 (3) A licensee may not be designated as a person in responsible charge for
10 more than one corporation, partnership, or limited liability company that provides or offers
11 to provide landscape architectural services without the prior approval of the Board.

12 9–407.

13 (a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section and while a permit is in effect, it
14 authorizes the holder to:

15 (1) operate a business through which a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
16 landscape architect practices landscape architecture; and

17 (2) represent to the public that the business provides the services of a
18 [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect.

19 (b) A permit authorizes the holder to provide a service that constitutes practicing
20 landscape architecture only if the service is performed by an individual who is licensed or
21 otherwise authorized to practice landscape architecture under this title.

22 9–408.

23 [(a) Unless a permit is renewed for a 2–year term as provided in this section, the
24 permit expires on the first June 30 that comes:

25 (1) after the effective date of the permit; and

26 (2) in an even–numbered year.]

27 (A) A PERMIT IS VALID FOR A 2–YEAR TERM FROM ISSUANCE OF THE
28 PERMIT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION.

29 9–410.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 485 17

1 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 9–411 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
2 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a permit to any
3 applicant, reprimand a permit holder, or suspend or revoke a permit if:

4 (1) the [applicant or permit holder] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE
5 ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED fraudulently or deceptively obtains or attempts to obtain a
6 permit; or

7 (2) the [permit holder] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS
8 CONTEMPLATED fraudulently or deceptively uses a permit.

9 (b) (1) In addition to a sanction imposed under subsection (a) of this section,
10 the Board may impose a penalty not exceeding $5,000 for:

11 (i) each violation for which a denial, reprimand, suspension, or
12 revocation was imposed under subsection (a) of this section; and

13 (ii) each failure to meet or continue to meet the qualifications or
14 requirements set forth in this subtitle.

15 (2) To determine the amount of the penalty imposed under this subsection,
16 the Board shall consider:

17 (i) the seriousness of the violation;

18 (ii) the harm caused by the violation;

19 (iii) the good faith of the permit holder or the applicant; and

20 (iv) any history of previous violations by the [permit holder or the
21 applicant] INDIVIDUAL AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED.

22 (c) The Board shall pay any penalty collected under subsection (b) of this section
23 into the General Fund of the State.

24 9–414.

25 (a) Subject to the provisions of this section AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY
26 THE BOARD, the Board may reinstate:

27 (1) a permit that has been revoked; or

28 (2) before fulfillment of the conditions of the suspension, a permit that has
29 been suspended.

30 9–501.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 485

1 Before a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect issues to a client or submits
2 to a public authority any final drawing, plan, specification, report, or other document, the
3 [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect who prepared or approved the document
4 shall sign, seal, and date the document.

5 9–602.

6 Except for a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect who operates a business
7 as a sole practitioner, a person may not operate a business through which landscape
8 architecture is practiced unless:

9 (1) the business is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company;
10 and

11 (2) the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company holds a
12 permit issued by the Board.

13 9–603.

14 Unless authorized under this title to practice landscape architecture, a person may
15 not represent to the public, by use of a title, including “landscape architect”,
16 “PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT”, or “licensed landscape architect”, by
17 description of services, methods, or procedures, or otherwise, that the person is authorized
18 to practice landscape architecture in the State.

19 9–604.

20 (a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section and unless a person holds a permit
21 issued by the Board, the person may not represent to the public, by the use of a title,
22 including “landscape architects”, “PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS”, “licensed
23 landscape architects”, or “registered landscape architects”, by the use of the term
24 “landscape architecture”, by description of services, methods, or procedures, or otherwise,
25 that the person holds a permit or otherwise is authorized to operate a business through
26 which landscape architecture is practiced in the State.

27 (b) Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL
28 landscape architect who operates the business as a sole practitioner.

29 9–701.

30 This title may be cited as the “Maryland PROFESSIONAL Landscape Architects Act”.

31 Article – Business Regulation

32 2–106.1.
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 485 19

1 (a) This section applies to the following occupational and professional licensing
2 boards:

3 (3) the State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL Landscape
4 Architects established under Title 9 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article;

5 2–108.

6 (a) The following units are in the Department:

7 (17) the State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL Landscape
8 Architects.

9 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

10 3–2C–01.

11 (c) “Licensed professional” means:

12 (3) A PROFESSIONAL landscape architect licensed under Title 9 of the
13 Business Occupations and Professions Article;

14 Article – Environment

15 4–308.

16 (a) Anne Arundel County or the City of Annapolis may issue a grading or building
17 permit within the Severn River Watershed only after the developer submits a plan of
18 development approved by the soil conservation district. If the development plan contains
19 any septic or private sewer facility, the Department of the Environment shall approve it
20 only if the facility will not contribute in any way to pollution of the Severn River. The
21 developer shall submit a certificate from a professional engineer, a professional land
22 surveyor, or a [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect stating that the developer’s
23 plan to control silt and erosion is adequate to contain the silt and erosion on the property
24 covered by the plan. Also, the developer shall submit another certificate stating that any
25 construction or development will be done according to the plan. A subdivision developer
26 shall obtain approval of the plan at the time of approving and recording of the subdivision
27 plat. In addition to any other penalty provided in this subtitle, if a developer violates his
28 certificate, then every permit issued pursuant to the certificate is void.

29 Article – Natural Resources

30 5–1604.

31 (a) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) and (3) of this section, after December
32 31, 1992, or after the date on which a local program has been adopted under § 5–1603 of
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 485

1 this subtitle, whichever occurs first, a person making application for subdivision or grading
2 or sediment control permits on areas greater than 40,000 square feet shall submit a forest
3 stand delineation for the entire site prepared by a licensed forester, [licensed]
4 PROFESSIONAL landscape architect, or other qualified professionals that may be approved
5 by the State or a local authority in the manner required by the approved program.

6 5–1605.

7 (b) The forest conservation plan shall be developed by a licensed forester,
8 [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect, or other qualified professionals that may
9 be approved by the State or a local authority.

10 Article – Public Utilities

11 12–101.

12 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

13 (i) “Designer” means a licensed architect, professional engineer, professional
14 land surveyor, or [licensed] PROFESSIONAL landscape architect, as those terms are
15 defined in the Business Occupations and Professions Article, who prepares a drawing for a
16 project that may require excavation or demolition.

17 Article – State Government

18 8–403.

19 This subtitle applies only to the following governmental activities and units:

20 (34) Landscape Architects, State Board of [Examiners of] PROFESSIONAL
21 (§ 9–201 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article);

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 20