START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 482 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 482 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
 
Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Legislative and Congressional 
Redistricting and Apportionment Commission (Fair Districts for Maryland Act) 
 
 
This bill proposes a constitutional amendment that establishes the Legislative and 
Congressional Redistricting and Apportionment Commission and requires each State 
legislative district and each congressional district boundary to meet specified requirements. 
The bill further includes implementing legislation contingent on the enactment of the 
constitutional amendment that (1) specifies the membership, duties, and procedures of the 
redistricting commission; (2) establishes that the Attorney General does not have the 
authority to prosecute and defend failed State legislative and congressional district plans, 
or for petitions seeking review of the legality of a plan; (3) institutes procedures for the 
review or establishment of a State legislative or congressional districting plan by the 
Supreme Court of Maryland; and (4) requires the Governor to include funding in the 
State budget to carry out the bill’s provisions. The bill’s statutory provisions take effect 
only on the ratification of the constitutional amendment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $1.75 million in each 
of FY 2031 and 2032, and every 10 years thereafter. Revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FY 2032 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
1.8 
1.8 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
($1.8) 
($1.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 482/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Legislative and Congressional Redistricting Boundary Requirements 
 
The proposed constitutional amendment requires that each State legislative district 
boundary and congressional district boundary (1) must respect natural boundaries and the 
geographic integrity and continuity of municipal corporations, counties, and other political 
subdivisions to the extent practicable; (2) must be geographically contiguous and compact 
and include nearby areas of population to the extent practicable; (3) must reflect 
communities of common interest; (4) may not account for how individuals are registered 
to vote, how individuals voted in the past, or the political party to which individuals belong; 
and (5) may not account for the domicile or residence of any individual, including an 
incumbent officeholder or potential candidate for office.  
 
The legislative districts must be as nearly equal in population as practicable but may not 
deviate more than 2% between districts, as specified. The commission must (1) adopt 
one plan for legislative districts and one plan for congressional districts; (2) certify that 
each plan is the plan adopted by the commission; and (3) send each certified plan to the 
presiding officers of the General Assembly. 
 
Legislative Intent 
 
The bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly that (1) no legislative district or 
congressional district in the State is established for the purpose of favoring or 
discriminating against an incumbent officeholder, a candidate for office, or a political party 
and (2) provisions of the bill comply with and implement specified provisions of the 
Maryland Constitution. 
  
Legislative and Congressional Redistricting and Apportionment Commission  
 
Unit of State Government:  The commission is an independent unit of State government, 
established by law. In the year following each decennial census of the United States, the 
commission must (1) divide the State into consecutively numbered legislative districts, as 
specified under the Maryland Constitution, and (2) divide the State into as many 
congressional districts as there are representatives in Congress apportioned to the State.  
 
Membership, Qualifications, and Compensation:  The ten-member commission must 
consist of (1) two members appointed by the Governor, subject to the unanimous approval 
of the Senate Executive Nominations Committee and the House Rules and Executive 
Nominations Committee; (2) four members of the General Assembly, as specified; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 482/ Page 3 
(3) four members appointed by majority and minority leadership of the General Assembly, 
as specified. At least one of the members appointed by the Governor must be a registered 
voter who, for at least seven years immediately preceding the date that the commission 
convenes, has been continuously registered with a political party other than a principal 
political party or has remained unaffiliated.  
 
A member of the commission must apply the provisions of the bill in a way that is impartial 
and that reinforces public confidence in the integrity of the redistricting process. 
 
The bill excludes the Governor from appointing certain individuals for membership on the 
commission, specifically:   
 
 
a member of or candidate for election to the U.S. Congress from the State;  
 
a member of or candidate for election to the General Assembly;  
 
an elected local government official or a candidate for an elected local government 
office;  
 
an officer or employee of a political party or political committee;  
 
a contractor providing professional services to a specified officeholder or candidate 
for a specified office; 
 
a current or former employee of or consultant to a specified contractor; 
 
an immediate family member of a specified officeholder, candidate for a specified 
office, or specified contractor;  
 
a staff member to a specified officeholder or candidate for a specified office; or  
 
a current or former registered lobbyist.  
 
Furthermore, an individual appointed by the Governor may not be at the time of 
appointment or have been within the immediately preceding seven years an employee of 
the Governor’s Office, the General Assembly, or an office of State government.  
 
Each member of the commission must apply the provisions established under the bill in a 
manner that is impartial and that reinforces public confidence in the integrity of the 
redistricting process.  
 
A member of the commission may not receive compensation for his or her service on the 
commission but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
 
Duties and Procedures of the Commission:  Seven members of the commission constitute 
a quorum. Any official action of the commission requires at least seven affirmative votes 
of the members. The commission must elect a member to serve as chair. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 482/ Page 4 
The bill generally charges the commission with (1) conducting an open and transparent 
process that allows full public participation in the redistricting process; (2) preparing and 
adopting a State legislative and congressional districting plan in accordance with specified 
standards; and (3) conducting business with integrity and fairness. In addition, the bill 
clarifies that the activities of the commission are subject to the Open Meetings Act and the 
Maryland Public Information Act (PIA). 
 
The commission must conduct public hearings for the purpose of collecting public input 
before and after the commission proposes a plan. The commission is responsible for 
developing and implementing a public hearing process that is subject to public notice and 
that promotes citizen outreach and broad public participation. The commission may 
supplement hearings with other activities to promote public participation, as specified. 
 
The commission must ensure that a proposed plan is readily accessible to the public and 
allow a 14-day public-comment period before adopting a proposed plan. Moreover, the 
commission must ensure the availability of a complete, accurate, computerized population 
database and public access to redistricting data and map-drawing software.  
 
By October 1 of each year ending in the numeral one, the commission must approve, 
certify, and send to the Presiding Officers of the General Assembly a State legislative 
districting plan and a congressional districting plan, as specified. The commission must 
submit with each plan corresponding maps and an explanatory report, as specified.  
 
Upon receipt of a certified plan from the commission, the Presiding Officers of the 
General Assembly must prepare the plan for consideration by the General Assembly, as 
specified. The General Assembly generally must treat the plan as a bill for purposes of 
publication, codification, notification, and distribution. 
 
In the event that the commission fails to adopt and certify a plan or a plan is not enacted, 
the commission must petition the Supreme Court of Maryland to establish a plan in 
accordance with specified standards. The commission represents the State in any petition 
seeking review of a certified or enacted plan. In any case brought in a federal court to 
review a plan, if the commission is not a party to the case, the commission must move to 
intervene in the case on behalf of the State. 
 
The bill authorizes the commission to hire staff, attorneys, and/or consultants in accordance 
with the State budget. Employees of the commission are independent of the State Personnel 
Management System. A possible criminal violation by a member or employee of the 
commission may be referred to the State prosecutor for criminal prosecution.  
 
Consideration by the General Assembly:  On receipt of the certified plans, the presiding 
officers must introduce each plan separately for consideration by the General Assembly. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 482/ Page 5 
Unless the Governor finds that a special session is not required, the Governor must issue a 
proclamation convening a special session of the General Assembly to consider the plans. 
The presiding officers must introduce the certified district plans at the following time:  
(1) if the Governor does not convene a special session, on the first day of the regular session 
of the General Assembly in the year ending in the numeral 2, or (2) if the Governor 
convenes a special session, on the first day of the special session. 
 
Except for the district maps required to be introduced by the presiding officers, a member 
of the General Assembly may not introduce a bill proposing a plan for legislative or 
congressional districts. 
 
During a regular session of the General Assembly, each chamber of the General Assembly 
must pass a legislative district plan and a congressional district plan by a vote of 
three‑fifths of the members elected to that chamber by the 45th day after the opening of 
regular session, and by the 15th day after the opening of a special session. The plans must 
be presented to the Governor for approval within one day after passage.  
 
If the legislative or congressional district plan does not receive a vote within the specified 
time periods, the plan must be considered as not passed. The Governor must sign or veto 
legislative and congressional district plans within six days after presentment. If the 
Governor does not sign or veto a plan, that plan must be a law in like manner as if signed 
by the Governor.  
 
A legislative district plan or a congressional district plan must become effective (1) on the 
date the Governor signs the plan; (2) if the Governor does not sign or veto the plan, on the 
sixth day after presentment; or (3) if there is a proceeding involving either plan in the 
Supreme Court of Maryland, on the date ordered by the Supreme Court of Maryland.  
 
Consideration by the Supreme Court of Maryland:  The Supreme Court of Maryland must 
adopt a legislative district plan or a congressional district plan in a proceeding if (1) the 
commission fails to approve a legislative or congressional district plan, or (2) the 
General Assembly does not pass a plan within the time period specified under the bill.  
 
The commission must be representative of the State in a proceeding before the 
Supreme Court as Maryland, as specified.   
 
Supreme Court of Maryland - Jurisdiction Over Redistricting Proceedings 
 
Upon enactment of a State legislative or congressional districting plan, a registered voter 
in the State may petition the Supreme Court of Maryland to bar the plan from taking effect 
on the grounds that the plan violates the Maryland Constitution, the U.S. Constitution, or 
federal or State statute. The commission is the defendant in a proceeding pertaining to an 
enacted legislative or congressional districting plan. Any State registered voter may 
participate as an amicus curiae in a proceeding pertaining to an enacted districting plan.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 482/ Page 6 
The bill grants the Supreme Court of Maryland exclusive original jurisdiction to establish 
State legislative or congressional districts in the event that (1) the commission fails to 
approve a plan; (2) a plan is not enacted; or (3) a registered voter files a petition, as 
specified. 
 
Upon the filing of a petition, the Supreme Court of Maryland must establish deadlines for 
the filing of pleadings and amicus curiae briefs. The Supreme Court of Maryland may 
appoint a special master to (1) hold a hearing; (2) consider a plan approved by the 
commission, if any; and (3) make recommendations to the Supreme Court of Maryland. A 
party to the proceeding may file exceptions to the recommendations of the special master, 
as specified. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland may, after (1) holding a hearing; (2) considering a plan 
approved by the redistricting commission, if any; and (3) considering the 
recommendations, if any, of a special master, order relief, as specified. In a proceeding 
pertaining 
to 
a 
plan 
adopted 
and 
certified 
by 
the 
commission, 
the  
Supreme Court of Maryland may approve or modify the plan or adopt a new plan. In the 
case of the commission’s failure to adopt and certify a plan, the Supreme Court of Maryland 
must establish State legislative and congressional districts in accordance with specified 
standards. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland must give priority to ruling on a petition filed under the 
bill. 
 
Funding for Redistricting Activities and Proceedings 
 
The Governor must include funds in the State budget to implement the provisions of the 
bill, including funds to cover the costs of litigation authorized under the bill.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Legislative and Congressional Redistricting in Maryland  
 
Legislative Redistricting:  Article III of the Maryland Constitution sets forth requirements 
for State legislative districts and procedures for legislative redistricting. The 
Maryland Constitution and federal case law require that the boundaries of the State’s 
47 legislative districts are redrawn after each decennial census to adjust for population 
changes. State legislative districts must (1) consist of adjoining territory; (2) be compact in 
form; (3) be substantially equal in population; and (4) duly reflect natural and political 
boundaries. Legislative districts may be subdivided into single-member and/or 
multi‑member districts for the purpose of electing delegates. Chapters 66 and 67 of 2010 
address the allocation of the State’s prison population among legislative districts. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 482/ Page 7 
In the second year following the decennial census, the Governor must, after conducting 
public hearings, submit a legislative districting plan to the Presiding Officers of the 
General Assembly on the first day of the legislative session. The Presiding Officers must 
introduce the plan as a joint resolution to the General Assembly. Unless the 
General Assembly adopts an alternative plan before the 45th day of the session, the 
Governor’s plan becomes law. The Supreme Court of Maryland has original jurisdiction to 
review, upon petition by a registered voter, the legislative districting plan and grant relief.  
 
In 2011, in concurrence with recent practice, the Governor established a Redistricting 
Advisory Committee to conduct public hearings around the State on legislative and 
congressional districting. The General Assembly adopted the Governor’s 2011 legislative 
districting plan under Joint Resolution 2 of 2012.  
 
State legislative boundaries are governed by the U.S. Constitution, the Voting Rights Act 
of 1965, and applicable case law. State legislative districts must be “substantially equal in 
population.” Reynolds v. Sims 377 U.S. 533 (1964). 
 
Congressional Redistricting:  Congressional redistricting is governed by the 
U.S. Constitution, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and federal case law. Congressional 
district boundaries must be redrawn after each decennial census to adjust for population 
changes, and they must be as nearly equal in population as practicable.  
Wesberry v. Sanders, 376 U.S. 1 (1964).  
 
Congress has left to the states the task of redrawing congressional district boundaries. 
Traditionally, the Governor has submitted a new congressional map to the 
General Assembly at the same time as a legislative redistricting plan. The 
General Assembly may adopt an alternative congressional map and is subject to no 
deadline after which the Governor’s plan becomes law. In 2011, the Governor convened a 
special session to finalize congressional districts for the 2012 primary elections. The 
General Assembly adopted the current congressional districting plan under Chapter 1 of 
the 2011 special session. 
 
The Maryland Constitution does not explicitly address congressional districting. 
Chapters 66 and 67 addressed the allocation of the State’s prison population among 
congressional districts in the State.  
 
Open Meetings Act, Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A  

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 482/ Page 8 
“public body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by 
the Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum 
of understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of 
education and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; 
a rule, resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others.  
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act, Generally 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $1.75 million in 
each of fiscal 2031 and 2032 (for a total of $3.5 million) to provide staffing, consulting 
services, and/or legal services for the commission; software for developing redistricting 
plans; computer, printing, map plotting, and other equipment; a computerized population 
database and public access to redistricting data and map‑drawing software; office space; 
public hearings; and the cost of any litigation resulting from the bill’s provisions, as 
discussed below.  
 
This estimate is based on California’s experience implementing a similar redistricting 
process. The California Citizens Redistricting Commission, a similar nonpartisan 
redistricting commission as envisioned under the bill, was appropriated approximately 
$20.5 million from fiscal 2020 through 2023. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) notes that, given the difference in population size between Maryland and California, 
expenditures are likely to be significantly lower for Maryland than those incurred in 
California. Based on these considerations, it is estimated that overall expenses related to 
redistricting work likely total approximately $3.5 million spread over two years. Additional 
details about what is included in this estimate are provided below. 
 
The Commission:  Under the bill, the commission is responsible for developing legislative 
and congressional districting plans, conducting public hearings, and ensuring the 
availability of a complete and accurate computerized population database and 
map‑drawing software. In addition, the bill authorizes the commission to hire staff, 
attorneys, and/or consultants in accordance with the State budget. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 482/ Page 9 
The staffing and consulting services required to meet the commission’s needs cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. However, it is assumed that the commission will rely 
extensively on contractual staff and/or contractual services, including legal and technical 
services. Because the activities of the commission are limited to the duration of the 
redistricting process, it is likely impractical for the commission to hire regular, full-time 
staff.  
 
Providing online access to redistricting data and map-drawing software requires uploading 
and maintaining the State’s official redistricting data to a software program that allows 
online map-drawing. The redistricting software vendor used by DLS has historically 
advised that an online system contemplated in the bill may cost between $35,000 and 
$75,000, depending on the number of anticipated users and the features enabled.  
 
While the bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
sufficient to support the commission proposed under the bill, including the costs of any 
litigation, the bill’s language does not meet the requirements necessary to establish a 
mandated appropriation. Generally, any legislation mandating funding for a program must 
include either an exact dollar figure or a funding formula that makes it possible to compute 
the level of funding required.  
 
Judiciary:  Expenditures may increase to the extent the bill results in increased filings, the 
appointment of a special master, and/or the development of congressional or legislative 
district boundaries by the court. As these expenses are contingent on redistricting plans not 
being adopted and/or petitions being filed to challenge final plans, any such effect cannot 
be reliably estimated.    
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires the commission to complete final maps by 
October 1 of each year ending in the number one. However, the State receives the required 
census data in February or as late as March of the same year. Chapters 66 and 67 require 
that population counts used to create legislative and congressional districts in Maryland 
exclude certain incarcerated individuals. Implementation of Chapters 66 and 67 includes 
(1) geocoding tens of thousands of prisoner address files in coordination with the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; (2) updating census data; and 
(3) incorporating the adjusted data into the software used to complete maps. During the 
previous redistricting cycle, in 2021, this process took nine months. DLS anticipates that 
this process will likely take at least six months in 2031. Thus, it may not be feasible for the 
commission to meet the bill’s deadline for completing its work.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 482/ Page 10 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 203 of 2025 and HB 182 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Governor’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Prosecutor’s Office; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services - Office of Legislative Audits; 
California Department of Finance; U.S. Census Bureau; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10