START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 402

N1, I3, P1 6lr1697
HB 306/25 – ENT

By: Delegates Holmes, Acevero, Boyce, Kaufman, McCaskill, Moreno, Pasteur,
Phillips, Ross, Simmons, Stewart, Stinnett, Toles, White Holland, Williams,
and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Common Ownership Communities – Ombudsman Unit, Governing Document
3 Database, and Local Commissions

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Common Ownership Community Ombudsman Unit in
5 the Division of Consumer Protection in the Office of the Attorney General to receive
6 and respond to certain complaints; requiring common ownership communities to file
7 certain documents with the Department of Housing and Community Development;
8 requiring the Department to establish a certain database; establishing requirements
9 for a local common ownership commission established by the local government of a
10 county; and generally relating to common ownership communities.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Commercial Law
13 Section 13–207
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Housing and Community Development
18 Section 2–304
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Real Property
23 Section 11C–101 through 11C–114 to be under the new title “Title 11C. Local
24 Commissions on Common Ownership Communities”
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0402*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 402

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Commercial Law

4 13–207.

5 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
6 INDICATED.

7 (2) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” MEANS:

8 (I) A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AS DEFINED IN §
9 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE;

10 (II) A CONDOMINIUM AS DEFINED IN § 11–101 OF THE REAL
11 PROPERTY ARTICLE; OR

12 (III) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION AS DEFINED IN § 11B–101 OF
13 THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

14 (3) “GOVERNING BODY” MEANS:

15 (I) THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS OF A CONDOMINIUM;

16 (II) THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
17 CORPORATION;

18 (III) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, OR
19 ANY OTHER ENTITY ESTABLISHED TO GOVERN A PROPERTY SUBJECT TO AN
20 INSTRUMENT THAT IMPOSES ON LOTS, OR ON THE OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS OF LOTS,
21 ANY MANDATORY FEE IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROVISION OF SERVICES OR
22 OTHERWISE FOR THE BENEFIT OF SOME OR ALL OF THE LOTS; OR

23 (IV) ANY OTHER BODY AUTHORIZED TO ADOPT RULES OR
24 REGULATIONS GOVERNING A CONDOMINIUM, COOPERATIVE HOUSING
25 CORPORATION, OR HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.

26 (4) “LOCAL COMMISSION” MEANS A COMMISSION ON COMMON
27 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
28 11C–101 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

29 (5) “MEMBER” MEANS:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 402 3

1 (I) AN OCCUPANT OR A UNIT OWNER UNDER THE MARYLAND
2 CONDOMINIUM ACT;

3 (II) A LOT OWNER UNDER THE MARYLAND HOMEOWNERS
4 ASSOCIATION ACT; OR

5 (III) A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AS
6 DEFINED IN § 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

7 (6) “UNIT” MEANS THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
8 OMBUDSMAN UNIT IN THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

9 (B) THERE IS A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OMBUDSMAN UNIT IN
10 THE DIVISION OF CONSUMER PROTECTION.

11 (C) THE PURPOSE OF THE UNIT IS:

12 (1) TO MONITOR CHANGES IN FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS RELATING
13 TO COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES;

14 (2) TO PUBLISH INFORMATION CONCERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP
15 COMMUNITIES ON THE WEBSITE OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL;

16 (3) TO ASSIST MEMBERS IN UNDERSTANDING RIGHTS AND
17 PROCESSES AVAILABLE TO MEMBERS UNDER LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING
18 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES; AND

19 (4) ON REQUEST, TO PROVIDE REFERRALS TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
20 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION SERVICES, WITH A GOAL OF REDUCING AND
21 RESOLVING CONFLICTS AMONG GOVERNING BODIES AND MEMBERS.

22 (D) THE UNIT SHALL INCLUDE:

23 (1) A FULL–TIME COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OMBUDSMAN;
24 AND

25 (2) STAFF AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

26 (E) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL APPOINT THE COMMON
27 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OMBUDSMAN.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (2) THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OMBUDSMAN MUST BE A
2 MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND BAR.

3 (F) THE UNIT SHALL RECEIVE AND RESPOND TO COMPLAINTS BY MEMBERS
4 REGARDING FINAL ADVERSE DECISIONS BY A GOVERNING BODY OR COMMON
5 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER.

6 (G) IN RESPONSE TO A COMPLAINT, OR ON THE INITIATIVE OF THE
7 OMBUDSMAN, THE UNIT SHALL:

8 (1) REFER THE COMPLAINT TO AN APPROPRIATE LOCAL COMMISSION
9 FOR FURTHER REVIEW OF WHETHER THE FINAL ADVERSE DECISION CONFLICTS
10 WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES IN
11 THE JURISDICTION; OR

12 (2) MAKE A DETERMINATION OF WHETHER THE FINAL ADVERSE
13 DECISION CONFLICTS WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON
14 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES AND PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE COMPLAINANT OF THE
15 DETERMINATION.

16 (H) (1) IF THE UNIT DETERMINES THAT A FINAL ADVERSE DECISION
17 CONFLICTS WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP
18 COMMUNITIES, THE UNIT SHALL PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE MEMBER, THE GOVERNING
19 BOARD, AND, IF APPLICABLE, THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER
20 THAT THE ADVERSE DECISION CONFLICTS WITH LAWS OR REGULATIONS
21 GOVERNING COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.

22 (2) IF WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER ISSUING A DETERMINATION THE
23 OMBUDSMAN RECEIVES A SUBSEQUENT COMPLAINT OF A FINAL ADVERSE DECISION
24 FOR THE SAME VIOLATION, THE UNIT SHALL REFER THE MATTER TO THE
25 APPROPRIATE LOCAL COMMISSION.

26 (I) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
27 THEREAFTER, THE UNIT SHALL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
28 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
29 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE
30 UNIT DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD.

31 (2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
32 SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

33 (I) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY THE UNIT;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 402 5

1 (II) THE TYPES OF ASSISTANCE REQUESTED;

2 (III) ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE UNIT;

3 (IV) THE NUMBER OF REFERRALS MADE TO LOCAL
4 COMMISSIONS; AND

5 (V) DATA ON DISPOSITIONS AND OUTCOMES OF COMPLAINTS
6 RECEIVED.

7 Article – Housing and Community Development

8 2–304.

9 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
10 INDICATED.

11 (2) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED
12 IN § 2–303 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

13 (3) “GOVERNING DOCUMENTS” MEANS AN OFFERING STATEMENT, A
14 DECLARATION, BYLAWS, RULES, REGULATIONS, A PROPRIETARY LEASE, OR ANY
15 OTHER SIMILAR DOCUMENT OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

16 (B) (1) A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY LOCATED IN THE STATE
17 SHALL FILE WITH THE DEPARTMENT A COPY OF THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, AND
18 ANY AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, OF THE COMMON OWNERSHIP
19 COMMUNITY.

20 (2) A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY THAT FAILS TO MAKE A
21 FILING REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS SUBJECT TO A
22 FINE OF $500.

23 (C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A DATABASE
24 OF GOVERNING DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION
25 (B) OF THIS SECTION ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT’S
26 WEBSITE DESCRIBED IN § 2–303 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

27 (2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY CHARGE THE FOLLOWING FEES FOR
28 FILINGS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION:

29 (I) FOR AN INITIAL FILING, UP TO $100; AND
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (II) FOR ANY AMENDMENT TO A GOVERNING DOCUMENT, UP TO
2 $25.

3 Article – Real Property

4 TITLE 11C. LOCAL COMMISSIONS ON COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES.

5 11C–101.

6 (A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
7 INDICATED.

8 (B) “COMMON ELEMENT” MEANS:

9 (1) ANY PORTION OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY OTHER
10 THAN THE UNITS OF A CONDOMINIUM OR COOPERATIVE; AND

11 (2) PROPERTY THAT IS OWNED OR LEASED BY A HOMEOWNERS
12 ASSOCIATION.

13 (C) (1) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” MEANS:

14 (I) A CONDOMINIUM AS DEFINED IN § 11–101 OF THIS ARTICLE
15 THAT IS USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES;

16 (II) A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AS DEFINED IN §
17 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE; AND

18 (III) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION AS DEFINED IN § 11B–101 OF
19 THIS ARTICLE.

20 (2) “COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A
21 TIME–SHARE PROJECT AS DEFINED IN § 11A–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

22 (D) (1) “DISPUTE” MEANS A DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN AT LEAST TWO
23 PARTIES THAT INVOLVES:

24 (I) THE AUTHORITY OF A GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON
25 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY TO:

26 1. REQUIRE OR PROHIBIT ANY ACTION INVOLVING A
27 UNIT OR COMMON ELEMENT;
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 402 7

1 2. REQUIRE ANY PERSON TO PAY A FEE, A FINE, OR AN
2 ASSESSMENT;

3 3. SPEND COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY FUNDS; OR

4 4. ALTER OR ADD TO A COMMON ELEMENT; OR

5 (II) THE FAILURE OF A GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON
6 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY TO:

7 1. PROPERLY CONDUCT AN ELECTION;

8 2. GIVE ADEQUATE NOTICE OF A MEETING OR ANY
9 OTHER ACTION;

10 3. PROPERLY CONDUCT A MEETING;

11 4. PROPERLY ADOPT A BUDGET OR RULES;

12 5. MAINTAIN OR AUDIT BOOKS AND RECORDS;

13 6. ALLOW INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS;

14 7. MAINTAIN OR REPAIR A COMMON ELEMENT IF THE
15 FAILURE RESULTS IN SIGNIFICANT PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY DAMAGE; OR

16 8. EXERCISE ITS JUDGMENT IN GOOD FAITH
17 CONCERNING THE ENFORCEMENT OF THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS AGAINST ANY
18 PERSON THAT IS SUBJECT TO THOSE DOCUMENTS.

19 (2) “DISPUTE” DOES NOT INCLUDE A DISAGREEMENT THAT
20 INVOLVES:

21 (I) TITLE TO ANY UNIT OR COMMON ELEMENT;

22 (II) THE PERCENTAGE INTEREST OR VOTE ALLOCABLE TO A
23 UNIT;

24 (III) THE INTERPRETATION OR ENFORCEMENT OF ANY
25 WARRANTY;

26 (IV) THE COLLECTION OF AN ASSESSMENT VALIDLY LEVIED
27 AGAINST A PARTY; OR
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (V) THE EXERCISE OF THE JUDGMENT OR DISCRETION OF A
2 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY REGARDING ANY LEGALLY AUTHORIZED ACTION.

3 (E) “GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY” MEANS:

4 (1) THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS OF A CONDOMINIUM;

5 (2) THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
6 CORPORATION;

7 (3) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, OR ANY
8 OTHER ENTITY ESTABLISHED TO GOVERN A PROPERTY SUBJECT TO AN INSTRUMENT
9 THAT IMPOSES ON LOTS, OR ON THE OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS OF LOTS, ANY
10 MANDATORY FEE IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROVISION OF SERVICES OR
11 OTHERWISE FOR THE BENEFIT OF SOME OR ALL OF THE LOTS; OR

12 (4) ANY OTHER BODY AUTHORIZED TO ADOPT RULES OR
13 REGULATIONS GOVERNING A CONDOMINIUM, COOPERATIVE HOUSING
14 CORPORATION, OR HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.

15 (F) (1) “GOVERNING DOCUMENT” MEANS:

16 (I) THE MASTER DEED, DECLARATION, INCORPORATION
17 DOCUMENT, BYLAWS, OR RULES OF ANY COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY;

18 (II) A WRITTEN PRIVATE AGREEMENT BETWEEN PARTIES
19 CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF THE COMMUNITY OR MAINTENANCE OR CONTROL
20 OF COMMON OR LIMITED COMMON PROPERTY; OR

21 (III) A DOCUMENT CONCERNING THE OPERATION OR
22 GOVERNANCE OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

23 (2) “GOVERNING DOCUMENT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A LEASE UNLESS
24 THE LEASE PROVIDES THAT IT MAY BE ENFORCED UNDER THIS TITLE.

25 (G) “LOCAL COMMISSION” MEANS A COMMISSION ON COMMON OWNERSHIP
26 COMMUNITIES ESTABLISHED BY A COUNTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE.

27 (H) “LOCAL GOVERNMENT” MEANS:

28 (1) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OR COUNTY COUNCIL OF A
29 COUNTY;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 402 9

1 (2) IF THE CHARTER OF THE COUNTY PROVIDES FOR A COUNTY
2 EXECUTIVE, THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE AND THE COUNTY COUNCIL; OR

3 (3) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY.

4 (I) “OWNER” MEANS:

5 (1) A UNIT OWNER IN A CONDOMINIUM;

6 (2) A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION; OR

7 (3) A LOT OWNER IN A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.

8 11C–102.

9 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE SUPERSEDE ANY INCONSISTENT PROVISIONS
10 OF LOCAL LAW THAT CONFLICT WITH THIS TITLE TO THE EXTENT OF THE CONFLICT.

11 11C–103.

12 (A) A LOCAL COMMISSION ON COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES
13 ESTABLISHED BY THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF A COUNTY BY LOCAL LAW SHALL
14 COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.

15 (B) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
16 LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL INCLUDE MEMBERS WHO:

17 1. ARE OWNERS IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY;
18 AND

19 2. REPRESENT PROFESSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
20 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN
21 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT OR REAL ESTATE SALES, DEVELOPERS, OR ATTORNEYS
22 WHO REPRESENT COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES INCLUDING AT LEAST ONE
23 MEMBER WHO IS A LICENSED COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MANAGER.

24 (II) THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT SHALL DETERMINE THE TOTAL
25 NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

26 (2) THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS SHALL SERVE AS NONVOTING
27 MEMBERS OF A LOCAL COMMISSION:
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (I) A DESIGNEE OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT; AND

2 (II) A DESIGNEE OF A COUNTY AGENCY DEALING WITH:

3 1. PLANNING;

4 2. ENVIRONMENT;

5 3. PERMITTING;

6 4. TRANSPORTATION; OR

7 5. HOUSING AND COMMUNITY AFFAIRS.

8 (C) THE CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR OF A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL BE
9 ELECTED FROM AMONG THE VOTING MEMBERSHIP OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

10 (D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A LOCAL
11 GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHING A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT PROCEDURES
12 FOR THE APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

13 (2) A MEMBER OF A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY NOT SERVE MORE THAN
14 TWO CONSECUTIVE TERMS.

15 11C–104.

16 (A) A MAJORITY OF THE TOTAL MEMBERSHIP OF A LOCAL COMMISSION
17 SHALL CONSTITUTE A QUORUM.

18 (B) A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST MONTHLY AND
19 DETERMINE THE TIMES AND PLACES OF ITS MEETINGS.

20 (C) A MEMBER OF A LOCAL COMMISSION:

21 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE LOCAL
22 COMMISSION; BUT

23 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
24 STANDARD COUNTY TRAVEL REGULATIONS.

25 (D) (1) A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL:
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 402 11

1 (I) ADOPT RULES OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AS
2 APPROPRIATE FOR MEMBERS AND STAFF;

3 (II) KEEP A RECORD OF ITS PROCEEDINGS;

4 (III) EXAMINE THE NEEDS OF COMMON OWNERSHIP
5 COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTY;

6 (IV) ADVISE COUNTY GOVERNMENT AND APPROPRIATE STATE
7 AND FEDERAL AGENCIES ON MATTERS RELATING TO COMMON OWNERSHIP
8 COMMUNITIES; AND

9 (V) PROVIDE TRAINING ON THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF A LOCAL
10 COMMISSION’S MEMBERS TO THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP
11 COMMUNITY BY:

12 1. DEVELOPING AN EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM FOR
13 NEW MEMBERS; AND

14 2. APPROVING AN ALTERNATIVE EDUCATIONAL
15 CURRICULUM FOR NEW MEMBERS.

16 (2) A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY:

17 (I) EMPLOY STAFF AS AUTHORIZED BY A LOCAL GOVERNMENT;

18 (II) ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR RESOLVING DISCIPLINARY
19 MATTERS PENDING BEFORE THE LOCAL COMMISSION THROUGH NONJUDICIAL
20 DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCESSES;

21 (III) DEVELOP EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES
22 FOR GOVERNING BODIES;

23 (IV) ADOPT ADDITIONAL BYLAWS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT
24 THE BUSINESS OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION; AND

25 (V) ADOPT ANY ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, PROCEDURES, OR
26 STANDARDS CONSISTENT WITH THE MISSION OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION AND TO
27 CARRY OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.

28 11C–105.
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (A) A LOCAL LAW ESTABLISHING A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL REQUIRE
2 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTY TO REGISTER WITH THE LOCAL
3 COMMISSION ANNUALLY ON A FORM THAT IDENTIFIES:

4 (1) THE ELECTED LEADERSHIP OF THE COMMON OWNERSHIP
5 COMMUNITY; AND

6 (2) THE MANAGING AGENTS OF THE COMMON OWNERSHIP
7 COMMUNITY.

8 (B) A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY THAT FAILS TO REGISTER OR
9 MAKES A FALSE STATEMENT ON A REGISTRATION FORM IS INELIGIBLE TO FILE A
10 DISPUTE.

11 11C–106.

12 (A) A LOCAL LAW ESTABLISHING A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY AUTHORIZE
13 THE COLLECTION OF A REASONABLE FEE FOR SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE LOCAL
14 COMMISSION.

15 (B) ANY AUTHORIZED FEE SHALL BE USED TO COVER THE COST OF
16 MAINTAINING THE LOCAL COMMISSION AND MAY INCLUDE:

17 (1) A PER UNIT ANNUAL CHARGE TO COMMON OWNERSHIP
18 COMMUNITIES TO RENEW REGISTRATION;

19 (2) FEES FOR DISPUTE RESOLUTION UNDER § 11C–110 OF THIS
20 TITLE, SERVICE, AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE; AND

21 (3) A PER UNIT CHARGE TO DEVELOPERS FOR THE RECORDATION OF
22 DOCUMENTS.

23 (C) IF THE COLLECTION OF A FEE BY A LOCAL COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED
24 UNDER THIS SECTION, THE LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL PUBLISH THE FEE
25 SCHEDULE.

26 11C–107.

27 A LOCAL GOVERNMENT THAT ESTABLISHES A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL
28 DESIGNATE A COUNTY AGENCY OR AN OFFICE TO:

29 (1) DISSEMINATE EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS REGARDING PROGRAMS
30 THAT ASSIST COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 402 13

1 (2) CONDUCT EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE THE
2 OPERATION OF COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES;

3 (3) MAINTAIN A LIST OF:

4 (I) COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTY,
5 INCLUDING THE LEADERSHIP OF EACH COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

6 (II) PROFESSIONAL MANAGEMENT COMPANIES THAT PROVIDE
7 SERVICES TO COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTY;

8 (4) MAINTAIN INFORMATION AND A REFERRAL SYSTEM FOR ALL
9 COUNTY SERVICES RELATED TO COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES;

10 (5) MAINTAIN A COLLECTION OF GOVERNING DOCUMENTS;

11 (6) PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO GOVERNING BODIES ON
12 MATTERS INCLUDING:

13 (I) LEADERSHIP TRANSITION;

14 (II) ELECTIONS;

15 (III) ADOPTION OF RULES;

16 (IV) ENFORCEMENT OF RULES;

17 (V) SELECTION OF ASSOCIATION MANAGERS; AND

18 (VI) STORMWATER MANAGEMENT;

19 (7) MAINTAIN AN OPERATIONS MANUAL TO GUIDE COMMON
20 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP;

21 (8) ADVISE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES AND PROFESSIONAL
22 ASSOCIATION MANAGERS OF CHANGES IN THE LAWS AND REGULATIONS THAT
23 AFFECT THEIR COMMUNITIES OR OPERATIONS; AND

24 (9) OPERATE A DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCESS TO FURNISH
25 MEDIATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.

26 11C–108.
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (A) A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY HEAR ANY DISPUTE BETWEEN PARTIES.

2 (B) A PARTY MAY NOT FILE A DISPUTE WITH A LOCAL COMMISSION UNTIL:

3 (1) THE PARTY HAS MADE A GOOD FAITH EFFORT TO EXHAUST ALL
4 PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS OF THE
5 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

6 (2) AT LEAST 60 DAYS AFTER ANY PROCEDURE OR REMEDY HAS BEEN
7 INITIATED WITH THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

8 (C) (1) IF THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
9 DETERMINES THAT A DISPUTE EXISTS, THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COMMON
10 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY SHALL NOTIFY THE OTHER PARTIES OF THE OPTION TO
11 FILE THE DISPUTE WITH A LOCAL COMMISSION.

12 (2) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
13 MAY NOT TAKE ACTION TO ENFORCE OR IMPLEMENT THE DECISION OF THE
14 GOVERNING BODY FOR 14 DAYS FOLLOWING NOTIFICATION OF ALL OTHER PARTIES.

15 (D) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 11C–109 OF THIS TITLE, ON THE FILING OF
16 A DISPUTE WITH A LOCAL COMMISSION, THE DECISION OF THE GOVERNING BODY OF
17 A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY SHALL BE STAYED AND MAY NOT BE ENFORCED
18 OR IMPLEMENTED, OTHER THAN BY FILING A CIVIL ACTION, UNTIL THE
19 COMPLETION OF THE DISPUTE PROCESS.

20 11C–109.

21 (A) (1) AT ANY TIME AFTER A DISPUTE IS FILED, THE GOVERNING BODY
22 OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY MAY SUBMIT A REQUEST TO LIFT AN
23 AUTOMATIC STAY UNDER § 11C–108 OF THIS TITLE.

24 (2) IF A HEARING PANEL HAS NOT BEEN APPOINTED UNDER §
25 11C–112 OF THIS TITLE, THE LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL AUTHORIZE A SPECIAL
26 STANDING PANEL TO CONSIDER REQUESTS FOR RELIEF FROM STAYS.

27 (3) THE SPECIAL PANEL SHALL INCLUDE:

28 (I) THREE VOTING MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMISSION
29 DESIGNATED BY THE CHAIR; AND
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 402 15

1 (II) AT LEAST ONE MEMBER DESCRIBED UNDER §
2 11C–103(B)(1)(I)1 OF THIS TITLE AND AT LEAST ONE MEMBER DESCRIBED UNDER §
3 11C–103(B)(1)(I)2 OF THIS TITLE.

4 (B) (1) A GOVERNING BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
5 THAT REQUESTS RELIEF FROM A STAY SHALL SERVE A COPY OF ITS REQUEST ON ANY
6 PARTY NAMED IN THE DISPUTE BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR PERSONAL SERVICE.

7 (2) A CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE SHALL ACCOMPANY ANY REQUEST
8 SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SECTION.

9 (3) A PARTY SERVED WITH A COPY OF THE REQUEST SHALL FILE ANY
10 OPPOSITION TO THE REQUEST WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING SERVICE.

11 (C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, A REQUEST
12 FOR RELIEF FROM A STAY MAY BE GRANTED ONLY IF THE ASSIGNED PANEL FINDS
13 THAT:

14 (1) ENFORCING THE STAY WOULD RESULT IN UNDUE HARM TO THE
15 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

16 (2) LIFTING THE STAY WILL NOT RESULT IN UNDUE HARM TO THE
17 RIGHTS OR INTERESTS OF ANY OPPOSING PARTY.

18 (D) IF A REQUEST FOR RELIEF FROM A STAY STATING FACTS SUFFICIENT TO
19 SHOW A NEED FOR IMMEDIATE ACTION IS NOT GRANTED OR DENIED WITHIN 20 DAYS
20 AFTER THE REQUEST WAS FILED, THE REQUEST SHALL BE DEEMED GRANTED.

21 11C–110.

22 (A) (1) FOLLOWING THE FILING OF A DISPUTE WITH A LOCAL
23 COMMISSION, AN AGENCY DESIGNATED BY A LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNDER §
24 11C–107 OF THIS TITLE MAY INVESTIGATE FACTS AND ASSEMBLE DOCUMENTS
25 RELEVANT TO THE DISPUTE AND MAY PREPARE A SUMMARY OF THE ISSUES IN THE
26 DISPUTE FOR USE BY THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

27 (2) THE DESIGNATED AGENCY OR OFFICE MAY NOTIFY A PARTY IF
28 THE DESIGNATED AGENCY OR OFFICE FINDS THAT A DISPUTE WAS NOT PROPERLY
29 FILED.

30 (3) THE DESIGNATED AGENCY OR OFFICE MAY NOTIFY EACH PARTY
31 OF THE DISPUTE REGARDING POSSIBLE SANCTIONS UNDER § 11C–112 OF THIS
32 TITLE.
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (B) IF THE DESIGNATED AGENCY OR OFFICE FINDS THAT, ASSUMING ALL
2 FACTS ALLEGED BY THE PARTY THAT FILED THE DISPUTE ARE TRUE, THERE ARE NO
3 REASONABLE GROUNDS TO CONCLUDE THAT A VIOLATION OF APPLICABLE LAW OR
4 ANY GOVERNING DOCUMENT HAS OCCURRED, THE DESIGNATED AGENCY OR OFFICE
5 SHALL INFORM THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

6 (C) ON RECEIPT OF THE RESULTS OF AN INVESTIGATION BY A DESIGNATED
7 AGENCY OR OFFICE, A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY:

8 (1) IF IT FINDS THAT THERE ARE NO REASONABLE GROUNDS TO
9 CONCLUDE THAT A VIOLATION OF APPLICABLE LAW OR ANY GOVERNING DOCUMENT
10 HAS OCCURRED, DISMISS THE DISPUTE;

11 (2) REQUEST ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATION BY THE DESIGNATED
12 AGENCY OR OFFICE; OR

13 (3) SCHEDULE A HEARING ON THE DISPUTE.

14 (D) A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY RECONSIDER THE DISMISSAL OF A DISPUTE
15 IF ANY PARTY FILES A MOTION TO RECONSIDER WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE
16 DISPUTE IS DISMISSED, DEMONSTRATING THAT:

17 (1) THE LOCAL COMMISSION ERRONEOUSLY INTERPRETED OR
18 APPLIED APPLICABLE LAW OR A GOVERNING DOCUMENT; OR

19 (2) MATERIAL ISSUES OF FACT THAT ARE NECESSARY TO A FAIR
20 RESOLUTION OF THE DISPUTE REMAIN UNRESOLVED.

21 11C–111.

22 (A) (1) ANY PARTY IN A DISPUTE MAY REQUEST MEDIATION.

23 (2) IF A PARTY REQUESTS MEDIATION, THE LOCAL COMMISSION
24 SHALL NOTIFY ALL PARTIES OF THE REQUEST AND OF THE MEDIATION SESSION.

25 (3) A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE A QUALIFIED MEDIATOR
26 TO MEET WITH THE PARTIES WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER A PARTY REQUESTS MEDIATION
27 TO ATTEMPT TO SETTLE THE DISPUTE.

28 (B) IF A PARTY REFUSES TO ATTEND A MEDIATION SESSION, OR IF
29 MEDIATION DOES NOT SUCCESSFULLY RESOLVE THE DISPUTE WITHIN 10 DAYS
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 402 17

1 AFTER THE FIRST MEDIATION SESSION IS HELD, THE LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL
2 PROMPTLY SCHEDULE A HEARING.

3 11C–112.

4 (A) (1) IF A HEARING IS SCHEDULED, THE CHAIR OF THE LOCAL
5 COMMISSION SHALL CONVENE A PANEL TO HEAR THE DISPUTE.

6 (2) THE CHAIR SHALL SELECT AT LEAST ONE MEMBER DESCRIBED
7 UNDER § 11C–103(B)(1)(I)1 OF THIS TITLE AND AT LEAST ONE MEMBER DESCRIBED
8 UNDER § 11C–103(B)(1)(I)2 OF THIS TITLE.

9 (3) THE LOCAL COMMISSION MEMBERS SELECTED BY THE CHAIR
10 SHALL DESIGNATE A THIRD MEMBER OF THE PANEL FROM A LIST OF VOLUNTEER
11 ARBITRATORS TRAINED OR EXPERIENCED IN COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY
12 ISSUES MAINTAINED BY THE LOCAL COMMISSION.

13 (4) IF A SUITABLE ARBITRATOR IS NOT AVAILABLE, THE CHAIR OF
14 THE LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL DESIGNATE:

15 (I) A THIRD PANELIST FROM AMONG THE VOTING MEMBERS OF
16 THE LOCAL COMMISSION; AND

17 (II) THE CHAIR OF THE PANEL.

18 (B) A PANELIST MAY NOT HAVE AN INTEREST IN THE DISPUTE TO BE HEARD.

19 (C) A HEARING PANEL SHALL HOLD A HEARING ON EACH DISPUTE THAT IS
20 NOT RESOLVED THROUGH MEDIATION UNDER § 11C–111 OF THIS TITLE UNLESS THE
21 LOCAL COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT THE DISPUTE IS:

22 (1) IDENTICAL TO ANOTHER DISPUTE BETWEEN THE SAME PARTIES
23 ON WHICH A HEARING HAS ALREADY BEEN HELD UNDER THIS SECTION; OR

24 (2) CLEARLY NOT WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF THE LOCAL
25 COMMISSION.

26 (D) A LOCAL COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE OF A HEARING TO ALL
27 PARTIES NOT LESS THAN 30 DAYS BEFORE A HEARING, UNLESS THE LOCAL
28 COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT AN EXPEDITED HEARING IS NECESSARY, IN WHICH
29 CASE NOTICE SHALL BE PROVIDED TO ALL PARTIES AT LEAST 15 DAYS BEFORE A
30 HEARING.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 402

1 (E) A PARTY OR WITNESS MAY BE ADVISED BY COUNSEL AT A HEARING.

2 (F) IF A PARTY, AFTER PROPER NOTICE, DOES NOT APPEAR AT THE
3 SCHEDULED HEARING, THE HEARING PANEL MAY ORDER ANY RELIEF FOR ANOTHER
4 PARTY THAT THE FACTS ON RECORD WARRANT.

5 (G) (1) THE HEARING PANEL SHALL APPLY STATE AND COUNTY LAWS
6 AND ALL RELEVANT CASE LAW TO THE FACTS OF THE DISPUTE.

7 (2) A DECISION OF THE HEARING PANEL IS BINDING ON THE PARTIES.

8 (H) (1) A LOCAL COMMISSION MAY ENFORCE A DECISION OF THE
9 HEARING PANEL BY APPROPRIATE LEGAL ACTION.

10 (2) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER ENFORCEMENT ACTION, A LOCAL
11 COMMISSION MAY:

12 (I) FILE FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF TO ENFORCE OR CORRECT
13 ANY VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE; AND

14 (II) FILE TO RECOVER DAMAGES FOR A LOSS SUSTAINED AS A
15 RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE.

16 (I) A HEARING PANEL MAY AWARD COSTS, INCLUDING REASONABLE
17 ATTORNEY’S FEES, TO ANY PARTY IF ANY OTHER PARTY:

18 (1) FILED OR MAINTAINED A FRIVOLOUS DISPUTE, OR FILED OR
19 MAINTAINED A DISPUTE IN BAD FAITH;

20 (2) REFUSED TO PARTICIPATE IN MEDIATION OF A DISPUTE; OR

21 (3) SUBSTANTIALLY DELAYED OR HINDERED THE DISPUTE
22 RESOLUTION PROCESS WITHOUT GOOD CAUSE.

23 (J) A HEARING PANEL MAY REQUIRE A LOSING PARTY IN A DISPUTE TO PAY
24 ALL OR PART OF ANY FILING FEE.

25 (K) A LOCAL GOVERNMENT MAY:

26 (1) ESTABLISH ADDITIONAL HEARING PROCEDURES; AND

27 (2) ADOPT ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO WITNESSES
28 AND EVIDENCE FOR A HEARING.
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 402 19

1 11C–113.

2 (A) A PARTY MAY APPEAL A DECISION OF A HEARING PANEL TO A COURT OF
3 COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

4 (B) AN APPEAL OF A DECISION SHALL BE CONSOLIDATED WITH ANY CASE
5 THAT ARISES OUT OF THE SAME FACTS.

6 (C) THE COURT HEARING AN APPEAL SHALL SUSTAIN THE DECISION OF THE
7 HEARING PANEL UNLESS THE DECISION IS:

8 (1) INCONSISTENT WITH APPLICABLE LAW;

9 (2) LACKING SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE; OR

10 (3) ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS.

11 11C–114.

12 (A) A PARTY MAY FILE A CIVIL ACTION ARISING OUT OF A GOVERNING
13 DOCUMENT OR A LAW REGULATING THE POWERS OF A GOVERNING BODY OF A
14 COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

15 (B) IF THE COURT IS NOTIFIED THAT A DISPUTE HAS BEEN FILED WITH A
16 LOCAL COMMISSION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS TITLE, THE COURT MAY POSTPONE
17 A PROCEEDING FOR AT LEAST 90 DAYS.

18 (C) THE COURT MAY HEAR THE ACTION DE NOVO IF A HEARING PANEL
19 ASSIGNED TO THE DISPUTE HAS NOT ISSUED A DECISION UNDER § 11C–112 OF THIS
20 TITLE.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
22 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 19