START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 486

F1 6lr1835
CF 6lr3058

By: Delegate Fennell
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools – Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day and Maryland School
3 Pedestrian Awareness Day – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of designating a certain date as Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day;
5 designating a certain day as Maryland School Pedestrian Awareness Day; requiring
6 the State Department of Education to make resources available in a certain manner
7 for a program of education for Ruby Bridges Walk to School Day and to plan
8 Maryland School Pedestrian Awareness Day; and generally relating to Ruby Bridges
9 Walk to School Day and Maryland School Pedestrian Awareness Day.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Education
12 Section 7–137 and 7–138
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Education

18 7–137.

19 (A) THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION IS TO DESIGNATE NOVEMBER 14 EACH
20 YEAR AS “RUBY BRIDGES WALK TO SCHOOL DAY” TO COMMEMORATE RUBY
21 BRIDGES, WHO, ON NOVEMBER 14, 1960, BECAME THE FIRST AFRICAN AMERICAN
22 STUDENT TO INTEGRATE AN ALL–WHITE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN NEW ORLEANS,
23 LOUISIANA.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0486*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 486

1 (B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE RESOURCE MATERIALS
2 PUBLICLY AVAILABLE TO ASSIST LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS IN PLANNING A PROGRAM
3 OF EDUCATION FOR RUBY BRIDGES WALK TO SCHOOL DAY.

4 (2) THE RESOURCE MATERIALS PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN
5 ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

6 (I) MAY INCLUDE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS, INCLUDING
7 AGE–APPROPRIATE LESSON PLANS, DISCUSSION GUIDES, HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS,
8 AND MULTIMEDIA RESOURCES; AND

9 (II) SHALL INCLUDE RESOURCES TO ASSIST TEACHERS TO
10 ENGAGE STUDENTS IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT CIVIL RIGHTS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE.

11 7–138.

12 (A) THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION IS TO DESIGNATE THE SECOND
13 WEDNESDAY IN OCTOBER EACH YEAR AS “MARYLAND SCHOOL PEDESTRIAN
14 AWARENESS DAY” TO ENCOURAGE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS, IN COLLABORATION
15 WITH THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY, TO PROMOTE SAFE PEDESTRIAN ROUTES TO
16 AND FROM SCHOOLS.

17 (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE RESOURCE MATERIALS PUBLICLY
18 AVAILABLE TO ASSIST LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS IN PLANNING MARYLAND SCHOOL
19 PEDESTRIAN AWARENESS DAY.

20 (C) THE RESOURCE MATERIALS PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN
21 ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION MAY INCLUDE:

22 (1) PEDESTRIAN SAFETY BEST PRACTICES;

23 (2) AGE–APPROPRIATE PEDESTRIAN SAFETY LESSON PLANS;

24 (3) MODEL WALK AUDIT TEMPLATES AND DISCUSSION GUIDES;

25 (4) AVAILABLE GRANT RESOURCES; AND

26 (5) ANY OTHER MATERIALS RELATED TO PEDESTRIAN AWARENESS.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2