START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 443

A2 6lr1059

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class B–SEC (Small Event
3 Center) License

4 PG 312–26

5 FOR the purpose of establishing a Class B–SEC (small event center) beer, wine, and liquor
6 license in Prince George’s County; authorizing the Board of License Commissioners
7 for Prince George’s County to issue the license for use in certain small event centers
8 in the county; limiting the number of Class B–SEC licenses that the Board may issue
9 per license year and per State legislative district; and generally relating to alcoholic
10 beverages licenses in Prince George’s County.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
13 Section 26–102
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
18 Section 26–1013.1
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

24 26–102.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0443*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 443

1 This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

2 26–1013.1.

3 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “SMALL EVENT CENTER” MEANS A VENUE THAT
4 OPERATES ON A PER–EVENT BASIS OR ON A LIMITED SCHEDULE AND DOES NOT
5 MAINTAIN STANDARD DAILY HOURS OF OPERATION.

6 (B) THERE IS A CLASS B–SEC (SMALL EVENT CENTER) BEER, WINE, AND
7 LIQUOR LICENSE.

8 (C) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE IN A SMALL EVENT
9 CENTER THAT HAS KITCHEN AND DINING FACILITIES TO ACCOMMODATE BETWEEN
10 75 AND 125 INDIVIDUALS, INCLUSIVE.

11 (D) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO SELL BEER, WINE,
12 AND LIQUOR FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION TO INDIVIDUALS ATTENDING AN
13 EVENT AT THE SMALL EVENT CENTER DESCRIBED IN THE LICENSE.

14 (E) THE BOARD MAY NOT ISSUE MORE THAN:

15 (1) 24 LICENSES IN A LICENSE YEAR; OR

16 (2) 3 LICENSES TO APPLY IN EACH STATE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT IN
17 THE COUNTY AT ANY ONE TIME.

18 (F) THE SMALL EVENT CENTER SHALL HAVE:

19 (1) A MINIMUM CAPITAL INVESTMENT, NOT INCLUDING THE COST OF
20 LAND, BUILDINGS, OR LEASING, OF $500,000 FOR SMALL EVENT CENTER FACILITIES
21 AND KITCHEN EQUIPMENT; AND

22 (2) FOOD AVAILABLE DURING THE HOURS OF OPERATION FOR AN
23 EVENT.

24 (G) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR DURING THE
25 HOURS AND DAYS AS SET OUT FOR A CLASS B BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE
26 UNDER § 26–2004 OF THIS TITLE, SUBJECT TO COUNTY USE AND OCCUPANCY LAWS
27 FOR HOURS OF OPERATION.

28 (H) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $3,500.

29 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
30 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2