START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 430

F5 6lr2027

By: Delegate Kerr
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Family Child Care Providers – National Guard and Military Reserves Members –
3 Substitute Provider

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a family child care provider who is a member of the National
5 Guard or military reserves to designate a substitute to provide family child care
6 under certain circumstances for not more than a certain amount of time each year;
7 and generally relating to family child care providers.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 9.5–301(a), (b), (e), and (f)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Education
15 Section 9.5–305.1
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Education

21 9.5–301.

22 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) “Child care provider” means the adult who has primary responsibility for the
24 operation of a family child care home or a large family child care home.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0430*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 430

1 (e) “Family child care home” means a residence in which family child care is
2 provided for up to eight children.

3 (f) “Family child care provider” means an individual who cares for children in a
4 registered family child care home or a registered large family child care home.

5 9.5–305.1.

6 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “MILITARY RESERVES” MEANS THE U.S. ARMY
7 RESERVE, U.S. NAVY RESERVE, AIR FORCE RESERVE COMMAND, U.S. MARINE
8 CORPS RESERVE, OR U.S. COAST GUARD RESERVE.

9 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER WHO
10 IS A MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL GUARD OR MILITARY RESERVES.

11 (C) A FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER SHALL DESIGNATE A SUBSTITUTE TO
12 PROVIDE FAMILY CHILD CARE DURING THE FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER’S
13 ABSENCE FOR REQUIRED TRAINING AND ACTIVE SERVICE IN THE NATIONAL GUARD
14 OR MILITARY RESERVES.

15 (D) A FAMILY CARE PROVIDER UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION
16 MAY USE THE DESIGNATED SUBSTITUTE TO PROVIDE FAMILY CHILD CARE DURING
17 THE FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER’S ABSENCE FOR NOT MORE THAN 45 WORKING
18 DAYS IN ANY 12–MONTH PERIOD.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2