START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 431

N1 6lr1942

By: Delegate Behler
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Real Property – Recordation and Printing of Subdivision Plats – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of updating certain provisions of law relating to the recordation of
4 subdivision plats; increasing a certain fee for printing of a set of subdivision plats;
5 and generally relating to the recordation of subdivision plats.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Real Property
8 Section 3–108(a) and (b)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Real Property
13 Section 3–108(c) and (d)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Real Property

19 3–108.

20 (a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the provisions of
21 this section are in addition to any other provisions of the Code, pertaining to recordation of
22 subdivision plats.

23 (2) This section does not apply in Queen Anne’s County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0431*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 431

1 (b) (1) If the owner of land in the State subdivides the land for commercial,
2 industrial, or residential use to be comprised of streets, avenues, lanes, or alleys and lots,
3 and desires, for the purpose of description and identification, to record a plat of the
4 subdivision among the land records of the county where the land lies, the clerk of the court
5 shall accept and record the plat as prescribed in this section.

6 (2) The clerk may not accept the plat for record until the owner of land
7 complies with the requirements prescribed in this section.

8 (c) (1) In this subsection, “coordinate” means a number which determines the
9 position of any point in a north or south and an east or west direction in relation to any
10 other point in the same coordinate system.

11 (2) The plat shall be legible, drawn accurately and to scale and shall be
12 submitted for recordation [using black ink on transparent mylar or black–line photo
13 process comparable to original quality that will conform] IN A FORMAT THAT CONFORMS
14 to archival standards.

15 (3) The plat shall contain the courses and distances of all lines drawn on
16 the plat.

17 (4) With respect to all curved lines, the plat shall show the length of all
18 radii, arcs, and tangents and the courses and distances of all chords.

19 (5) The plat shall contain a north arrow which represents and designates
20 either true or magnetic meridian as of a date specified on the plat or shall be referenced to
21 a recognized coordinate system within the county.

22 (6) All courses shown on the plat shall be calculated from the plat meridian.

23 (7) No distance on the plat may be marked “more or less” except on lines
24 which begin, terminate, or bind on a [marsh] WETLAND, stream, or any body of water.

25 (8) (i) The plat shall show the position by coordinates of not less than
26 four markers set in convenient places within the subdivision [in a manner so that the
27 position of one marker is visible from the position of one other marker].

28 (ii) From these markers, [commonly called traverse points,] every
29 corner and line can be readily calculated and marked on the ground.

30 (iii) These markers shall comply with standards that the State Board
31 for Professional Land Surveyors sets by regulation under § 15–208 of the Business
32 Occupations and Professions Article.

33 (9) A certificate stating that the requirement of this subsection, as far as it
34 concerns the making of the plat and setting of the markers, shall be put on the plat and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 431 3

1 signed by the owner of the land shown on the plat to the best of the owner’s knowledge and
2 by the professional land surveyor or property line surveyor preparing it.

3 (d) (1) The owner shall mail or deliver three copies of the plat to the clerk.

4 (2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the fee
5 is [$5] $25 PER PAGE for each set of plats.

6 (ii) A fee is not required for plats showing property or rights–of–way
7 to be acquired or granted by the State Highway Administration.

8 (iii) The clerk may assess additional fees if required by local law or
9 ordinance.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
11 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3