START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 467

E5 6lr0767
CF 6lr0726

By: Delegates Embry, Boyce, Fair, Kaufman, Moreno, Pasteur, Phillips, Ruth,
Simmons, Stinnett, and Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Correctional Services – Maryland Parole Commission – Improvements in
3 Transparency and Equity

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the annual report of the Maryland Parole Commission to
5 include certain information; altering a certain provision of law to require the
6 Commission to provide certain documents to a certain incarcerated individual at a
7 certain time, rather than allow the incarcerated individual to examine the
8 documents on request; requiring the Commission to document, state on the record,
9 provide to an incarcerated individual, and make available to the public certain
10 information; altering the time periods within which the Commission is required to
11 issue certain reports; providing that the Commission does not have the authority to
12 permanently deny parole; providing that a certain incarcerated individual is entitled
13 to a subsequent parole hearing at a certain time; requiring the Commission to record
14 each hearing at a certain time; requiring each hearing recording to be made available
15 to the public, to be redacted in a certain manner, to be retained for a certain amount
16 of time, and to contain certain materials; and generally relating to the Maryland
17 Parole Commission.

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Correctional Services
20 Section 7–208, 7–303, 7–304(b), 7–305(7), 7–306, and 7–307
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2025 Replacement Volume)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Correctional Services
25 Section 7–307.1 and 7–307.2
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2025 Replacement Volume)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0467*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 467

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Correctional Services

4 7–208.

5 (A) The Commission shall:

6 (1) maintain a record of its actions;

7 (2) make an annual report to the Governor of its work; and

8 (3) make appropriate recommendations for the improvement of its
9 functions.

10 (B) THE ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS
11 SECTION SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION, DISAGGREGATED BY
12 RACE OF THE RELEVANT INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS:

13 (1) THE NUMBER OF CASES IN WHICH THE COMMISSION GRANTED
14 PAROLE;

15 (2) THE NUMBER OF CASES IN WHICH THE COMMISSION DENIED
16 PAROLE AND THE REASON FOR EACH DENIAL;

17 (3) THE NUMBER OF INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE
18 GRANTED ADMINISTRATIVE RELEASE;

19 (4) THE NUMBER OF HEARINGS HELD AND THE PURPOSE OF EACH
20 HEARING; AND

21 (5) THE NUMBER OF INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
22 PAROLE–ELIGIBLE BUT HAVE NOT BEEN GRANTED PAROLE.

23 7–303.

24 (a) Before any hearing on parole release, the Commission shall give the
25 incarcerated individual:

26 (1) adequate and timely written notice of:

27 [(1)] (I) the date, time, and place of the hearing; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 467 3

1 [(2)] (II) the factors that the Commission or hearing examiner will
2 consider in determining whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole[.

3 (b) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the
4 notice also shall indicate that, before the hearing, the incarcerated individual or the
5 incarcerated individual’s representative may, on request, examine any document]; AND

6 (2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
7 COPIES OF ALL DOCUMENTS that the Commission or hearing examiner will use in
8 determining whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole.

9 [(ii)] (B) (1) A document, or a portion of it, is not available for
10 examination[,] if the Commission determines that:

11 [1.] (I) the document or portion contains a diagnostic
12 opinion;

13 [2.] (II) the incarcerated individual’s knowledge of the
14 document or portion would disrupt seriously a program of rehabilitation;

15 [3.] (III) the document or portion contains sources of
16 information obtained on a promise of confidentiality; or

17 [4.] (IV) the document or portion is otherwise privileged.

18 [(iii)] (2) If the Commission determines that a document or a
19 portion of it is not available for examination, the Commission shall notify the incarcerated
20 individual that:

21 [1.] (I) the document or portion is not available for
22 examination; and

23 [2.] (II) on request and if appropriate, the Commission will
24 provide the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative with the
25 substance of any information contained in the document or portion.

26 [(2)] (C) The Commission shall delete the address and phone number of
27 the victim or the victim’s designated representative from a document before the
28 incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative examines the
29 document.

30 7–304.

31 (b) The vote of each commissioner when acting collectively or in a panel, to
32 approve or deny parole, EACH COMMISSIONER’S REASONING AND JUSTIFICATIONS
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 467

1 FOR THE COMMISSIONER’S VOTE, and a vote to close or restrict access to a parole hearing
2 under subsection (d) of this section, shall be made available to the public.

3 7–305.

4 Each hearing examiner and commissioner determining whether an incarcerated
5 individual is suitable for parole, and the Commission before entering into a predetermined
6 parole release agreement, shall consider:

7 (7) ANY VICTIM’S ORIGINAL OR SUBSEQUENTLY FILED VICTIM
8 IMPACT STATEMENT, an updated victim impact statement, or ANY recommendation
9 prepared under § 7–801 of this title;

10 7–306.

11 (a) (1) The chairperson of the Commission shall assign hearing examiners, or
12 commissioners acting as hearing examiners, as required to hear cases for parole.

13 (2) Each proceeding before a hearing examiner shall be conducted in
14 accordance with this section.

15 (b) The Commission shall keep a record of each hearing conducted by a hearing
16 examiner.

17 (c) A hearing examiner shall determine if an incarcerated individual is suitable
18 for parole in accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this
19 subtitle.

20 (d) (1) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing examiner shall inform the
21 incarcerated individual of the hearing examiner’s recommendation for parole or denial of
22 parole.

23 (2) Within [21] 14 days after the hearing, the hearing examiner shall give
24 to the Commission, the Commissioner of Correction, and the incarcerated individual a
25 written report of the hearing examiner’s findings and recommendation for parole or denial
26 of parole, INCLUDING THE REASONING AND JUSTIFICATIONS FOR THE
27 RECOMMENDATION.

28 (3) The Commissioner of Correction or the incarcerated individual may file
29 with the Commission written exceptions to the report of a hearing examiner no later than
30 5 days after the report is received.

31 (e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, one commissioner assigned
32 by the chairperson of the Commission shall review summarily the recommendation of the
33 hearing examiner.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 467 5

1 (2) (i) The Commission, on its own initiative or on the filing of an
2 exception, may schedule a hearing on the record by the entire Commission or by a panel of
3 at least two commissioners assigned by the chairperson of the Commission.

4 (ii) The Commission or panel shall render a written decision on the
5 appeal.

6 (iii) The decision of the Commission or panel is final.

7 (3) If an exception is not filed and the Commission does not act on its own
8 initiative within the 5–day appeal period established under subsection (d)(3) of this section,
9 the recommendation of the hearing examiner is approved.

10 (4) (I) THE COMMISSION SHALL PROMPTLY GIVE THE
11 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WRITTEN NOTICE OF ITS FINAL DECISION UNDER THIS
12 SECTION.

13 (II) IF THE COMMISSION’S FINAL DECISION UNDER THIS
14 SECTION IS TO DENY PAROLE, THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
15 THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE THE DATE OF THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S
16 NEXT PAROLE HEARING, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–307.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

17 7–307.

18 (a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the chairperson of
19 the Commission shall assign at least two commissioners to hear cases for parole release as
20 a panel.

21 (2) Each proceeding before a Commission panel shall be conducted in
22 accordance with this section.

23 (b) (1) (i) A Commission panel that consists of two commissioners shall
24 determine, by unanimous vote, whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole
25 in accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

26 (ii) If the two–commissioner panel is unable to reach a unanimous
27 decision, the chairperson of the Commission shall convene a three–commissioner panel as
28 soon as practicable to rehear the case.

29 (2) A Commission panel that consists of three commissioners shall
30 determine, by majority vote, whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole in
31 accordance with the factors and other information specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

32 (c) For an incarcerated individual who has been sentenced to life imprisonment
33 after being convicted of a crime committed on or after October 1, 2021, at least six
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 467

1 affirmative votes are required to approve the incarcerated individual for parole, based on
2 consideration of the factors specified in § 7–305 of this subtitle.

3 (d) (1) The Commission panel shall inform the incarcerated individual and the
4 appropriate correctional authority of the Commission’s decision as soon as possible.

5 (2) If parole is denied, the Commission shall, WITHIN 14 DAYS AFTER THE
6 HEARING, give the incarcerated individual:

7 (I) a written report of its findings [within 30 days after the hearing],
8 INCLUDING THE REASONING AND JUSTIFICATIONS FOR THE DECISION; AND

9 (II) WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE DATE OF THE INCARCERATED
10 INDIVIDUAL’S NEXT PAROLE HEARING, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–307.1 OF THIS
11 SUBTITLE.

12 7–307.1.

13 (A) THE COMMISSION DOES NOT HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO PERMANENTLY
14 DENY PAROLE.

15 (B) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IS ENTITLED TO A SUBSEQUENT
16 PAROLE HEARING:

17 (1) FOR AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL SENTENCED TO A PERIOD OF
18 INCARCERATION OF 10 YEARS OR LESS, NOT LATER THAN 2 YEARS AFTER EACH
19 PAROLE HEARING THAT RESULTS IN A DENIAL OF PAROLE;

20 (2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, FOR AN
21 INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL SENTENCED TO A PERIOD OF INCARCERATION
22 EXCEEDING 10 YEARS, NOT LATER THAN 3 YEARS AFTER EACH PAROLE HEARING
23 THAT RESULTS IN A DENIAL OF PAROLE; AND

24 (3) FOR AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL SENTENCED TO A PERIOD OF
25 INCARCERATION EXCEEDING 20 YEARS FOR A CRIME AGAINST AN INDIVIDUAL, NOT
26 LATER THAN 3 YEARS AFTER THE FIRST PAROLE HEARING THAT RESULTS IN A
27 DENIAL OF PAROLE AND NOT LATER THAN 5 YEARS THEREAFTER.

28 7–307.2.

29 (A) THE COMMISSION SHALL RECORD EACH HEARING.

30 (B) EACH HEARING RECORDING SHALL BE:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 467 7

1 (1) REDACTED OF ALL PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION OF
2 THE VICTIM; AND

3 (2) MADE READILY AVAILABLE TO THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL.

4 (C) EACH HEARING RECORDING SHALL BE RETAINED ELECTRONICALLY
5 UNTIL 3 YEARS AFTER THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IS RELEASED FROM
6 INCARCERATION, ALL POSTINCARCERATION SUPERVISION IS COMPLETED, AND ALL
7 APPEALS ARE EXHAUSTED, WHICHEVER HAPPENS LAST.

8 (D) AT THE CONCLUSION OF EACH HEARING, THE PRESIDING
9 COMMISSIONER SHALL STATE THE FINDINGS, REASONING, AND JUSTIFICATIONS OF
10 THE COMMISSION ON THE RECORD.

11 (E) ANY STATEMENTS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND OTHER MATERIALS
12 CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION SHALL BE INCORPORATED INTO THE RECORDING
13 OF THE HEARING, UNLESS CONFIDENTIALITY IS NECESSARY TO PRESERVE
14 INSTITUTIONAL SECURITY OR THE SECURITY OF PERSONS WHO MIGHT BE
15 ENDANGERED BY DISCLOSURE.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7