START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 425

R4 6lr1229

By: Delegate Kerr
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motor Vehicle Administration – Sleep Apnea – Reporting Requirement
3 Prohibition

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the Motor Vehicle Administration from requiring a licensee
5 or an applicant for a driver’s license to notify the Administration if the licensee or
6 applicant is diagnosed as having sleep apnea; and generally relating to medical
7 condition reporting requirements for licensees or applicants for a driver’s license.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Transportation
10 Section 16–118
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Transportation

16 16–118.

17 (a) (1) The Administrator may appoint a Medical Advisory Board of qualified
18 physicians and optometrists to enable the Administration to comply properly with the
19 provisions of this title regarding the physical and mental condition of individuals who seek
20 to drive on highways in this State.

21 (2) The Administrator also may appoint a medical secretary to serve the
22 Board.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0425*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 425

1 (b) Each member of the Medical Advisory Board is entitled to compensation for
2 each meeting that the member attends. The compensation shall be paid out of funds
3 appropriated to the Administration.

4 (c) (1) The Administrator may refer to the Medical Advisory Board, for an
5 advisory opinion, the case of any licensee or applicant for a license, if the Administrator
6 has good cause to believe that the driving of a vehicle by him would be contrary to public
7 safety and welfare because of an existing or suspected mental or physical disability.

8 (2) The Board shall meet at the pleasure of the Administrator.

9 (C–1) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT REQUIRE A LICENSEE OR AN
10 APPLICANT FOR A DRIVER’S LICENSE TO NOTIFY THE ADMINISTRATION IF THE
11 LICENSEE OR APPLICANT IS DIAGNOSED AS HAVING SLEEP APNEA.

12 (d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the records of
13 the Medical Advisory Board:

14 (i) Are confidential;

15 (ii) May be disclosed only on court order; and

16 (iii) May be used only to determine the qualifications of an individual
17 to drive.

18 (2) The Administration may use information in its records for the purpose
19 of driver safety research, provided that personal information is not published or disclosed.

20 (3) The Administration may contract with third parties to assist with
21 driver safety research.

22 (4) A person may not use these records for any other purpose.

23 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
24 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2