START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 450

E2 6lr1214
CF SB 294

By: Delegates Guyton, Bagnall, Boyce, Conaway, Embry, Feldmark, Fennell,
Foley, Forbes, Harrison, Hornberger, D. Jones, Kaiser, Kaufman, Lehman,
Lewis, J. Long, Lopez, Miller, Phillips, Roberts, Rose, Ruth, Schindler,
Spiegel, Stein, Stinnett, Taveras, Terrasa, Tomlinson, Watson,
White Holland, Wolek, Woods, Woorman, and Wu
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Procedure – Protection of Identity of Victim of Sexual Assault or
3 Stalking

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a court or a party in a criminal or juvenile delinquency case
5 from disclosing or allowing inspection of a certain court filing or record to a nonparty
6 unless the court or the party redacts certain identifying information relating to a
7 certain victim of sexual assault or victim of stalking that appears in the filing or
8 record, subject to a certain exception; requiring a court to redact certain identifying
9 information relating to a certain victim of sexual assault or victim of stalking from
10 an existing filing or record on certain request; and generally relating to protection of
11 victims.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Criminal Procedure
14 Section 11–301
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2025 Replacement Volume)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Criminal Procedure

20 11–301.

21 (a) On motion of the State or on request of a victim or witness, during a criminal
22 trial or a juvenile delinquency adjudicatory hearing, a court may prohibit the release of the

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0450*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 450

1 address or telephone number of the victim or witness unless the court determines that good
2 cause is shown for the release of the information.

3 (b) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
4 indicated.

5 (ii) “Identifying information” means the name of, and any other
6 information that could reasonably be expected to identify, a minor victim, A VICTIM OF
7 SEXUAL ASSAULT, OR A VICTIM OF STALKING.

8 (iii) “Minor victim” means [a] AN ALLEGED victim of a crime or
9 delinquent act who was a minor at the time that the crime or delinquent act occurred.

10 (IV) “VICTIM OF SEXUAL ASSAULT” MEANS AN ALLEGED VICTIM
11 OF SEXUALLY ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR AS DEFINED IN § 10–923 OF THE COURTS
12 ARTICLE OR A CRIME UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 11 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
13 ARTICLE.

14 (V) “VICTIM OF STALKING” MEANS AN ALLEGED VICTIM OF
15 STALKING AS DEFINED IN § 3–802 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

16 (2) Notwithstanding any other law, on notice that an electronic or paper
17 filing includes identifying information of a minor victim, unless the court finds by clear and
18 convincing evidence that there is good cause to order otherwise, the court or a party in a
19 criminal or juvenile delinquency case may not disclose or allow inspection of an electronic
20 or paper court filing, including a charging document, to a nonparty to the criminal or
21 juvenile delinquency case unless the court or the party disclosing or allowing inspection of
22 the filing redacts all identifying information that appears in the filing.

23 (3) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, ON NOTICE THAT A CASE
24 FILING OR RECORD INCLUDES IDENTIFYING INFORMATION OF A VICTIM OF SEXUAL
25 ASSAULT OR A VICTIM OF STALKING, UNLESS THE COURT FINDS CLEAR AND
26 CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT THERE IS GOOD CAUSE TO ORDER OTHERWISE, THE
27 COURT OR A PARTY IN A CRIMINAL OR JUVENILE DELINQUENCY CASE MAY NOT
28 DISCLOSE OR ALLOW INSPECTION OF AN ELECTRONIC OR PAPER COURT FILING OR
29 RECORD, INCLUDING A CHARGING DOCUMENT, TO A NONPARTY TO THE CRIMINAL
30 OR JUVENILE DELINQUENCY CASE, EXCEPT TO THE VICTIM OR THE VICTIM’S
31 REPRESENTATIVE, UNLESS THE COURT OR THE PARTY DISCLOSING OR ALLOWING
32 INSPECTION OF THE FILING OR RECORD REDACTS ALL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION
33 THAT APPEARS IN THE FILING OR RECORD.

34 (4) ON WRITTEN REQUEST OF A VICTIM OF SEXUAL ASSAULT OR A
35 VICTIM OF STALKING, THE COURT SHALL REDACT IDENTIFYING INFORMATION
36 RELATING TO THE VICTIM FROM AN EXISTING FILING OR RECORD.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 450 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3