START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 452 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 452 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners - Grounds for Disciplinary Action 
- Restrictions 
 
 
This bill prohibits the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners from suspending or 
revoking a license to practice veterinary medicine in the State, reprimanding or censuring 
a licensee, or placing a licensee on probation solely on the basis of the licensee discussing 
or recommending the use of cannabis or a product that contains cannabidiol on an animal 
for potential therapeutic effect or health supplementation purposes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. To date, the 
board has not taken any formal actions that would be prohibited under the bill.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. As noted above, to date, the board has not taken 
any formal actions that would be prohibited under the bill. As a result, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect small veterinary businesses. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:    
 
State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners 
 
The State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners, which falls under the Maryland 
Department of Agriculture, licenses and registers veterinarians, registered veterinary 
technicians, veterinary hospitals, and animal control facilities and enforces the Maryland 
Veterinary Practice Act and related regulations. The board currently regulates more than 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 452/ Page 2 
3,300 veterinarians, more than 950 registered veterinary technicians, more than 
600 veterinary hospitals, and approximately 30 animal control facilities.  
 
With respect to veterinarians and veterinary practitioners, the board is authorized to refuse, 
suspend, or revoke any application or license, and censure or place on probation any 
licensee after a hearing, on various grounds, including (1) being unable to practice 
veterinary medicine competently due to a physical or mental disability; (2) being convicted 
of a violation of specified State or federal drug-related laws; (3) being convicted of a 
felony, or of a crime involving moral turpitude; (4) failing to comply with board rules or 
regulations after receiving a license; and (5) being grossly negligent or deliberately cruel 
to an animal. The board is also authorized to impose a penalty of (1) up to $5,000, for a 
first offense, in lieu of or in addition to suspension of a license, or in addition to revocation 
of a license and (2) up to $10,000, for a second or subsequent offense, in addition to 
suspension or revocation of a license. The board may also issue a cease and desist order, 
on review and approval of the Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary’s designee, against 
a person who takes an action for which the board determines there is a preponderance of 
evidence of grounds for discipline.  
 
Definition of “Cannabis” 
 
“Cannabis” means the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of the plant, including all 
derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether 
growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration greater than 0.3% on a 
dry weight basis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis products, seeds, seedlings, immature 
plants, and clones, but does not include hemp or hemp products, as defined.     
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 54 (Senator Lam) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2