START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 418

D2 6lr1008

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Courts – Remote Public Access to Bail Review
3 Hearings

4 PG 302–26

5 FOR the purpose of requiring each court in Prince George’s County to provide remote
6 audio–visual access to bail review hearings, except under certain circumstances; and
7 generally relating to remote access to bail review hearings.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
10 Section 1–101
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
15 Section 1–206
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

21 1–101.

22 (a) In this title the following words or terms have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) “Circuit court” means the circuit court for a county.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0418*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 418

1 (c) “Court” means the Supreme Court of Maryland, Appellate Court of Maryland,
2 circuit court, and District Court of Maryland, or any of them, unless the context clearly
3 requires a contrary meaning. It does not include an orphans’ court, or the Maryland Tax
4 Court.

5 (d) “Judge” means a judge of a court.

6 1–206.

7 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

8 (B) EACH COURT SHALL PROVIDE REMOTE PUBLIC ACCESS FOR BAIL
9 REVIEW HEARINGS, UNLESS A HEARING IS DEEMED CLOSED, CONFIDENTIAL, OR
10 RESTRICTED BY FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.

11 (C) UNLESS THERE IS AN OVERRIDING PUBLIC INTEREST COMPELLING
12 DISCLOSURE, A PRESIDING JUDGE MAY PROHIBIT THE BROADCAST OF ANY PORTION
13 OF A HEARING ON THE REQUEST OF ANY PARTY, WITNESS, OR COUNSEL INVOLVED
14 IN THE HEARING.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
16 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2