START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 432 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 432 
(Delegate Mireku-North, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Municipalities - Vagrancy - Repeal of Authority to Prohibit 
 
 
This bill repeals the authority of a municipality to prohibit vagrancy. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Municipal expenditures are not anticipated to be materially affected as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A municipality may prohibit vagrancy, vice, gambling, and houses of 
prostitution in the municipality. A municipality may also enforce all ordinances relating to 
disorderly conduct and nuisances equally within the municipality, and up to one-half mile 
outside the municipal limits, except where there is a conflict with the powers of another 
municipality. 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 2 of the Local Government Article describes the general authority and 
express powers granted to municipalities. Generally, a municipality may adopt ordinances 
that (1) assures the good government of the municipality; (2) protect and preserve the 
municipality’s rights, property, and privileges; (3) preserve peace and good order; 
(4) secure persons and property from danger and destruction; and (5) protect the health, 
comfort, and convenience of the residents of the municipality. However, an ordinance 
adopted by a municipal government may not conflict with State law. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 432/ Page 2 
Local Expenditures:  The bill removes the authority of a municipal government to prohibit 
vagrancy in the municipality. Under current law, a municipality may enforce all ordinances 
relating to disorderly conduct and nuisances occurring within the municipality, which 
includes any disorderly conduct or nuisances of a vagrant. The City of Greenbelt advises 
that the bill is not expected to fiscally impact its operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses as a 
result of vagrancy problems, which is heightened during cold or harsh weather conditions 
where vagrants go to small businesses seeking shelter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See HB 734 of 2024 and HB 564 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 463 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; City of Greenbelt; Town of 
Sykesville; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2