START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 421 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 421 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Prince George's County - Point-to-Point Speed Monitoring Systems - Maryland 
Route 210  
PG 309-26 
 
   
This bill establishes a regulatory framework to allow the use of point-to-point speed 
monitoring systems in Prince George’s County. By January 31, 2028, and by each 
January 31 thereafter, Prince George’s County must report specified information about 
the point-to‑point speed monitoring program to the General Assembly.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase 
beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent that Prince George’s County establishes 
point‑to-point speed monitoring systems on Maryland Route 210. General fund revenues 
increase beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent more violations are contested under 
the bill, as discussed below. General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be materially 
affected, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues and expenditures increase beginning as 
early as FY 2027 to the extent that the county installs point-to-point speed monitoring 
systems, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:            
 
Point-to-Point Monitoring Systems  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 421/ Page 2 
The bill authorizes the use of point-to-point speed monitoring systems in  
Prince George’s County. “Point-to-point speed monitoring system” means a device that 
uses at least two motor vehicle sensors to calculate the average speed of a motor vehicle 
between two geographically fixed points.  
 
A point-to-point speed monitoring system may be placed and used only at a location that 
is identified by safety studies as high risk for motor vehicle crashes or as having a high 
prevalence for speeding. A point-to-point speed monitoring system may be used only to 
identify speed violations by motor vehicles traveling at an average speed of at least 
12 miles per hour above the posted speed limit in a monitored segment of highway, 
generate citations, and respond to appeals. A point-to-point speed monitoring system may 
not be used for general surveillance, immigration enforcement, or criminal investigations 
or law enforcement purposes unrelated to speeding violations.  
 
Prince George’s County may place and use point-to-point speed monitoring systems on 
Maryland Route 210 only if:   
 
 
each monitored segment of highway is at least one mile and not more than ten miles 
in length; 
 
specified signage indicating a point-to-point speed monitoring system is in use is 
installed;   
 
each monitored segment of highway includes at least one device that displays a 
real‑time posting of the speed at which a driver is traveling; and 
 
the county and the State Highway Administration (SHA) publish notice of the 
location of the system and the monitored segment of highway on their websites at 
least 30 days before activating the system.  
 
Existing provisions of law governing other speed monitoring systems used in the State, 
including provisions that enumerate the escalating penalty structure for a violation recorded 
by a speed monitoring system, also apply for point-to-point speed monitoring systems.  
 
Citation Revenues  
 
Similar to other local government speed camera monitoring system programs in the State, 
Prince George’s County may use citation revenues to recover the costs of implementing 
and administering the point-to-point speed monitoring system program and may spend any 
remaining balance solely for public safety purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety 
programs. For any fiscal year in which the balance remaining after the costs of 
implementing and administering the systems is greater than 10% of the total revenues of 
the county for the fiscal year, the county must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total 
revenues to the Comptroller.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 421/ Page 3 
 
However, for any point-to-point speed monitoring system implemented on  
Maryland Route 210, Prince George’s County must remit the citation revenues (after cost 
recovery) to the Comptroller for distribution to SHA. SHA must solely use the revenues to 
assist in covering the costs of (1) examining the engineering, infrastructure, and other 
relevant factors that may contribute to safety issues on Maryland Route 210; (2) reporting 
its findings and recommendations on any solutions to these safety issues; and 
(3) implementing any solutions to these safety issues.  
 
Reporting 
 
By January 31, 2028, and each January 31 thereafter, Prince George’s County must report 
to the General Assembly on the point-to-point speed monitoring systems operated under 
the bill, including:  
 
 
the total number of citations issued for each monitored segment of highway; 
 
the gross revenue generated; 
 
the expenditures incurred; 
 
the net revenue generated;  
 
the total amount of any payments made to a contractor under the program; 
 
a description of how the net revenue generated from the point-to-point speed 
monitoring systems was used, including what percentage of net revenue was 
dedicated to roadway safety improvements on or near Maryland Route 210;  
 
changes to the average speed on each monitored segment of highway; and 
 
for each monitored segment of highway, changes in the number of motor vehicle 
crashes and motor vehicle crashes that result in serious bodily injury or death. 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control 
systems. Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who 
receives a citation, may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 421/ Page 4 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
District Court  
 
To the extent the District Court collects fines for citations issued under the bill, general 
fund revenues increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027. Any such impact depends on the 
extent to which Prince George’s County elects to deploy the systems authorized under the 
bill, the amount of the fine established/collected for a violation, and whether citations are 
contested (and, therefore, paid into the general fund upon a guilty disposition). However, 
general fund revenues are likely to be minimal.  
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court.  
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the  
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an IT upgrade to automate the process at 
approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be incurred. 
 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis.  
 
State Highway Administration 
 
As noted above, Prince George’s County is required to transfer net fine revenues 
(i.e., revenues remaining after cost recovery) from speed camera violations on 
Maryland Route 210 to the Comptroller for distribution to SHA. Thus, under the bill, TTF 
revenues increase to the extent that the county implements a point-to-point speed 
monitoring system program for Maryland Route 210. TTF expenditures increase 
correspondingly as the revenues are used for authorized purposes.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 421/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that Prince George’s County chooses to implement a 
point-to-point speed monitoring system program pursuant to the bill’s authorization:   
 
 
expenditures increase to install the devices and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the program 
(e.g., mailing or contractual costs);  
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the local 
jurisdiction; and  
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes (or remitted to SHA for systems established on Maryland Route 210).    
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 152 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 421/ Page 6 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 421/ Page 7 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7