START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 441 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 441 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Prince George's County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Maryland Route 210 - 
Penalties PG 306-26 
 
 
This bill authorizes and requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), under certain 
circumstances, to suspend the registration of a motor vehicle involved in a speed violation 
recorded by a speed monitoring system placed on Maryland Route 210 in 
Prince George’s County; the bill establishes related processes for any such vehicle 
suspension. By December 1, 2026, and each December 1 thereafter, MVA must report 
specified information to the General Assembly on any such registration suspensions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase from 
FY 2027 through 2029 to the extent that the bill results in fines being paid when they 
otherwise would not have been, as discussed below. General fund revenues increase over 
the same period to the extent more violations are contested under the bill. General fund 
expenditures are not anticipated to be materially affected, as discussed below. It is assumed 
that the bill does not materially impact the workload of the Office of Administrative 
Hearings. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County fee revenues may increase minimally to the extent 
administrative fees are paid to the county as authorized by the bill. Otherwise, the bill does 
not materially affect Prince George’s County finances or operations due to an existing 
revenue-sharing requirement related to speed camera violations on Maryland Route 210. 
However, Prince George’s County may benefit from increased spending on safety 
improvements for Maryland Route 210. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 441/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s requirements only apply to speed violations recorded by a speed 
monitoring system placed on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County. 
 
If a person liable for a violation does not pay the civil penalty or contest the violation, 
MVA may, on notice from Prince George’s County, suspend the registration of the motor 
vehicle involved in the violation. If MVA determines that a suspension should be imposed, 
MVA must give written notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, and the owner may 
request a hearing in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act. 
 
MVA must, on notice from Prince George’s County, suspend the registration of a motor 
vehicle involved in violations for which the owner of the motor vehicle or the person liable 
(1) within any 90-day period, does not pay the civil penalty or contest the violation for at 
least three overdue citations or (2) at any time, does not pay the civil penalty or contest the 
violation for any number of overdue citations that total at least $500 in civil penalties. 
 
When MVA is required to suspend the registration of a motor vehicle, MVA must reinstate 
the registration on notice from Prince George’s County that the owner of the motor vehicle 
or the person liable has paid (1) all overdue civil penalties and any related fees and court 
costs applicable to the motor vehicle that derived from the overdue citations and  
(2) a $30 administrative fee to Prince George’s County. 
 
By December 1, 2026, and each December 1 thereafter, MVA must report to the 
General Assembly on vehicle suspensions that take place under the bill. The report must 
include: 
 
 
the number of registrations suspended under the bill, broken down by the reasons 
for the suspensions; 
 
the number of registrations reinstated after being suspended under the bill; 
 
a geographic breakdown of the motor vehicle registrations suspended under the bill; 
and 
 
a description of the outcomes of court proceedings involving persons subject to the 
bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Automated Enforcement Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 441/ Page 3 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives 
a citation, may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
If a person fails to pay a civil penalty or contest the violation, MVA is authorized to refuse 
to register or reregister the motor vehicle cited for the violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems on Maryland Route 210 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by Prince George’s County on 
Maryland Route 210. However, this authorization terminates September 30, 2028, pursuant 
to Chapter 606 of 2023. Unlike other speed monitoring systems operated by local 
governments, revenues derived from citations issued by these systems do not accrue to the 
county. Instead, the county may keep a portion of the revenues for cost recovery, but the 
remainder must be remitted to the State Highway Administration (SHA). SHA must solely 
use the fine revenues to assist in covering the costs of (1) examining the engineering, 
infrastructure, and other relevant factors that may contribute to safety issues on 
Maryland Route 210; (2) reporting its findings and recommendations on any solutions to 
these safety issues; and (3) implementing any solutions to these safety issues. 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 596 of 2025, the same escalating penalty structure that applies for 
violations recorded by other speed monitoring systems in use in the State also applies for 
violations recorded by speed monitoring systems on Maryland Route 210. 
 
State Revenues:  As noted above, the current authorization to use speed cameras on 
Maryland Route 210 terminates September 30, 2028. Consequently, the bill’s various 
impacts (discussed below) likely terminate after fiscal 2029. 
 
District Court and the General Fund 
 
Under the bill, MVA is authorized or required (depending on the circumstances) to suspend 
the registration of a vehicle involved in a speed violation recorded by a speed monitoring 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 441/ Page 4 
system placed on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County. Due to the severity of 
this enforcement action, more individuals issued speed camera citations are expected to 
request a trial in District Court. If an individual is found guilty after a trial, the penalty is 
paid to the general fund, rather than the local government issuing the citation. However, 
the exact impact on general fund revenues depends on the number of guilty dispositions in 
court, which cannot be determined without actual experience under the bill. 
 
Transportation Trust Fund 
 
As noted above, Prince George’s County is required to transfer net fine revenues 
(i.e., revenues remaining after cost recovery) from speed camera violations on 
Maryland Route 210 to the Comptroller for distribution to SHA. Thus, under the bill, to 
the extent that bill results in additional fines being paid when they otherwise would not 
have been, TTF revenues increase commensurately. 
 
For informational purposes only, Prince George’s County has previously advised that, for 
fiscal 2023, approximately 13,743 citations were issued by speed cameras on 
Maryland Route 210 and subsequently satisfied with the county. After cost recovery, 
$334,456 was remitted to the Comptroller for distribution to SHA. This figure excludes 
any citations issued that were contested in District Court, voided for technical reasons, or 
otherwise not paid. 
 
TTF revenues may also increase, likely minimally, to the extent that administrative flag 
fees are paid for vehicles that have their registrations suspended. Specifically, MVA 
charges a $30 administrative fee in order for an owner to reregister the vehicle after a 
registration is suspended. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
District Court 
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an IT upgrade to automate the process at 
approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be incurred. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 441/ Page 5 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 
State Highway Administration 
 
To the extent SHA receives more revenues than it currently does under the existing 
revenue-sharing requirement noted above, TTF expenditures increase commensurately for 
the 
required 
activities 
(e.g., 
implementing 
solutions 
to 
safety 
issues 
on  
Maryland Route 210). As noted above, in fiscal 2023, $334,456 was remitted to the 
Comptroller for distribution to SHA. Similar to the effect discussed above for TTF 
revenues, any such impact likely terminates in fiscal 2029, when the authorization for speed 
cameras on Maryland Route 210 terminates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 206 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 441/ Page 6 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County. 
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. 
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system; 
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program; 
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 441/ Page 7 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7