START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 423

F3 6lr1027

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Public High Schools – Drug Detection Products

3 PG 501–26

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Prince George’s County Board of Education to provide
5 certain drug detection products to public high school students in the county in a
6 certain manner beginning in a certain school year; requiring each public high school
7 in the county to submit a certain report to Maryland’s Office of Overdose Response
8 on or before a certain date each year; and generally relating to drug detection
9 products and Prince George’s County public high schools.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Education
12 Section 7–455
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Education

18 7–455.

19 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (2) “DRINK SPIKING DETECTION PRODUCT” MEANS A PRODUCT THAT
22 HAS ONE OR MORE TEST SPOTS THAT ALLOW THE USER TO TEST A PORTION OF A
23 BEVERAGE TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE BEVERAGE HAS BEEN CONTAMINATED

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0423*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 423

1 WITH THE DRUG GAMMA–HYDROXYBUTYRIC ACID (GHB) OR KETAMINE.

2 (3) “DRUG DETECTION STRIP” MEANS A DISPOSABLE TEST STRIP
3 THAT ALLOWS AN INDIVIDUAL TO TEST A DRUG FOR THE PRESENCE OF FENTANYL.

4 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

5 (C) BEGINNING IN THE 2026–2027 SCHOOL YEAR, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S
6 COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL REQUIRE EACH PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL IN
7 THE COUNTY TO PROVIDE, AT NO CHARGE TO STUDENTS, DRINK SPIKING DETECTION
8 PRODUCTS AND DRUG DETECTION STRIPS.

9 (D) THE DRINK SPIKING DETECTION PRODUCTS AND DRUG DETECTION
10 STRIPS REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED TO HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS UNDER THIS
11 SECTION MAY BE MADE AVAILABLE IN SCHOOL–BASED HEALTH CLINICS OR SCHOOL
12 LIBRARIES.

13 (E) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, AND EACH OCTOBER 1 THEREAFTER,
14 EACH PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY SHALL REPORT TO MARYLAND’S
15 OFFICE OF OVERDOSE RESPONSE ON THE QUANTITY OF DRUG DETECTION
16 PRODUCTS DISTRIBUTED BY THE SCHOOL DURING THE PREVIOUS SCHOOL YEAR.

17 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2