START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 487

C8 6lr2282
HB 498/25 – W&M & APP CF SB 248

By: Delegate Feldmark
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Investments – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Technology Development Corporation to adopt
4 certain regulations regarding the consideration of remedies for investments in
5 certain businesses that no longer meet the definition of qualified business for
6 purposes of provisions of law governing the Corporation; authorizing, rather than
7 requiring, the Corporation to divest itself of an interest under certain circumstances;
8 authorizing the Corporation to pursue certain other remedies under certain
9 circumstances; and generally relating to the Maryland Technology Development
10 Corporation.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Economic Development
13 Section 10–401(a) and (c)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Economic Development
18 Section 10–408(a) and 10–470
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Economic Development

24 10–401.

25 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0487*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 487

1 (c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

2 10–408.

3 (a) The Corporation shall adopt regulations establishing:

4 (1) the investment committee;

5 (2) the responsibilities of the investment committee, INCLUDING A
6 PROCESS FOR CONSIDERING REMEDIES, INCLUDING DIVESTMENT, FOR
7 INVESTMENTS IN A BUSINESS THAT NO LONGER MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A
8 QUALIFIED BUSINESS; and

9 (3) the procedures for the appointment of investment committee members.

10 10–470.

11 (a) The Corporation may require that all or part of a grant be repaid, with interest
12 at a rate the Corporation sets, when conditions specified by the Corporation occur.

13 (b) (1) Whenever the Corporation is authorized by law to make a grant,
14 including a grant from the Economic Development Opportunities Program Account
15 authorized under § 7–314 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, the Corporation
16 may use money appropriated for the grant to make an equity investment in a qualified
17 business.

18 (2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph and
19 Subtitle 4A of this title, in making an equity investment under this subtitle or Subtitle 4A
20 of this title, the Corporation may not acquire an ownership interest in an enterprise that
21 exceeds 25%.

22 (ii) In making an equity investment under this subtitle or Subtitle
23 4A of this title in one or more venture or private equity firms, the Corporation may acquire
24 an ownership interest exceeding 25%.

25 (3) Within 15 years after making an equity investment under this subtitle
26 or Subtitle 4A of this title, the Corporation [shall], ON REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF THE
27 CORPORATION’S INVESTMENT COMMITTEE, MAY divest itself of that investment OR
28 PURSUE ANOTHER REMEDY THAT IS IN THE CORPORATION’S BEST INTEREST.

29 (4) The liability of the State and the Corporation in making an equity
30 investment under this subtitle or Subtitle 4A of this title is limited to the amount of that
31 investment.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 487 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3