START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 436

F3 6lr2111
CF 6lr1608

By: Delegate Bagnall
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County Board of Education – Member Compensation and Student
3 Member Scholarship – Increase

4 FOR the purpose of increasing the compensation of the president, vice president, and other
5 members of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education; increasing, beginning in
6 a certain year, the scholarship award for a student member of the county board who
7 completes a full term on the county board; and generally relating to the
8 compensation of the members and the scholarship of the student member of the Anne
9 Arundel County Board of Education.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Education
12 Section 3–2A–07
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Education

18 3–2A–07.

19 (a) The president of the county board is entitled to receive [$17,000] $25,000
20 annually as compensation, the vice president is entitled to receive [$16,000] $24,000
21 annually as compensation, and, except for the student member, the other board members
22 are entitled to receive [$15,000] $23,000 each annually as compensation.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0436*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 436

1 (b) A student member who completes a full term on the county board shall be
2 granted a scholarship [of $15,000] to be applied toward the student’s higher education costs
3 IN THE FOLLOWING AMOUNT:

4 (1) $15,000 FOR A TERM THAT BEGINS BEFORE JULY 1, 2029; AND

5 (2) $23,000 FOR A TERM THAT BEGINS ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2029.

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in accordance with Article
7 III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to
8 the salary or compensation of the president, vice president, members, and student member
9 of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education while serving in a term of office beginning
10 before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions of this Act concerning the salary or
11 compensation of the president, vice president, members, and student member of the Anne
12 Arundel County Board of Education shall take effect at the beginning of the next following
13 term of office. This limitation does not apply to an individual appointed or elected after the
14 effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

15 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
16 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2