START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 468

J1, Q7 6lr1480
HB 414/25 – W&M

By: Delegates Martinez, Acevero, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health and Taxation – Digital Social Media Services and the Mental Health Care
3 Fund for Children and Youth

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Mental Health Care Fund for Children and Youth as
5 a special, nonlapsing fund to improve access to mental health care services for
6 children and youth in the State; imposing a tax on certain annual revenues derived
7 from certain digital social media services in the State; providing for the calculation
8 and collection of the tax; requiring the Comptroller to distribute revenue from the
9 tax in a certain manner; and generally relating to the digital social media gross
10 revenues tax and mental health care services for children and youth.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Health – General
13 Section 10–209
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – State Finance and Procurement
18 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 Article – State Finance and Procurement
23 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 BY adding to
27 Article – State Finance and Procurement

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0468*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 468

1 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

4 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
5 Article – Tax – General
6 Section 1–101(a)
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Tax – General
11 Section 1–101(g–2), 2–102(a), 13–201(4), 13–402(a)(5) and (6), 13–602(a), 13–702(a),
12 13–1002(b) and (c), and 13–1101(b) and (c)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Tax – General
17 Section 1–101(g–2); 2–4B–01 and 2–4B–02 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4B.
18 Digital Social Media Gross Revenues Tax Distribution”; 7.7–101 through
19 7.7–301 to be under the new title “Title 7.7. Digital Social Media Gross
20 Revenues Tax”; and 13–402(a)(7) and 13–1001(h)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Health – General

26 10–209.

27 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE MENTAL HEALTH CARE FUND
28 FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH.

29 (B) THERE IS A MENTAL HEALTH CARE FUND FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH.

30 (C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO MENTAL
31 HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH IN THE STATE.

32 (D) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

33 (E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
34 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 468 3

1 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
2 AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

3 (F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

4 (1) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER TITLE 2, SUBTITLE
5 4B OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

6 (2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

7 (3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

8 (4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
9 THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

10 (G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR IMPROVING ACCESS TO MENTAL
11 HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH IN THE STATE.

12 (H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
13 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

14 (2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
15 THE FUND.

16 (I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
17 WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

18 (J) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR IMPROVING ACCESS TO
19 MENTAL HEALTH CARE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH IN THE STATE IS SUPPLEMENTAL
20 TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT OTHERWISE
21 WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR IMPROVING ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH CARE FOR
22 CHILDREN AND YOUTH IN THE STATE.

23 Article – State Finance and Procurement

24 6–226.

25 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.

26 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
27 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
28 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
29 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
30 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 468

1 Fund of the State.

2 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
3 apply to the following funds:

4 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
5 Fund; [and]

6 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

7 214. THE MENTAL HEALTH CARE FUND FOR CHILDREN
8 AND YOUTH.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
10 as follows:

11 Article – Tax – General

12 1–101.

13 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (G–2) “DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX” MEANS THE TAX
15 IMPOSED UNDER TITLE 7.7 OF THIS ARTICLE.

16 [(g–2)] (G–3) (1) “Executive Director” means the Executive Director of the
17 Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission.

18 (2) “Executive Director” includes a deputy, an inspector, or any other
19 individual acting within the scope of the Executive Director’s authority.

20 2–102.

21 (a) In addition to the duties set forth elsewhere in this article and in other articles
22 of the Code, the Comptroller shall administer the laws that relate to:

23 (1) the admissions and amusement tax;

24 (2) the boxing and wrestling tax;

25 (3) the digital advertising gross revenues tax;

26 (4) THE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX;

27 (5) the income tax;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 468 5

1 [(5)] (6) the Maryland estate tax;

2 [(6)] (7) the Maryland generation–skipping transfer tax;

3 [(7)] (8) the motor carrier tax;

4 [(8)] (9) the motor fuel tax;

5 [(9)] (10) the sales and use tax; and

6 [(10)] (11) the savings and loan association franchise tax.

7 SUBTITLE 4B. DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX DISTRIBUTION.

8 2–4B–01.

9 FROM THE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX REVENUE, THE
10 COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE EACH QUARTER THE AMOUNT NECESSARY TO
11 ADMINISTER THE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX LAWS IN THE
12 PREVIOUS QUARTER TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE COST ACCOUNT.

13 2–4B–02.

14 AFTER MAKING THE DISTRIBUTION REQUIRED UNDER § 2–4B–01 OF THIS
15 SUBTITLE, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE REMAINING DIGITAL
16 SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX REVENUE TO THE MENTAL HEALTH CARE
17 FUND FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–209 OF THE
18 HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

19 TITLE 7.7. DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX.

20 SUBTITLE 1. DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.

21 7.7–101.

22 (A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
23 INDICATED.

24 (B) “ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES” MEANS INCOME OR REVENUE FROM ALL
25 SOURCES, BEFORE ANY EXPENSES OR TAXES, COMPUTED ACCORDING TO
26 GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES.

27 (C) “ASSESSABLE BASE” MEANS THE ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES DERIVED
28 FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE STATE.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 468

1 (D) (1) “DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICE” MEANS A SERVICE PROVIDED
2 TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH AN INTERNET WEBSITE OR A MOBILE APPLICATION THAT:

3 (I) INCLUDES FEATURES THAT ALLOW A USER TO SHARE
4 IMAGES, TEXT, OR VIDEO THROUGH THE INTERNET WITH OTHER USERS OF THE
5 SERVICE WHOM THE USER HAS MET, IDENTIFIED, OR BECOME AWARE OF THROUGH
6 THE USE OF THE SERVICE; AND

7 (II) HAS MORE THAN 1,000,000 MONTHLY ACTIVE USERS IN THE
8 UNITED STATES OR GENERATES MORE THAN $500,000,000 IN ANNUAL GROSS
9 REVENUE, ADJUSTED ANNUALLY FOR INFLATION.

10 (2) “DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICE” DOES NOT INCLUDE A SERVICE
11 THAT IS USED PRIMARILY FOR:

12 (I) THE SALE OR PROVISION OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES;

13 (II) THE SALE OF COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS; OR

14 (III) IF THE SERVICE DOES NOT INCLUDE THE ABILITY FOR
15 CONTENT TO BE SENT BY A USER DIRECTLY TO ANOTHER USER, THE PROVISION OF
16 NEWS OR INFORMATION.

17 (E) “USER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL OR ANY OTHER PERSON WHO ACCESSES
18 A DIGITAL INTERFACE WITH A DEVICE.

19 7.7–102.

20 (A) A TAX IS IMPOSED ON ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES OF A PERSON DERIVED
21 FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE STATE.

22 (B) (1) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS TITLE, THE PART OF THE ANNUAL GROSS
23 REVENUES OF A PERSON DERIVED FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE
24 STATE SHALL BE DETERMINED USING AN APPORTIONMENT FRACTION:

25 (I) THE NUMERATOR OF WHICH IS THE ANNUAL GROSS
26 REVENUES OF A PERSON DERIVED FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE
27 STATE; AND

28 (II) THE DENOMINATOR OF WHICH IS THE ANNUAL GROSS
29 REVENUES OF A PERSON DERIVED FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE
30 UNITED STATES.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 468 7

1 (2) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT
2 DETERMINE THE STATE FROM WHICH REVENUES FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA
3 SERVICES ARE DERIVED.

4 7.7–103.

5 THE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX RATE IS:

6 (1) 5% OF THE ASSESSABLE BASE FOR A PERSON WITH GLOBAL
7 ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES OF $500,000,000 THROUGH $1,000,000,000;

8 (2) 7.5% OF THE ASSESSABLE BASE FOR A PERSON WITH GLOBAL
9 ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES OF $1,000,000,001 THROUGH $10,000,000,000; AND

10 (3) 10% OF THE ASSESSABLE BASE FOR A PERSON WITH GLOBAL
11 ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES EXCEEDING $10,000,000,000.

12 SUBTITLE 2. RETURNS.

13 7.7–201.

14 (A) EACH PERSON THAT, IN A CALENDAR YEAR, HAS ANNUAL GROSS
15 REVENUES DERIVED FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE STATE OF AT
16 LEAST $1,000,000 SHALL COMPLETE, UNDER OATH, AND FILE WITH THE
17 COMPTROLLER A RETURN, ON OR BEFORE APRIL 15 OF THE NEXT YEAR.

18 (B) (1) EACH PERSON THAT REASONABLY EXPECTS THE PERSON’S
19 ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES DERIVED FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE
20 STATE TO EXCEED $1,000,000 SHALL COMPLETE, UNDER OATH, AND FILE WITH THE
21 COMPTROLLER A DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX, ON OR BEFORE APRIL 15 OF
22 THAT YEAR.

23 (2) A PERSON REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
24 SUBSECTION TO FILE A DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX FOR A TAXABLE YEAR
25 SHALL COMPLETE AND FILE WITH THE COMPTROLLER A QUARTERLY ESTIMATED
26 TAX RETURN ON OR BEFORE JUNE 15, SEPTEMBER 15, AND DECEMBER 15 OF THAT
27 YEAR.

28 (C) A PERSON REQUIRED TO FILE A RETURN UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
29 FILE WITH THE RETURN AN ATTACHMENT THAT STATES ANY INFORMATION THAT
30 THE COMPTROLLER REQUIRES TO DETERMINE ANNUAL GROSS REVENUES DERIVED
31 FROM DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES IN THE STATE.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 468

1 7.7–202.

2 A PERSON REQUIRED TO FILE A RETURN UNDER § 7.7–201 OF THIS SUBTITLE
3 SHALL MAINTAIN RECORDS OF DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA SERVICES PROVIDED IN THE
4 STATE AND THE BASIS FOR THE CALCULATION OF THE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA
5 GROSS REVENUES TAX OWED.

6 SUBTITLE 3. TAX PAYMENT.

7 7.7–301.

8 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PERSON
9 REQUIRED TO FILE A RETURN UNDER § 7.7–201 OF THIS TITLE SHALL PAY THE
10 DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX WITH THE RETURN THAT COVERS THE
11 PERIOD FOR WHICH THE TAX IS DUE.

12 (B) A PERSON REQUIRED TO FILE ESTIMATED DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA
13 GROSS REVENUES TAX RETURNS UNDER § 7.7–201(B) OF THIS TITLE SHALL PAY:

14 (1) AT LEAST 25% OF THE ESTIMATED DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS
15 REVENUES TAX SHOWN ON THE DECLARATION OR AMENDED DECLARATION FOR A
16 TAXABLE YEAR:

17 (I) WITH THE DECLARATION OR AMENDED DECLARATION THAT
18 COVERS THE YEAR; AND

19 (II) WITH EACH QUARTERLY RETURN FOR THAT YEAR; AND

20 (2) ANY UNPAID DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX FOR
21 THE YEAR SHOWN ON THE PERSON’S RETURN THAT COVERS THAT YEAR WITH THE
22 RETURN.

23 13–201.

24 In this subtitle, “tax information” means:

25 (4) any information contained in:

26 (i) an admissions and amusement tax return;

27 (ii) an alcoholic beverage tax return;

28 (iii) a bay restoration fee return;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 468 9

1 (iv) a boxing and wrestling tax return;

2 (v) a digital advertising gross revenues tax return;

3 (VI) A DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX RETURN;

4 [(vi)] (VII) an E–9–1–1 fee return;

5 [(vii)] (VIII) a financial institution franchise tax return;

6 [(viii)] (IX) an inheritance tax return;

7 [(ix)] (X) a Maryland estate tax return;

8 [(x)] (XI) a motor carrier tax return;

9 [(xi)] (XII) a motor fuel tax return;

10 [(xii)] (XIII) a new tire fee return;

11 [(xiii)] (XIV) an other tobacco products tax return;

12 [(xiv)] (XV) a public service company franchise tax return;

13 [(xv)] (XVI) a sales and use tax return;

14 [(xvi)] (XVII) a savings and loan association franchise tax return;

15 [(xvii)] (XVIII) a tire recycling fee return;

16 [(xviii)] (XIX) a tobacco tax return; or

17 [(xix)] (XX) a transportation services assessment return.

18 13–402.

19 (a) If a notice and demand for a return is made under § 13–303 of this title and
20 the person or governmental unit fails to file the return, the tax collector shall:

21 (5) for public service company franchise tax:

22 (i) estimate gross receipts from the best information in the
23 possession of the tax collector; and

24 (ii) assess the tax due on the estimated gross receipts; [and]
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 468

1 (6) for digital advertising gross revenues tax:

2 (i) estimate gross revenues from the best information in possession
3 of the tax collector; and

4 (ii) assess the tax due on the estimated assessable base; AND

5 (7) FOR DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX:

6 (I) ESTIMATE GROSS REVENUES FROM THE BEST
7 INFORMATION IN POSSESSION OF THE TAX COLLECTOR; AND

8 (II) ASSESS THE TAX DUE ON THE ESTIMATED ASSESSABLE
9 BASE.

10 13–602.

11 (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a tax collector
12 shall assess interest on unpaid tax from the due date to the date on which the tax is paid if
13 a person who is required to estimate and pay digital advertising gross revenues tax,
14 DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX, financial institution franchise tax,
15 public service company franchise tax, or income tax under § 7.5–301, § 7.7–301, § 8–210(b),
16 § 8–405(b), or § 10–902 of this article:

17 (1) fails to pay an installment when due; or

18 (2) estimates a tax that is:

19 (i) less than 90% of the tax required to be shown on the return for
20 the current taxable year; and

21 (ii) less than 110% of the tax paid for the prior taxable year, reduced
22 by the credit allowed under § 10–703 of this article.

23 13–702.

24 (a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, a tax collector
25 shall assess a penalty not exceeding 25% of the amount underestimated, if a person who is
26 required to estimate and pay digital advertising gross revenues tax, DIGITAL SOCIAL
27 MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX, financial institution franchise tax, public service company
28 franchise tax, or income tax under § 7.5–301, § 7.7–301, § 8–210(b), § 8–405(b), or §
29 10–902 of this article:

30 (1) fails to pay an installment when due; or
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 468 11

1 (2) estimates a tax that is:

2 (i) less than 90% of the tax required to be shown on the return for
3 the current taxable year; and

4 (ii) less than 110% of the tax paid for the prior taxable year, reduced
5 by the credit allowed under § 10–703 of this article.

6 13–1001.

7 (H) A PERSON WHO IS REQUIRED TO FILE A DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS
8 REVENUES TAX RETURN AND WHO WILLFULLY FAILS TO FILE THE RETURN AS
9 REQUIRED UNDER TITLE 7.7 OF THIS ARTICLE IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND,
10 ON CONVICTION, IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 OR IMPRISONMENT
11 NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS OR BOTH.

12 13–1002.

13 (b) A person, including an officer of a corporation, who willfully files a false digital
14 advertising gross revenues tax return, A FALSE DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS
15 REVENUES TAX RETURN, a false financial institution franchise tax return, a false public
16 service company franchise tax return, or a false income tax return with the intent to evade
17 the payment of tax due under this article is guilty of perjury and, on conviction, is subject
18 to the penalty for perjury.

19 (c) Subsections (a) and (b) of this section apply to the alcoholic beverage, digital
20 advertising gross revenues, DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES, financial
21 institution franchise, public service company franchise, and income taxes.

22 13–1101.

23 (b) An assessment of digital advertising gross revenues tax, DIGITAL SOCIAL
24 MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX, financial institution franchise tax, public service company
25 franchise tax, income tax, or estate tax may be made at any time if:

26 (1) a false return is filed with the intent to evade the tax;

27 (2) a willful attempt is made to evade the tax;

28 (3) a return is not filed as required under Title 7, Title 7.5, TITLE 7.7, Title
29 8, or Title 10 of this article;

30 (4) an amended estate tax return is not filed as required under Title 7 of
31 this article;

32 (5) an incomplete return is filed; or
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 468

1 (6) a report of federal adjustment is not filed within the period required
2 under § 13–409 of this title.

3 (c) If a report of federal adjustment is filed within the time required under §
4 13–409 of this title, the tax collector shall assess the digital advertising gross revenues tax,
5 DIGITAL SOCIAL MEDIA GROSS REVENUES TAX, financial institution franchise tax,
6 public service company franchise tax, income tax, or estate tax within 1 year after the date
7 on which the tax collector receives the report.

8 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall be
9 applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2028.

10 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
11 1, 2028.
END OF PAGE 12