START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 526

D3 6lr1737

By: Delegate Kaufman
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Civil Actions – Settlement Agreements – Payment and Release

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a settling defendant in a tort action for money damages to
4 provide a proposed release to a plaintiff within a certain period of time and to pay all
5 sums due to a plaintiff under a settlement agreement within a certain period of time;
6 providing for the protection by a plaintiff of certain third–party rights of recovery or
7 subrogation; establishing the accrual of interest on settlement sums under certain
8 circumstances; and generally relating to settlement agreements in tort actions.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
11 Section 5–11A–01 and 5–11A–02 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 11A.
12 Payment of Settlement Agreements”
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

18 SUBTITLE 11A. PAYMENT OF SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS.

19 5–11A–01.

20 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “IOLTA ACCOUNT” MEANS AN ATTORNEY TRUST ACCOUNT
21 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–303 OF THE BUSINESS OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
22 ARTICLE.

23 5–11A–02.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0526*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 526

1 (A) THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION IS TO ENSURE THE PROMPT EXCHANGE
2 OF RELEASE DOCUMENTS AND PAYMENT OF SETTLEMENT PROCEEDS FOLLOWING
3 THE ORAL OR WRITTEN CONFIRMATION OF SETTLEMENT.

4 (B) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A TORT CLAIM FOR MONEY
5 DAMAGES.

6 (2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN INDIVIDUAL PAYING FOR A
7 SETTLEMENT WITH PERSONAL ASSETS.

8 (C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A SETTLING
9 DEFENDANT SHALL:

10 (I) PROVIDE A PROPOSED RELEASE TO A PLAINTIFF WITHIN 10
11 DAYS AFTER AN ORAL OR WRITTEN AGREEMENT FOR A SPECIFIED AMOUNT OF
12 MONEY TO RESOLVE A CLAIM BEFORE TRIAL; AND

13 (II) PAY ALL SUMS DUE TO THE PLAINTIFF WITHIN 15 DAYS
14 AFTER:

15 1. THE PLAINTIFF PROVIDES THE EXECUTED RELEASE
16 AND ANY APPLICABLE DOCUMENT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS
17 SECTION; OR

18 2. IF COURT APPROVAL IS REQUIRED BY LAW OR AS
19 PART OF THE SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT, COURT APPROVAL OF THE SETTLEMENT
20 AGREEMENT.

21 (2) DURING A TIME PERIOD DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
22 SUBSECTION, THE PARTIES MAY MUTUALLY AGREE TO AN EXTENSION OF THE TIME
23 PERIOD.

24 (D) IF THERE IS A KNOWN AND ASSERTED THIRD–PARTY RIGHT OF
25 RECOVERY OR SUBROGATION INTEREST, INCLUDING AN ATTORNEY’S LIEN, A
26 HEALTH CARE PROVIDER LIEN, OR A RIGHT OF RECOVERY ASSERTED BY MEDICARE,
27 THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES, MARYLAND MEDICAID,
28 OR A PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE COMPANY, A PLAINTIFF MAY PROTECT THE
29 THIRD PARTY’S RIGHT OF RECOVERY OR SUBROGATION INTEREST BY TENDERING
30 TO A SETTLING DEFENDANT:

31 (1) FOR AN ATTORNEY’S LIEN, A SIGNED RELEASE OF THE
32 ATTORNEY’S LIEN;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 526 3

1 (2) FOR A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER LIEN:

2 (I) A SIGNED RELEASE OF THE HEALTH CARE PROVIDER LIEN;

3 (II) A LETTER FROM THE PLAINTIFF’S ATTORNEY OR LANGUAGE
4 IN A MUTUALLY AGREED ON RELEASE STATING THAT THE PLAINTIFF’S ATTORNEY
5 WILL HOLD THE FULL AMOUNT OF THE CLAIMED LIEN IN THE IOLTA ACCOUNT OF
6 THE PLAINTIFF’S ATTORNEY PENDING FINAL RESOLUTION OF THE LIEN AMOUNT; OR

7 (III) DOCUMENTATION OF ANY OTHER METHOD OF RESOLUTION
8 OF THE LIEN OR RIGHT OF RECOVERY AS AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES; OR

9 (3) FOR A RIGHT OF RECOVERY CLAIMED BY A HEALTH INSURER:

10 (I) DOCUMENTATION OF AN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
11 PLAINTIFF AND MEDICARE, THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
12 SERVICES, MARYLAND MEDICAID, OR PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE COMPANY
13 REGARDING THE AMOUNT OF THE SETTLEMENT THAT WILL BE ACCEPTED IN
14 SATISFACTION OF THE RIGHT OF RECOVERY;

15 (II) A LETTER FROM THE PLAINTIFF’S ATTORNEY, OR
16 LANGUAGE IN A MUTUAL RELEASE, AGREEING TO HOLD THE FULL AMOUNT OF THE
17 CLAIMED RIGHT TO RECOVERY IN THE PLAINTIFF’S IOLTA ACCOUNT PENDING
18 FINAL RESOLUTION OF THE AMOUNT OF THE RIGHT TO RECOVERY; OR

19 (III) DOCUMENTATION OF ANY OTHER METHOD OF RESOLUTION
20 OF THE LIEN AS AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES.

21 (E) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
22 SETTLEMENT AMOUNT SHALL ACCRUE INTEREST AT THE LEGAL RATE OF INTEREST
23 ON A JUDGMENT, ASSESSED BEGINNING THE DATE THE PARTIES REACH AN ORAL OR
24 WRITTEN SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT, AND UNTIL PAYMENT IS MADE IF:

25 (I) THE SETTLING DEFENDANT DOES NOT PROVIDE A DRAFT
26 RELEASE AS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1)(I) OF THIS SECTION; OR

27 (II) THE SETTLING DEFENDANT DOES NOT PAY ALL SUMS DUE
28 AS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

29 (2) THE PARTIES MAY MUTUALLY AGREE TO AN INTEREST RATE
30 DIFFERENT THAN THE INTEREST RATE DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
31 SUBSECTION, BUT AN AGREEMENT MAY NOT WAIVE THE ACCRUAL OF INTEREST.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 526

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
2 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
3 application to any settlement agreement ratified before the effective date of this Act.

4 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4