START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 510 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 510 
(Delegate Cardin, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Automated Speed Enforcement - Improper Registration 
 
 
This bill increases the civil penalties for a speed limit violation recorded by a speed 
monitoring system (i.e., speed camera) or a work zone speed control system when the 
owner of the motor vehicle is a resident of the State and the vehicle is improperly registered 
in Virginia. The bill also requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to establish a 
searchable database of information regarding motor vehicles that are owned by residents 
of the State and improperly registered in Virginia; the database must be made available to 
any State or local entity seeking access for the purpose of issuing citations, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund, special fund, and nonbudgeted revenues may increase 
beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the increased penalties established by the bill, as discussed 
below; special fund expenditures increase accordingly as the revenues are used for 
authorized purposes. General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be materially 
affected, as discussed below. MVA can establish the database using existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures may increase due to the 
increased penalties established by the bill, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 510/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Citations and Penalties 
 
When a motor vehicle recorded by a speed monitoring system or work zone speed control 
system is improperly registered in Virginia, the citation that is mailed to the registered 
owner of the motor vehicle must include information advising the person alleged to be 
liable that driving a motor vehicle on a highway without proper registration is a violation 
of the Maryland Vehicle Law, as specified.  
 
The bill increases the civil penalties for a violation recorded by a speed monitoring system 
and work zone speed control system when the owner of the motor vehicle is a resident of 
the State and the motor vehicle is improperly registered in Virginia, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Speed Camera and Work Zone Speed Camera Penalties  
Under Current Law and the Bill  
 
Exceeding the  
Speed Limit By:   
Speed Camera  
Maximum Penalty 
Work Zone 
Maximum Penalty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Current Law 
The Bill 
Current Law 
The Bill 
 
 
 
 
 
12 – 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
$250 
$60 
$300 
16 – 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
500 
80 
450 
20 – 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
750 
140 
600 
30 – 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
1,000 
270 
750 
40 or more MPH 
425 
1,250 
500 
900 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Notes:  The increased penalties under the bill are applicable only when the owner of the motor 
vehicle is a resident of the State and the vehicle is improperly registered in Virginia. 
 
Under both current law and the bill, penalties are doubled for a violation recorded by a work 
zone speed control system when workers are present in a work zone. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 510/ Page 3 
Searchable Database 
 
MVA must enter into an agreement or arrangement with an appropriate authorized 
representative of Virginia to obtain and regularly update information regarding motor 
vehicles that are owned by residents of the State and are improperly registered in Virginia. 
 
MVA must compile the information into a searchable database and make the database 
available to any State or local entity seeking access for the purposes of issuing citations to 
the owners or drivers of motor vehicles for violations recorded by speed monitoring 
systems and work zone speed control systems.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement Systems  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives 
a citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court.  
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
 
Work Zone Speed Control Systems  
 
Chapter 17 of 2024 made various changes to the State’s work zone speed control systems 
program by, among other things, increasing civil penalties for violations captured by work 
zone speed cameras and establishing an escalating penalty structure for violations captured 
by work zone speed cameras (effective January 1, 2025), as reflected above in Exhibit 1. 
 
In general, revenues from the civil fines collected through the use of State operated work 
zone speed cameras must accrue to a special fund and be distributed first to the Department 
of State Police (DSP) and the State Highway Administration (SHA) to cover the costs of 
implementing and administering work zone speed cameras. Then, of the remaining balance 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 510/ Page 4 
(1) 25% must be distributed to DSP to be used only for the purchase of replacement 
vehicles and related motor vehicle equipment used to outfit police vehicles, and (2) 75% 
must be distributed to the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) for highway and work zone 
safety purposes and SHA system preservation. 
 
Vehicle Registration  
 
The Maryland Vehicle Law requires that each motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole 
trailer driven on a highway must be properly registered. The Maryland Vehicle Law 
includes various exceptions to the registration requirement. For example, registration is not 
required for a farm tractor, a towed vehicle that is properly attached to a towing vehicle, or 
a vehicle owned by a new resident of Maryland during the first 60 days of residency, as 
specified.  
 
State Revenues:  The bill significantly increases the penalties associated with speed 
violations recorded by speed monitoring systems and work zone speed control systems, but 
only when the owner of the motor vehicle recorded is a resident of the State and the vehicle 
is improperly registered in Virginia. To the extent that additional fine revenues are 
collected under the bill, general fund, special fund, and nonbudgeted revenues increase 
accordingly. 
 
Specifically, both SHA and the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) have speed 
monitoring systems in place; revenues from uncontested citations from these systems 
generally accrue to TTF and MDTA’s nonbudgeted fund, respectively. In addition, 
revenues collected from speed monitoring systems placed by Prince George’s County on 
Maryland Route 210 accrue to TTF. In the event that a citation is contested, and the 
individual is found guilty by the District Court, the revenues accrue to the general fund 
instead. Additionally, citation revenues collected through a State operated work zone speed 
control system program accrue to a special fund to subsequently be distributed to SHA and 
DSP for specified purposes. 
 
The ultimate fiscal impact depends on the number of affected vehicles cited under the bill 
and the number of cases that are contested, which cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill. The Department of Legislative Services notes that 
revenues may also be affected to the extent that owner/driver behavior changes over time. 
For informational purposes only, MVA estimates that there are 77,550 motor vehicles 
owned by Maryland residents but registered in Virginia. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, revenues from the civil fines collected through the 
use of State operated work zone speed cameras (and certain speed cameras operated by 
Prince George’s County, as referenced above) must generally be distributed and used for 
specified authorized purposes by DSP and/or SHA. Thus, special fund expenditures 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 510/ Page 5 
increase correspondingly to the extent additional revenues are distributed and used for such 
purposes. 
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the  
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an IT upgrade to automate the process at 
approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be incurred. 
 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Revenues from speed monitoring system citations may increase for 
local jurisdictions authorized to use speed monitoring systems. Although there are a 
significant number of improperly registered vehicles in the State, as noted above, the 
ultimate revenue impact depends on if and how many of these vehicles receive speed 
monitoring system citations (and the extent to which owners/drivers modify behaviors as 
a result of the bill). As such, the revenue increase cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill. Local government expenditures increase as the penalty 
revenues are used for authorized purposes.  
 
For information purposes only, Baltimore City advises that it issued about 80,000 speed 
camera citations for vehicles that were not registered in Maryland in calendar year 2024. 
Of this total, 48,258 of the citations were issued for vehicles registered in Virginia.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 115 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 510/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore City; Anne Arundel and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 510/ Page 7 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 510/ Page 8 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8