START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 553 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 553 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Public Safety - Elevator Inspection Certificates - Searchable Database 
 
   
This bill requires the Commissioner of Labor and Industry within the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MD Labor) to post a user-friendly, searchable database of active 
elevator inspection certificates on MD Labor’s website. The database must allow users to 
search for active certificates by street address, city, and county. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be implemented with existing budgeted 
resources. However, to the extent that existing online resources do not meet the bill’s 
requirements, general fund expenditures may increase by $75,000, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Elevator” means a hoisting and lowering machine equipped with a car or 
platform that moves in guides in a substantially vertical direction and serves two or more 
floors of a building or structure.  
 
Elevators in the State must be inspected, tested, and maintained in a safe operating 
condition in accordance with the State Safety Code and regulations adopted by the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry. Unless otherwise specified by statute, an elevator 
may not operate in a building, structure, or place of employment in the State unless it has 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 553/ Page 2 
been certified by the commissioner. A certificate must be posted conspicuously in or on 
the elevator unit. 
 
Generally, each elevator owned or operated in the State must be registered with the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry and is subject to initial and periodic inspections. An 
elevator unit installed in a building or structure under federal control is exempt from the 
State’s registration and inspection requirements for commercial elevators. An elevator unit 
installed in a privately-owned single-family residential dwelling must be registered at least 
60 days before it is placed in service and inspected on completion of installation, but is 
otherwise exempt from periodic inspections. 
  
State Expenditures:  MD Labor indicates that its Safety Inspection Unit currently 
maintains a database to track its own inspection and certification activities. The unit 
currently extracts data regarding elevator certificate status into an Excel spreadsheet and 
posts that data monthly on its website.   
 
To the extent that the Excel spreadsheet, which contains the data required by the bill in a 
searchable format, meets the bill’s requirement for a “user-friendly” searchable database, 
MD Labor can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. If the existing 
spreadsheet does not meet the bill’s requirements, MD Labor must add a module that 
allows limited public access to its current internal elevator inspection database at an 
estimated one-time cost of $75,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 286 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2