START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 561

F5 6lr0701
CF 6lr0809

By: Delegate Palakovich Carr
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Child Care Credential Program – Extension of Funding

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to appropriate a certain amount of funding for
4 the Maryland Child Care Credential Program annually, beginning in a certain fiscal
5 year; and generally relating to funding for the Maryland Child Care Credential
6 Program.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 9.5–904
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Education

15 9.5–904.

16 (a) There is a Maryland Child Care Credential Program.

17 (b) An individual may apply to the Office for a staff credential, including a child
18 development associate credential, or an administrator credential under this subsection.

19 (c) If a person pursues, obtains, or already holds an Office–approved credential,
20 the Office may award to the individual:

21 (1) An achievement bonus;

22 (2) A training reimbursement; or

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0561*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 561

1 (3) A training voucher.

2 (d) (1) The Governor shall appropriate $4,000,000 for the program for fiscal
3 year 2021.

4 (2) For each of fiscal years 2022 through 2024, funding for the program
5 shall increase by 10% over the prior fiscal year.

6 (3) For fiscal year 2026, the Governor shall appropriate for the program an
7 amount that is at least equal to the amount appropriated in fiscal year 2024.

8 (4) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
9 THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPROPRIATE FOR THE PROGRAM AN AMOUNT THAT IS AT
10 LEAST EQUAL TO THE AMOUNT APPROPRIATED IN FISCAL YEAR 2024.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
12 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2