START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 583

A2 6lr1073

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Notice of Issuance of Class C
3 Per Diem Beer, Wine, and Liquor License

4 PG 319–26

5 FOR the purpose of updating the name of a certain office to which the Board of License
6 Commissioners for Prince George’s County must provide notice when issuing a Class
7 C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license; and generally relating to alcoholic
8 beverages licenses in Prince George’s County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 26–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 26–1311
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22 26–102.

23 This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0583*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 583

1 26–1311.

2 (a) When the Board issues a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license, the
3 Board shall provide notice of the event for which the license is issued to:

4 (1) the County Police Chief;

5 (2) the County Fire Chief;

6 (3) the director of the [County Department of Environmental Resources]
7 DEPARTMENT OF PERMITTING, INSPECTIONS, AND ENFORCEMENT; and

8 (4) if applicable, the chief administrative officer of the municipality in
9 which the event is to be held.

10 (b) The notice shall include the time, place, and expected size of the event.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
12 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2