START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 502

N1 6lr1699
HB 299/25 – ENT

By: Delegate Holmes
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Real Property – Governing Bodies of Common Ownership Communities –
3 Member Training

4 FOR the purpose of requiring certain members of a board of directors or certain officers of
5 a council of unit owners of certain condominiums and certain members of a governing
6 body of a homeowners association to successfully complete a certain training
7 curriculum in a certain manner and subject to certain requirements; and generally
8 relating to members of governing bodies of condominiums and homeowners
9 associations.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Real Property
12 Section 11–109 and 11B–106.1(g)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – Real Property
17 Section 11B–106.1(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY adding to
21 Article – Real Property
22 Section 11B–106.1(g)
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
26 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0502*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 502

1 Article – Real Property

2 11–109.

3 (a) The affairs of the condominium shall be governed by a council of unit owners
4 which, even if unincorporated, is constituted a legal entity for all purposes. The council of
5 unit owners shall be comprised of all unit owners.

6 (b) The bylaws may authorize or provide for the delegation of any power of the
7 council of unit owners to a board of directors, officers, managing agent, or other person for
8 the purpose of carrying out the responsibilities of the council of unit owners.

9 (C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A MEMBER OF A BOARD OF
10 DIRECTORS OR AN OFFICER OF A COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS FOR A CONDOMINIUM
11 THAT IS COMPOSED SOLELY OF RESIDENTIAL FOR–SALE HOUSING OR CONSUMER
12 REALTY WHO SERVES AFTER A MEETING REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(16) OF
13 THIS SECTION.

14 (2) (I) EACH MEMBER OF A BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR OFFICER OF
15 A COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS SHALL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE A TRAINING
16 CURRICULUM ON THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF BEING A MEMBER OR AN OFFICER
17 DEVELOPED BY:

18 1. A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION RECOGNIZED
19 BY THE STATE OR A LOCAL GOVERNMENT;

20 2. AN ORGANIZATION APPROVED TO ADMINISTER THE
21 TRAINING CURRICULUM BY A RECOGNIZED COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION;

22 3. AN INSTITUTION ACCREDITED BY THE MIDDLE
23 STATES COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION;

24 4. A MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION THAT OFFERS
25 NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED CERTIFICATION CREDENTIALS FOR COMMUNITY
26 MANAGERS; OR

27 5. A COUNTY WITH COURSEWORK ESTABLISHED BY THE
28 COUNTY COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION.

29 (II) A TRAINING CURRICULUM DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
30 PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE TRAINING ON:

31 1. THE MARYLAND HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION ACT,
32 THE MARYLAND CONDOMINIUM ACT, AND THE MARYLAND COOPERATIVE
33 HOUSING CORPORATION ACT;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 502 3

1 2. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMON
2 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY GOVERNING BODIES;

3 3. FIDUCIARY DUTY;

4 4. RESPONSIBLE GOVERNANCE POLICIES;

5 5. LEGAL STRUCTURES AND GUIDELINES;

6 6. RESERVES AND AUDITS;

7 7. MEETING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS;

8 8. HANDLING OF DISPUTES;

9 9. INSURANCE AND BONDING;

10 10. COMMUNITY MAINTENANCE;

11 11. RECORD KEEPING; AND

12 12. STATE AND LOCAL RESOURCES FOR GOVERNING
13 BODIES.

14 (3) EACH MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR OFFICER OF THE
15 COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS SHALL SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE THE TRAINING
16 CURRICULUM REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE
17 INDIVIDUAL:

18 (I) IS FIRST ELECTED OR APPOINTED TO THE OFFICE; OR

19 (II) FOR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS IN OFFICE ON OCTOBER 1,
20 2026, BEGINS A SUBSEQUENT TERM AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR
21 AN OFFICER OF THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS.

22 (4) (I) THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR THE OFFICERS OF THE
23 COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS SHALL:

24 1. CERTIFY THAT EACH MEMBER OR OFFICER
25 SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETES THE TRAINING CURRICULUM REQUIRED UNDER THIS
26 SUBSECTION;

27 2. RETAIN A COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE OF
28 COMPLETION OF EACH MEMBER OR OFFICER; AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 502

1 3. WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE CERTIFICATION OF THE
2 MEMBER OR OFFICER, REPORT TO THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION ON THE
3 CERTIFICATION.

4 (II) A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION ISSUED UNDER THIS
5 PARAGRAPH SHALL BE VALID FOR 3 YEARS.

6 (III) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO REMAINS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF
7 DIRECTORS OR AN OFFICER OF THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS AT THE TIME THE
8 CERTIFICATE EXPIRES SHALL RENEW THE CERTIFICATION BY SUCCESSFULLY
9 COMPLETING THE TRAINING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

10 (5) IF A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR AN OFFICER OF
11 THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS DOES NOT SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE THE
12 TRAINING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR THE
13 COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS MAY:

14 (I) REMOVE THE INDIVIDUAL FROM THE OFFICE; OR

15 (II) INVALIDATE A VOTE OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

16 [(c)] (D) (1) A meeting of the council of unit owners or board of directors may
17 not be held on less notice than required by this section.

18 (2) The council of unit owners shall maintain a current roster of names and
19 addresses of each unit owner to which notice of meetings of the board of directors shall be
20 sent at least annually.

21 (3) Each unit owner shall furnish the council of unit owners with his name
22 and current mailing address. A unit owner may not vote at meetings of the council of unit
23 owners until this information is furnished.

24 (4) A regular or special meeting of the council of unit owners may not be
25 held on less than 10 nor more than 90 days’:

26 (i) Written notice delivered or mailed to each unit owner at the
27 address shown on the roster on the date of the notice; or

28 (ii) Notice sent to each unit owner by electronic transmission, if the
29 requirements of § 11–139.1 of this title are met.

30 (5) Notice of special meetings of the board of directors shall be given:

31 (i) As provided in the bylaws; or
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 502 5

1 (ii) If the requirements of § 11–139.1 of this title are met, by
2 electronic transmission.

3 (6) Except as provided in § 11–109.1 of this title, a meeting of a governing
4 body shall be open and held at a time and location as provided in the notice or bylaws.

5 (7) (i) This paragraph does not apply to any meeting of the governing
6 body that occurs at any time before the meeting at which the unit owners elect officers or a
7 board of directors in accordance with paragraph (16) of this subsection.

8 (ii) Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph and to reasonable
9 rules adopted by the governing body under § 11–111 of this title, a governing body shall
10 provide a designated period of time during a meeting to allow unit owners an opportunity
11 to comment on any matter relating to the condominium.

12 (iii) During a meeting at which the agenda is limited to specific topics
13 or at a special meeting, the unit owners’ comments may be limited to the topics listed on
14 the meeting agenda.

15 (iv) The governing body shall convene at least one meeting each year
16 at which the agenda is open to any matter relating to the condominium.

17 (8) (i) Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a quorum is deemed
18 present throughout any meeting of the council of unit owners if persons entitled to cast 25
19 percent of the total number of votes appurtenant to all units are present in person or by
20 proxy.

21 (ii) If the number of persons present in person or by proxy at a
22 properly called meeting of the council of unit owners is insufficient to constitute a quorum,
23 an additional meeting of the council of unit owners may be called for the same purpose if:

24 1. The notice of the initial properly called meeting stated:

25 A. That the procedure authorized by this paragraph might be
26 invoked; and

27 B. The date, time, and place of the additional meeting; and

28 2. A majority of the unit owners present vote in person or by
29 proxy to call for the additional meeting.

30 (iii) 1. An additional meeting called under subparagraph (ii) of
31 this paragraph shall occur not less than 15 days after the initial properly called meeting.

32 2. Not less than 10 days before the additional meeting, a
33 separate and distinct notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the additional meeting
34 called under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall be:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 502

1 A. Delivered, mailed, or sent by electronic transmission if the
2 requirements of § 11–139.1 of this title are met, to each unit owner at the address shown
3 on the roster maintained under paragraph (2) of this subsection;

4 B. Advertised in a newspaper published in the county where
5 the condominium is located; or

6 C. If the condominium has a website, posted on the homepage
7 of the website.

8 3. The notice shall contain the quorum and voting provisions
9 of subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph.

10 (iv) 1. At the additional meeting, the unit owners present in
11 person or by proxy constitute a quorum.

12 2. Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, a majority of the
13 unit owners present in person or by proxy:

14 A. May approve or authorize the proposed action at the
15 additional meeting; and

16 B. May take any other action that could have been taken at
17 the original meeting if a sufficient number of unit owners had been present.

18 (v) This paragraph may not be construed to affect the percentage of
19 votes required to amend the declaration or bylaws or to take any other action required to
20 be taken by a specified percentage of votes.

21 (9) At meetings of the council of unit owners each unit owner shall be
22 entitled to cast the number of votes appurtenant to his unit. Unit owners may vote by proxy,
23 but the proxy is effective only for a maximum period of 180 days following its issuance,
24 unless granted to a lessee or mortgagee.

25 (10) Any proxy may be revoked at any time at the pleasure of the unit owner
26 or unit owners executing the proxy.

27 (11) A proxy who is not appointed to vote as directed by a unit owner may
28 only be appointed for purposes of meeting quorums and to vote for matters of business
29 before the council of unit owners, other than an election of officers and members of the
30 board of directors.

31 (12) Only a unit owner voting in person or by electronic transmission if the
32 requirements of § 11–139.2 of this title are met or a proxy voting for candidates designated
33 by a unit owner may vote for officers and members of the board of directors.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 502 7

1 (13) Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, a unit owner may nominate
2 himself or any other person to be an officer or member of the board of directors. A call for
3 nominations shall be sent to all unit owners not less than 45 days before notice of an election
4 is sent. Only nominations made at least 15 days before notice of an election shall be listed
5 on the election ballot. Candidates shall be listed on the ballot in alphabetical order, with
6 no indicated candidate preference. Nominations may be made from the floor at the meeting
7 at which the election to the board is held.

8 (14) Election materials prepared with funds of the council of unit owners
9 shall list candidates in alphabetical order and may not indicate a candidate preference.

10 (15) Unless otherwise provided in this title, and subject to provisions in the
11 bylaws requiring a different majority, decisions of the council of unit owners shall be made
12 on a majority of votes of the unit owners listed on the current roster present and voting.

13 (16) (i) A meeting of the council of unit owners to elect a board of
14 directors for the council of unit owners, as provided in the condominium declaration or
15 bylaws, shall be held within:

16 1. 60 days from the date that units representing 50 percent
17 of the votes in the condominium have been conveyed by the developer to members of the
18 public for residential purposes; or

19 2. If a lesser percentage is specified in the declaration or
20 bylaws of the condominium, 60 days from the date the specified lesser percentage of units
21 in the condominium are sold to members of the public for residential purposes.

22 (ii) 1. Before the date of the meeting held under subparagraph
23 (i) of this paragraph, the developer shall deliver to each unit owner notice that the
24 requirements of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph have been met.

25 2. The notice shall include the date, time, and place of the
26 meeting to elect the board of directors for the council of unit owners.

27 (iii) If a replacement board member is elected, the term of each
28 member of the board of directors appointed by the developer shall end 10 days after the
29 meeting is held as specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

30 (iv) Within 30 days from the date of the meeting held under
31 subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the developer shall deliver to the officers or board of
32 directors for the council of unit owners, as provided in the condominium declaration or
33 bylaws, at the developer’s expense:

34 1. The documents specified in § 11–132 of this title;

35 2. The condominium funds, including operating funds,
36 replacement reserves, investment accounts, and working capital;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 502

1 3. The tangible property of the condominium; and

2 4. A roster of current unit owners, including mailing
3 addresses, telephone numbers, and unit numbers, if known.

4 (v) The replacement reserves delivered under subparagraph (iv)2 of
5 this paragraph for a residential condominium shall be equal to at least the reserve funding
6 amount recommended in the reserve study completed under § 11–109.4 of this title as of
7 the date of the meeting.

8 (vi) 1. This subparagraph does not apply to a contract entered
9 into before October 1, 2009.

10 2. A. In this subparagraph, “contract” means an
11 agreement with a company or individual to handle financial matters, maintenance, or
12 services for the condominium.

13 B. “Contract” does not include an agreement relating to the
14 provision of utility services or communication systems.

15 3. Until all members of the board of directors of the
16 condominium are elected by the unit owners at a transitional meeting as specified in
17 subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, a contract entered into by the officers or board of
18 directors of the condominium may be terminated, at the discretion of the board of directors
19 and without liability for the termination, not later than 30 days after notice.

20 (vii) If the developer fails to comply with the requirements of this
21 paragraph, an aggrieved unit owner may submit the dispute to the Division of Consumer
22 Protection of the Office of the Attorney General under § 11–130(c) of this title.

23 (17) (i) Elections, including the collection and counting of ballots and the
24 certifying of results, for officers or members of the governing body other than the full
25 membership of the council of unit owners shall be conducted by independent parties who:

26 1. Are not candidates in the election; and

27 2. Do not have a conflict of interest regarding any candidate
28 in the election.

29 (ii) A unit owner is an independent party if the unit owner:

30 1. Complies with the requirements of this section;

31 2. Does not electioneer for any candidate; and
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 502 9

1 3. Is not subject to an objection by more than 25 percent of
2 the eligible voting members of the council of unit owners.

3 (iii) Unless property management for a condominium is owned by the
4 condominium, or a parent association of the condominium, representatives of the
5 condominium’s property management are not independent parties.

6 (18) The governing body may retain a third–party vendor or employ a
7 commercial technology platform to conduct an election.

8 (19) Individuals conducting an election shall make reasonable efforts to
9 ensure that the election is fair and that there is accountability for the process and the
10 results of the election.

11 (20) A unit owner designated to conduct an election who acts in good faith
12 is not personally liable in connection with the conduct of the election.

13 (21) (i) The governing body shall make reasonable accommodations,
14 including reasonable use of any portion of common areas, for unit owners to engage in
15 organizing activities relating to governance of the condominium.

16 (ii) The governing body may not prevent unit owners from or
17 retaliate against unit owners for exercising rights guaranteed under law or under the
18 governing documents of the condominium.

19 (22) Provisions of the governing documents, rules, or regulations of a
20 condominium relating to the conduct of elections that are inconsistent with the
21 requirements of this section are unenforceable and void.

22 [(d)] (E) The council of unit owners may be either incorporated as a nonstock
23 corporation or unincorporated and it is subject to those provisions of Title 5, Subtitle 2 of
24 the Corporations and Associations Article which are not inconsistent with this title. The
25 council of unit owners has, subject to any provision of this title, and except as provided in
26 item (22) of this subsection, the declaration, and bylaws, the following powers:

27 (1) To have perpetual existence, subject to the right of the unit owners to
28 terminate the condominium regime as provided in § 11–123 of this title;

29 (2) To adopt and amend reasonable rules and regulations;

30 (3) To adopt and amend budgets for revenues, expenditures, and reserves
31 and collect assessments for common expenses from unit owners;

32 (4) To sue and be sued, complain and defend, or intervene in litigation or
33 administrative proceedings in its own name on behalf of itself or two or more unit owners
34 on matters affecting the condominium;
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 502

1 (5) To transact its business, carry on its operations and exercise the powers
2 provided in this subsection in any state, territory, district, or possession of the United
3 States and in any foreign country;

4 (6) To make contracts and guarantees, incur liabilities and borrow money,
5 sell, mortgage, lease, pledge, exchange, convey, transfer, and otherwise dispose of any part
6 of its property and assets;

7 (7) To issue bonds, notes, and other obligations and secure the same by
8 mortgage or deed of trust of any part of its property, franchises, and income;

9 (8) To acquire by purchase or in any other manner, to take, receive, own,
10 hold, use, employ, improve, and otherwise deal with any property, real or personal, or any
11 interest therein, wherever located;

12 (9) To hire and terminate managing agents and other employees, agents,
13 and independent contractors;

14 (10) To purchase, take, receive, subscribe for or otherwise acquire, own,
15 hold, vote, use, employ, sell, mortgage, loan, pledge or otherwise dispose of, and otherwise
16 use and deal in and with, shares or other interests in, or obligation of corporations of the
17 State, or foreign corporations, and of associations, partnerships, and individuals;

18 (11) To invest its funds and to lend money in any manner appropriate to
19 enable it to carry on the operations or to fulfill the purposes named in the declaration or
20 bylaws, and to take and to hold real and personal property as security for the payment of
21 funds so invested or loaned;

22 (12) To regulate the use, maintenance, repair, replacement, and
23 modification of common elements;

24 (13) To cause additional improvements to be made as a part of the general
25 common elements;

26 (14) To grant easements, rights–of–way, licenses, leases in excess of 1 year,
27 or similar interests through or over the common elements in accordance with § 11–125(f)
28 of this title;

29 (15) To impose and receive any payments, fees, or charges for the use, rental,
30 or operation of the common elements other than limited common elements;

31 (16) To impose charges for late payment of assessments and, after notice
32 and an opportunity to be heard, levy reasonable fines for violations of the declaration,
33 bylaws, and rules and regulations of the council of unit owners, under § 11–113 of this title;
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 502 11

1 (17) To impose reasonable charges for the preparation and recordation of
2 amendments to the declaration, bylaws, rules, regulations, or resolutions, resale
3 certificates, or statements of unpaid assessments;

4 (18) To provide for the indemnification of and maintain liability insurance
5 for officers, directors, and any managing agent or other employee charged with the
6 operation or maintenance of the condominium;

7 (19) To enforce the implied warranties made to the council of unit owners by
8 the developer under § 11–131 of this title;

9 (20) To enforce the provisions of this title, the declaration, bylaws, and rules
10 and regulations of the council of unit owners against any unit owner or occupant;

11 (21) Generally, to exercise the powers set forth in this title and the
12 declaration or bylaws and to do every other act not inconsistent with law, which may be
13 appropriate to promote and attain the purposes set forth in this title, the declaration or
14 bylaws; and

15 (22) To designate parking for individuals with disabilities, notwithstanding
16 any provision in the declaration, bylaws, or rules and regulations.

17 [(e)] (F) A unit owner may not have any right, title, or interest in any property
18 owned by the council of unit owners other than as holder of a percentage interest in common
19 expenses and common profits appurtenant to his unit.

20 [(f)] (G) A unit owner’s rights as holder of a percentage interest in common
21 expenses and common profits are such that:

22 (1) A unit owner’s right to possess, use, or enjoy property of the council of
23 unit owners shall be as provided in the bylaws; and

24 (2) A unit owner’s interest in the property is not assignable or attachable
25 separate from his unit except as provided in §§ 11–107(d) and 11–112(g) of this title.

26 11B–106.1.

27 (a) A meeting of the members of the homeowners association to elect a governing
28 body of the homeowners association shall be held within:

29 (1) 60 days from the date that at least 75% of the total number of lots that
30 may be part of the development after all phases are complete are sold to members of the
31 public for residential purposes; or

32 (2) If a lesser percentage is specified in the governing documents of the
33 homeowners association, 60 days from the date the specified lesser percentage of the total
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 502

1 number of lots in the development after all phases are complete are sold to members of the
2 public for residential purposes.

3 (G) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A MEMBER OF THE
4 GOVERNING BODY OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION THAT CONSISTS SOLELY OF
5 RESIDENTIAL FOR–SALE HOUSING WHO SERVES AFTER THE MEETING REQUIRED
6 UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

7 (2) (I) EACH MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL
8 SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE A TRAINING CURRICULUM ON THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF
9 A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY DEVELOPED BY:

10 1. A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION RECOGNIZED
11 BY THE STATE OR A LOCAL GOVERNMENT;

12 2. AN ORGANIZATION APPROVED TO ADMINISTER THE
13 TRAINING CURRICULUM BY A RECOGNIZED COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION;

14 3. AN INSTITUTION ACCREDITED BY THE MIDDLE
15 STATES COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION;

16 4. A MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATION THAT OFFERS
17 NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED CERTIFICATION CREDENTIALS FOR COMMUNITY
18 MANAGERS; OR

19 5. A COUNTY WITH COURSEWORK ESTABLISHED BY THE
20 COUNTY COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION.

21 (II) A TRAINING CURRICULUM DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
22 PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE TRAINING ON:

23 1. THE MARYLAND HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION ACT,
24 THE MARYLAND CONDOMINIUM ACT, AND THE MARYLAND COOPERATIVE
25 HOUSING CORPORATION ACT;

26 2. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMON
27 OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY GOVERNING BODIES;

28 3. FIDUCIARY DUTY;

29 4. RESPONSIBLE GOVERNANCE POLICIES;

30 5. LEGAL STRUCTURES AND GUIDELINES;

31 6. RESERVES AND AUDITS;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 502 13

1 7. MEETING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS;

2 8. HANDLING OF DISPUTES;

3 9. INSURANCE AND BONDING;

4 10. COMMUNITY MAINTENANCE;

5 11. RECORD KEEPING; AND

6 12. STATE AND LOCAL RESOURCES FOR GOVERNING
7 BODIES.

8 (3) EACH MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL SUCCESSFULLY
9 COMPLETE THE TRAINING CURRICULUM REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
10 WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE INDIVIDUAL:

11 (I) IS FIRST ELECTED OR APPOINTED TO THE GOVERNING
12 BODY; OR

13 (II) FOR A MEMBER WHO IS IN OFFICE ON OCTOBER 1, 2026,
14 BEGINS A SUBSEQUENT TERM AS A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY.

15 (4) (I) THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL:

16 1. CERTIFY THAT EACH MEMBER SUCCESSFULLY
17 COMPLETES THE TRAINING CURRICULUM REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

18 2. RETAIN A COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE OF
19 COMPLETION OF EACH MEMBER; AND

20 3. WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE CERTIFICATION OF THE
21 MEMBER, REPORT TO THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMISSION ON THE
22 CERTIFICATION.

23 (II) A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION ISSUED UNDER THIS
24 PARAGRAPH SHALL BE VALID FOR 3 YEARS.

25 (III) IF A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY REMAINS A
26 MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY AT THE TIME THE CERTIFICATE EXPIRES, THE
27 MEMBER SHALL RENEW THE CERTIFICATION BY SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETING THE
28 TRAINING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 502

1 (5) IF A MEMBER OF THE GOVERNING BODY DOES NOT
2 SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETE THE TRAINING REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION,
3 THE GOVERNING BODY MAY:

4 (I) REMOVE THE MEMBER FROM THE GOVERNING BODY; OR

5 (II) INVALIDATE A VOTE OF THE MEMBER.

6 [(g)] (H) If the declarant fails to comply with the requirements of this section, an
7 aggrieved lot owner may submit the dispute to the Division of Consumer Protection of the
8 Office of the Attorney General under § 11B–115(c) of this title.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 14