START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 595

Q3 6lr1793
CF 6lr1792

By: Delegates Lewis, Addison, Alston, Conaway, Feldmark, Hill, Stinnett, and
Young
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means and Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Income Tax – Credit for Physician Preceptors in Areas With Health Care
3 Workforce Shortages – Alterations

4 FOR the purpose of altering eligibility for a certain credit against the State income tax for
5 certain physician preceptors by repealing a requirement that a student in a
6 physician preceptorship program be enrolled in a medical school or medical training
7 program in the State and reducing the required number of hours for a preceptor
8 rotation for community–based clinical training; and generally relating to a credit
9 against the State income tax for licensed physicians serving as physician preceptors
10 in areas with health care workforce shortages.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Tax – General
13 Section 10–738
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Tax – General

19 10–738.

20 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (2) “Department” means the Maryland Department of Health.

22 (3) “Licensed physician” means an individual who is licensed to practice
23 medicine under Title 14 of the Health Occupations Article.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0595*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 595

1 (4) “Preceptorship program” means an organized system of clinical
2 experience that, for the purpose of attaining specified learning objectives, pairs an enrolled
3 student of a Liaison Committee on Medical Education–accredited medical school [in the
4 State] or an individual in a postgraduate medical training program [in the State] with a
5 licensed physician who meets the qualifications as a preceptor.

6 (b) (1) Subject to the limitations of this section, a licensed physician may claim
7 a credit against the State income tax in the amount stated on the tax credit certificate
8 issued under subsection (c) of this section for the taxable year in which the licensed
9 physician served without compensation as a physician preceptor in a preceptorship
10 program authorized by an accredited medical school [in the State] and worked:

11 (i) a minimum of three rotations, each consisting of [100] 90 hours
12 of community–based clinical training; and

13 (ii) in an area of the State identified as having a health care
14 workforce shortage by the Department, in consultation with the Governor’s Workforce
15 Development Board.

16 (2) (i) The total amount of the credit allowed under this section for any
17 taxable year may not exceed the State income tax imposed for that taxable year.

18 (ii) Any unused amount of the credit for any taxable year may not be
19 carried over to any other taxable year.

20 (c) (1) On application by a licensed physician, the Department shall issue a
21 credit certificate in the amount of $1,000 for each student rotation of the minimum number
22 of hours required under subsection (b)(1)(i) of this section for which the licensed physician
23 served as a physician preceptor without compensation.

24 (2) The application shall contain:

25 (i) the name of the licensed physician;

26 (ii) information identifying the physician preceptorship in which the
27 licensed physician participated;

28 (iii) the number and names of the students for whom the individual
29 served as a physician preceptor without compensation; and

30 (iv) any other information that the Department requires.

31 (3) For any taxable year, the amount of tax credit stated in the tax credit
32 certificate may not exceed $10,000.

33 (4) The Department shall:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 595 3

1 (i) approve all applications that qualify for a tax credit certificate
2 under this subsection on a first–come, first–served basis; and

3 (ii) notify a taxpayer within 45 days of receipt of the taxpayer’s
4 application of its approval or denial.

5 (5) (i) For each taxable year, the total amount of tax credit certificates
6 that may be issued by the Department under this section may not exceed $100,000.

7 (ii) If the aggregate amount of tax credit certificates issued under
8 this section during a taxable year total less than the amount authorized under this
9 paragraph, any excess amount may be issued under tax credit certificates in the next
10 taxable year.

11 (d) On or before January 31 of each taxable year, the Department shall:

12 (1) report to the Comptroller on the tax credit certificates issued under this
13 section during the prior taxable year; and

14 (2) report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
15 State Government Article, on the utilization of the credit established under this section.

16 (e) The Department, in consultation with the Governor’s Workforce Development
17 Board, shall adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this section, including the
18 criteria and procedures for application for, approval of, and monitoring eligibility for the
19 tax credit authorized under this section.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 3