START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 507

E4 6lr2927
CF SB 305

By: Delegates Ruff, Addison, Allen, Alston, Amprey, Boyce, Conaway, Embry,
Forbes, Lewis, J. Long, Phillips, Ruth, Simpson, Smith, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Qualifying Nonprofit Organizations – Incarcerated Individual Training and
3 Reentry Grant Fund – Extension

4 FOR the purpose of extending the fiscal years in which the Governor may include a certain
5 appropriation in the annual budget bill for certain qualifying nonprofit organizations
6 that provide certain services to incarcerated or formerly incarcerated individuals;
7 extending the termination date for provisions relating to funding for certain services
8 to incarcerated and formerly incarcerated individuals; and generally relating to
9 reentry services and employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated
10 individuals.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Public Safety
13 Section 4–1013
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Chapter 892 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2024
18 Section 2

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Public Safety

22 4–1013.

23 (a) In this section, “qualifying nonprofit organization” means an organization
24 that:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0507*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 507

1 (1) provides training and reentry assistance for incarcerated and formerly
2 incarcerated individuals;

3 (2) provides training for at least 50 incarcerated or formerly incarcerated
4 individuals per year in automotive repair;

5 (3) is able to provide an automotive repair certificate from a nationally
6 recognized automotive repair organization to eligible participants; and

7 (4) demonstrates a minimum of a 50% employment placement rate for
8 eligible participants in a paid automotive repair job.

9 (b) For fiscal years 2026 through [2028] 2029, each year the Governor may
10 include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $1,000,000 to be used solely as an
11 operating grant to qualifying nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing training
12 to formerly incarcerated individuals in automotive repair.

13 (c) The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention[, Youth,] and [Victim Services]
14 POLICY shall administer the grant funds to qualifying nonprofit organizations in
15 accordance with § 4–1008 of this subtitle.

16 (d) A qualifying nonprofit organization that receives a grant under this section
17 shall submit for each fiscal year the following to the Executive Director of the Governor’s
18 Office of Crime Prevention[, Youth,] and [Victim Services] POLICY:

19 (1) proof of the expenditure of the grant funds and the purposes for which
20 the funds were expended;

21 (2) the total number of incarcerated and formerly incarcerated individuals
22 who received services; and

23 (3) any related outcome–based performance measures.

24 Chapter 892 of the Acts of 2024

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
26 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of [4] 5 years and, at the end of [June 30,
27 2028] JUNE 30, 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
28 shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

29 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
30 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2