START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 544

R7, E1 6lr1586
HB 1392/25 – JUD

By: Delegates R. Long, Arentz, Beauchamp, Ghrist, Hutchinson, Jacobs, and
Mangione
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Cannabis Use in Motor Vehicle With Minor Occupant –
3 Prohibition

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting an individual from smoking, vaping, or consuming cannabis
5 in the passenger area of a motor vehicle in which a minor is an occupant; and
6 generally relating to cannabis use in a motor vehicle.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 21–903.1
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 21–903.1.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “CANNABIS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–101 OF THE
19 CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

20 (3) “PASSENGER AREA” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 21–903 OF
21 THIS SUBTITLE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0544*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 544

1 (B) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT SMOKE, VAPE, OR CONSUME CANNABIS IN THE
2 PASSENGER AREA OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IN WHICH A MINOR IS AN OCCUPANT.

3 (C) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A
4 MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT
5 EXCEEDING 1 YEAR OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 OR BOTH.

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
7 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2