START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 573 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 573 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Fair Housing and Housing Discrimination - Regulations, Intent, and 
Discriminatory Effect 
 
 
This bill alters State statute related to housing discrimination to prohibit a person from 
acting in a manner that has a “discriminatory effect.” The bill also specifies that the 
prohibited acts in § 20-705 of the State Government Article are regardless of intent. 
However, a person has not violated a prohibition in § 20‐705 if (1) the act was without 
discriminatory intent; (2) the action was necessary to achieve one or more substantial, 
legitimate, and nondiscriminatory interests; and (3) the person could not have achieved the 
substantial, legitimate, and nondiscriminatory interests by less discriminatory means. The 
bill also authorizes the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
adopt regulations to carry out its statutory responsibilities related to affirmatively 
furthering fair housing. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Discriminatory effect” means an effect that actually or predictably has a 
disparate impact on a group of persons or creates, increases, reinforces, or perpetuates 
segregated housing patterns because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, marital status, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 573/ Page 2 
familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, source of income, or 
military status. 
 
Current Law:  In general, State law prohibits housing discrimination because of race, sex, 
color, religion, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, source of income, disability, or military status. 
 
Housing discrimination prohibited under § 20‐705 of the State Government Article 
includes, among other things, taking the following actions based on a protected class:  
(1) refusing to sell or rent a dwelling after the making of a bona fide offer; (2) refusing to 
negotiate for the sale or rental of a dwelling; (3) making a dwelling otherwise unavailable; 
(4) discriminating in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling; 
(5) discriminating in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the sale or 
rental of a dwelling; (6) making, printing, or publishing or causing to be made, printed, or 
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a 
dwelling that indicates a preference, limitation, or discrimination based on a protected 
status; (7) representing to a person that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or 
rental when it is available; and (8) for profit, inducing, or attempting to induce a person to 
sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the 
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular protected status. 
 
Provisions prohibiting housing discrimination do not require that a dwelling be made 
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or 
safety of another individual or result in substantial physical damage to the property of 
others, nor do they prohibit conduct against a person because the person has been convicted 
of the illegal manufacture or distribution of “controlled dangerous substances” or 
“controlled substances” as defined in State and federal law. 
 
Enforcement and Remedies – In General 
 
The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) is the independent State agency 
generally charged with the enforcement of laws prohibiting discrimination in employment, 
housing, public accommodations, and State contracting. 
 
A person claiming to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice may file a 
complaint with MCCR. Statutory provisions specify the process and requirements for 
complaints of housing discrimination, including the responsibilities of MCCR in 
investigating a claim and attempting conciliation and the circumstances under which a 
complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person must have an opportunity for an 
administrative hearing conducted by the Office of Administrative Hearings or may elect to 
file a civil action in circuit court. If an administrative law judge (ALJ) finds that the 
respondent has engaged in a discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ may order 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 573/ Page 3 
appropriate relief, including actual damages and injunctive or other relief, and may assess 
a civil penalty against the respondent. A court may award actual or punitive damages, grant 
injunctive relief, and allow reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. 
 
Fair Housing Act – Disparate Impacts 
 
The federal Fair Housing Act (FHA) prohibits housing discrimination on the basis of race, 
color, sex, disability, national origin, familial status, or religion. FHA violations may 
involve actions and policies that are intentionally discriminatory, as well as those that, 
despite being applied neutrally and without intent to discriminate, have a discriminatory 
effect (disparate impact). The disparate impact theory was first recognized in the context 
of employment discrimination in Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971), a case 
that examined an employer’s policy that required employees to have a high school diploma 
or pass an “intelligence test” to qualify for certain positions. Although these requirements 
appeared neutral, they disproportionately excluded African American employees and were 
not shown to be necessary for job performance. As a result, the U.S. Supreme Court held 
that employment practices that have a discriminatory effect, even if unintentional, may 
violate Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, unless the employer can prove that the practice is 
related to job performance. 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court later affirmed and extended similar protections in housing 
discrimination cases in Texas Dept. of Housing and Community Affairs v. The Inclusive 
Communities Project, 576 U.S. 519 (2015), finding that recognition of disparate impact 
claims is consistent with FHA’s central purpose. Specifically, the U.S. Supreme Court 
noted that antidiscrimination laws are to be construed as encompassing disparate impact 
claims if their text refers not only to the mindset of actors, but also to the consequences of 
actions (and when such interpretation is consistent with statutory purpose). According to 
the court, such unlawful practices may include zoning laws and other housing restrictions 
that function to unfairly exclude minorities from certain neighborhoods without any 
sufficient justification. 
 
Housing and Community Development Article § 2-402 – Affirmatively Furthering Fair 
Housing by Political Subdivisions 
 
DCHD must administer its programs and activities related to housing and community 
development to affirmatively further fair housing and must explore ways to ensure it is 
collaborating with and supporting nonprofit and governmental entities devoted to 
furthering fair housing. DHCD may not take any action that is materially inconsistent with 
the obligation to affirmatively further fair housing. 
 
DHCD must require political subdivisions and housing authorities to affirmatively further 
fair housing. To ensure that political subdivisions and housing authorities affirmatively 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 573/ Page 4 
further fair housing, DHCD must require a political subdivision or housing authority to 
submit an assessment of fair housing to DCHD as part of the housing element of a 
comprehensive plan, in accordance with specified provisions of the Land Use Article. 
 
Small Business Effect:  In general, the bill codifies and affirms the disparate impact 
analysis currently available in housing discrimination cases, based on federal law. Absent 
any significant changes to federal law, there is no meaningful impact anticipated on 
landlords or other small businesses involved in the sale or rental of residential property. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to MCCR’s annual report, it received 266 total 
housing discrimination cases for investigation in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1239 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 274 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Maryland Municipal 
League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4