START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 551

E1 6lr2055
CF SB 327

By: Delegates Simpson, Acevero, Addison, Amprey, Boyce, Conaway, Crutchfield,
Embry, Foley, Lewis, J. Long, Phillips, Roberson, Ruff, Smith, Stinnett,
Wells, Wilkins, Williams, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Law – Drug Paraphernalia and Controlled Paraphernalia Prohibitions
3 – Repeal

4 FOR the purpose of repealing certain prohibitions relating to drug paraphernalia and
5 controlled paraphernalia; and generally relating to drug paraphernalia and
6 controlled paraphernalia.

7 BY repealing
8 Article – Criminal Law
9 Section 5–101(h) and (p), 5–619, and 5–620
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Criminal Law
14 Section 5–101(a)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Criminal Law
19 Section 5–101(i) through (o), (p–1), and (q) through (ff)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That Section(s) 5–619 and 5–620 of Article – Criminal Law of the Annotated Code of
24 Maryland be repealed.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0551*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 551

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
2 as follows:

3 Article – Criminal Law

4 5–101.

5 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 [(h) “Controlled paraphernalia” means:

7 (1) a hypodermic syringe, needle, or any other object or combination of
8 objects adapted to administer a controlled dangerous substance by hypodermic injection;

9 (2) a gelatin capsule, glassine envelope, or other container suitable for
10 packaging individual quantities of a controlled dangerous substance; or

11 (3) lactose, quinine, mannite, mannitol, dextrose, sucrose, procaine
12 hydrochloride, or any other substance suitable as a diluent or adulterant.]

13 [(i)] (H) “Deliver” means to make an actual, constructive, or attempted transfer
14 or exchange from one person to another whether or not remuneration is paid or an agency
15 relationship exists.

16 [(j)] (I) “Department” means the Maryland Department of Health.

17 [(k)] (J) “Depressant or stimulant drug” means a drug that contains any
18 quantity of a substance that the Attorney General of the United States by regulation
19 designates as having a potential for abuse because of:

20 (1) a depressant or stimulant effect on the central nervous system; or

21 (2) a hallucinogenic effect.

22 [(l)] (K) (1) “Dispense” means to deliver to the ultimate user or the human
23 research subject by or in accordance with the lawful order of an authorized provider.

24 (2) “Dispense” includes to prescribe, administer, package, label, or
25 compound a substance for delivery.

26 [(m)] (L) “Distribute” means, with respect to a controlled dangerous substance,
27 to deliver other than by dispensing.

28 [(n)] (M) (1) “Drug” means:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 551 3

1 (i) a substance recognized in the official United States
2 Pharmacopoeia, official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United States, or official
3 National Formulary;

4 (ii) a substance intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
5 treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other animals;

6 (iii) except for food, a substance intended to affect the structure or
7 function of the body of humans or other animals; or

8 (iv) a substance intended for use as a component of any substance
9 specified in item (i), (ii), or (iii) of this paragraph.

10 (2) “Drug” does not include a device or an accessory, part, or component of
11 a device.

12 [(o)] (N) “Drug dependent person” means a person who:

13 (1) is using a controlled dangerous substance; and

14 (2) is in a state of psychological or physical dependence, or both, that:

15 (i) arises from administration of that controlled dangerous
16 substance on a continuous basis; and

17 (ii) is characterized by behavioral and other responses that include
18 a strong compulsion to take the substance on a continuous basis in order to experience its
19 psychological effects or to avoid the discomfort of its absence.

20 [(p) (1) “Drug paraphernalia” means equipment, a product, or material that is
21 used, intended for use, or designed for use, in:

22 (i) planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
23 manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, packaging,
24 repackaging, storing, containing, or concealing a controlled dangerous substance in
25 violation of this title; or

26 (ii) injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
27 human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of this title.

28 (2) “Drug paraphernalia” includes:

29 (i) a kit used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
30 propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant that is a controlled
31 dangerous substance other than cannabis or from which a controlled dangerous substance
32 can be derived;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 551

1 (ii) a kit used, intended for use, or designed for use in
2 manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing a controlled
3 dangerous substance other than cannabis;

4 (iii) an isomerization device used, intended for use, or designed for
5 use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled dangerous
6 substance other than cannabis;

7 (iv) testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
8 analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled dangerous substance other
9 than cannabis;

10 (v) a scale or balance used, intended for use, or designed for use in
11 weighing or measuring a controlled dangerous substance other than cannabis;

12 (vi) a diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
13 mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting a
14 controlled dangerous substance other than cannabis;

15 (vii) a separation gin or sifter used, intended for use, or designed for
16 use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, a controlled
17 dangerous substance other than cannabis;

18 (viii) a blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device used,
19 intended for use, or designed for use in compounding a controlled dangerous substance
20 other than cannabis;

21 (ix) a capsule, balloon, envelope, or other container used, intended
22 for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of a controlled dangerous
23 substance other than cannabis;

24 (x) a container or other object used, intended for use, or designed for
25 use in storing or concealing a controlled dangerous substance other than cannabis;

26 (xi) a hypodermic syringe, needle, or other object used, intended for
27 use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting a controlled dangerous substance into the
28 human body; and

29 (xii) an object used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
30 inhaling, or otherwise introducing cocaine into the human body.]

31 [(p–1)] (O) “Electronic prescription” means a prescription that:

32 (1) is generated on an electronic application and transmitted as an
33 electronic data file; and
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 551 5

1 (2) if the prescription is for a controlled dangerous substance, complies
2 with the requirements of 21 C.F.R. Part 1306.

3 [(q)] (P) (1) “Manufacture”, with respect to a controlled dangerous substance,
4 means to produce, prepare, propagate, compound, convert, or process a controlled
5 dangerous substance:

6 (i) directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural
7 origin;

8 (ii) independently by chemical synthesis; or

9 (iii) by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis.

10 (2) “Manufacture” includes to package and repackage a controlled
11 dangerous substance and label and relabel its containers.

12 (3) “Manufacture” does not include:

13 (i) to prepare or compound a controlled dangerous substance by an
14 individual for the individual’s own use; or

15 (ii) to prepare, compound, package, or label a controlled dangerous
16 substance:

17 1. by an authorized provider incidental to administering or
18 dispensing a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice; or

19 2. if the controlled dangerous substance is not for sale by an
20 authorized provider, or by the authorized provider’s agent under the authorized provider’s
21 supervision, for or incidental to research, teaching, or chemical analysis.

22 [(r)] (Q) (1) “Narcotic drug” means a substance:

23 (i) that has been found to present an extreme danger to the health
24 and welfare of the community because of addiction–forming and addiction–sustaining
25 qualities;

26 (ii) that is:

27 1. an opiate;

28 2. a compound, manufactured substance, salt, derivative, or
29 preparation of opium, coca leaf, or an opiate; or
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 551

1 3. a substance and any compound, manufactured substance,
2 salt, derivative, or preparation that is chemically identical with a substance listed in items
3 1 and 2 of this item; and

4 (iii) that is produced:

5 1. directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of
6 vegetable origin;

7 2. independently by chemical synthesis; or

8 3. by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis.

9 (2) “Narcotic drug” includes decocainized coca leaf or an extract of coca leaf
10 that does not contain cocaine or ecgonine.

11 [(s)] (R) “Noncontrolled substance” means a substance that is not classified as a
12 controlled dangerous substance under Subtitle 4 of this title.

13 [(t)] (S) (1) “Opiate” means a substance that has an addiction–forming or
14 addiction–sustaining quality similar to morphine or that can be converted into a drug that
15 has this addiction–forming or addiction–sustaining quality.

16 (2) “Opiate” includes:

17 (i) the racemic and levorotatory forms of an opiate;

18 (ii) except for seeds, the opium poppy, the plant of the species
19 Papaver somniferum L.;

20 (iii) the poppy straw consisting of the opium poppy after mowing
21 except the seeds; and

22 (iv) coca leaf.

23 (3) “Opiate” does not include, unless specifically designated as controlled
24 under § 5–202 of this title, the dextrorotatory isomer of 3–methoxy–n–methyl–morphinan
25 and its salts (dextromethorphan).

26 [(u)] (T) “Personal use amount” means:

27 (1) an amount of usable cannabis that does not exceed 1.5 ounces;

28 (2) an amount of concentrated cannabis that does not exceed 12 grams;

29 (3) an amount of cannabis products containing
30 delta–9–tetrahydrocannabinol that does not exceed 750 milligrams; or
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 551 7

1 (4) two or fewer cannabis plants.

2 [(v)] (U) “Possess” means to exercise actual or constructive dominion or control
3 over a thing by one or more persons.

4 [(w)] (V) (1) “Prescription drug” means a drug that:

5 (i) is intended to be used by an individual; and

6 (ii) because of its toxicity, other potentiality for harmful effect,
7 method of use, or collateral measures necessary for its use:

8 1. bears a cautionary label warning a person that under
9 federal law the drug may not be dispensed without a prescription; or

10 2. is designated by the Department as not safe for use except
11 under the supervision of a person licensed by the State to administer a prescription drug.

12 (2) “Prescription drug” does not include a controlled dangerous substance.

13 [(x)] (W) “Produce”, with respect to a controlled dangerous substance, includes
14 to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow, and harvest.

15 [(y)] (X) “Registrant” means a person who is registered by the Department to
16 manufacture, distribute, or dispense a controlled dangerous substance in the State.

17 [(z)] (Y) “Schedule I” means the controlled dangerous substances described in §
18 5–402 of this title.

19 [(aa)] (Z) “Schedule II” means the controlled dangerous substances described in
20 § 5–403 of this title.

21 [(bb)] (AA) “Schedule III” means the controlled dangerous substances described in
22 § 5–404 of this title.

23 [(cc)] (BB) “Schedule IV” means the controlled dangerous substances described in
24 § 5–405 of this title.

25 [(dd)] (CC) “Schedule V” means the controlled dangerous substances described in §
26 5–406 of this title.

27 [(ee)] (DD) “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Department.

28 [(ff)] (EE) “Ultimate user” means a person who lawfully possesses a controlled
29 dangerous substance for the person’s own use, for the use of a member of the person’s
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 551

1 household, or for administration to an animal owned by the person or by a member of the
2 person’s household.

3 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8