START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 531

F1 6lr1670

By: Delegates Wu, Ebersole, Forbes, Hill, Kaufman, J. Long, Moreno,
Palakovich Carr, Patterson, Schindler, Simmons, Spiegel, Stinnett, and
Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools STEM and Robotics Program Task Force – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Public Schools STEM and Robotics Program Task
4 Force to collect information on and study existing STEM and robotics programs in
5 public schools in the State and in other states to determine the feasibility of
6 establishing competitive STEM and robotics programs throughout the State; and
7 generally relating to the Public Schools STEM and Robotics Program Task Force.

8 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
9 That:

10 (a) There is a Public Schools Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
11 (STEM) and Robotics Program Task Force.

12 (b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

13 (1) two members of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
14 the Senate;

15 (2) two members of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of
16 the House;

17 (3) the State Superintendent of Schools, or the State Superintendent’s
18 designee;

19 (4) the Secretary of Labor, or the Secretary’s designee;

20 (5) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary’s designee;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0531*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 531

1 (6) three representatives from local school systems, appointed by the State
2 Superintendent of Schools or the State Superintendent’s designee; and

3 (7) three representatives of nonprofit organizations that provide STEM
4 and robotics services in the State, appointed by the Governor.

5 (c) The Governor shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

6 (d) The State Department of Education shall provide staff for the Task Force.

7 (e) A member of the Task Force:

8 (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

9 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
10 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

11 (f) The Task Force shall:

12 (1) collect information regarding existing STEM and robotics programs in
13 public schools in the State and in other states, including:

14 (i) a description of each program;

15 (ii) requirements for the administration of each program;

16 (iii) the funding amount and source of funding for each program; and

17 (iv) the impact on revenues and expenditures in the State and other
18 applicable states;

19 (2) study:

20 (i) the feasibility of implementing competitive STEM and robotics
21 programs in public schools throughout the State; and

22 (ii) approaches and resources needed to implement competitive
23 STEM and robotics programs in public schools throughout the State; and

24 (3) make recommendations on establishing competitive robotics programs
25 as varsity sports in every public high school throughout the State.

26 (g) On or before December 15, 2026, the Task Force shall report its findings and
27 recommendations to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the Senate Committee
28 on Education, Energy, and the Environment, the House Appropriations Committee, the
29 House Ways and Means Committee, and the General Assembly, in accordance with §
30 2–1257 of the State Government Article.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 531 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2027, this
3 Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
4 further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 3