START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 576

P1, P3 6lr1213
CF 6lr3027

By: Delegates Griffith, Adams, Arentz, Boyce, Buckel, Ciliberti, Fair, Ghrist,
Hartman, Hornberger, Hutchinson, Ivey, Jacobs, A. Johnson, S. Johnson,
Kipke, McComas, T. Morgan, Palakovich Carr, Phillips, Reilly, Rose, Ruff,
Stewart, and Tomlinson
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Archives – Record Services – Fees

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the State Archives to establish certain fees relating to
4 certain records by regulation; and generally relating to fees established by the State
5 Archives.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – State Government
8 Section 9–1007(c), 9–1009(d), 9–1011(c), and 9–1015(e)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – State Government
13 Section 9–1009(a), 9–1011(a), and 9–1015(a)(1) and (8)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – State Government

19 9–1007.

20 (c) (1) The State Archivist may establish BY REGULATION reasonable fees for
21 the care and preservation of records and other services provided by the Archives.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0576*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 576

1 (2) Fees may be in the form of:

2 (i) a percentage not to exceed 2% of an existing fee charged at the
3 time of the creation of a record in any form or format; or

4 (ii) a flat rate subscription charge for a publication of the Archives.

5 (3) Of the fees collected, 7% shall be deposited in the Archives Endowment
6 Account of the State Archives Fund established under § 9–1013 of this subtitle as an
7 educational and entrepreneurial reserve.

8 9–1009.

9 (a) The Archives may:

10 (1) repair and preserve the records under the supervision of the State
11 Archivist, as provided in the State budget;

12 (2) make a copy of any record in the Archives; and

13 (3) certify the copy.

14 (d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Archives
15 may [charge] ESTABLISH BY REGULATION a reasonable fee for providing a copy of a
16 record and for certifying the record.

17 (2) If, with the written approval of a judge of a circuit court, the clerk of
18 court asks for a copy of a land record that a court has transferred to the Commission or
19 Archives, the Archives shall provide, without charge, a micrographic copy of the land
20 record.

21 9–1011.

22 (a) The Archives is the central depository for and custodian of each deed, title
23 insurance policy, and other record that relates to real property acquired by the State.

24 (c) (1) The Archives shall receive, index, and file durable–backed, microfilm
25 aperture card copies or electronic images of plats showing property or rights–of–way
26 acquired or conveyed by the State Roads Commission and the State Highway
27 Administration.

28 (2) (i) The Archives electronically shall post an image of each plat on
29 the Archives website (http://www.plats.net) for the county where the property or
30 right–of–way is located.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 576 3

1 (ii) The posted image shall conform to a generally accepted archival
2 standard in quality and permanence.

3 (iii) The image shall include or be linked to a certification by the State
4 Archivist that the image is an authentic representation of the plat received by the Archives.

5 (iv) Such certification by the State Archivist shall constitute a
6 recordation of the plat.

7 (v) The Archives may [charge] ESTABLISH BY REGULATION a
8 reasonable fee to the State Roads Commission, the State Highway Administration, and the
9 courts to recover the cost of electronically posting and maintaining the images of plats.

10 (vi) The Archives may [charge] ESTABLISH BY REGULATION a
11 reasonable fee, not to exceed $3, to the public for the cost of reproducing a copy of a plat
12 under this subsection.

13 9–1015.

14 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

15 (8) “Vital record” means a record of birth, death, marriage, absolute
16 divorce, or marriage annulment required by law to be filed with the Department.

17 (e) The Archives may [charge] ESTABLISH BY REGULATION a reasonable fee to
18 cover the expense of copying vital records or indexes to a vital record, to make extracts from
19 restricted vital records or to undertake a search for vital records.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
21 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3