START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 589

F3, F4 6lr1021

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means and Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County Board of Education and Board of Community College
3 Trustees for Prince George’s County – Vendor Registration

4 PG 503–26

5 FOR the purpose of requiring the Prince George’s County Board of Education and the Board
6 of Community College Trustees for Prince George’s County to accept as a registered
7 vendor any person that is registered as a vendor with Prince George’s County;
8 authorizing the Prince George’s County Board of Education and the Board of
9 Community College Trustees for Prince George’s County to enter into a certain
10 memorandum of understanding with Prince George’s County; and generally relating
11 to procurement by the Prince George’s County Board of Education and the Board of
12 Community College Trustees for Prince George’s County.

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Education
15 Section 4–148
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Education
20 Section 16–414.1
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Education

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0589*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 589

1 4–148.

2 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

3 (B) THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION:

4 (1) SHALL ACCEPT AS A REGISTERED VENDOR FOR THE LOCAL
5 SCHOOL SYSTEM ANY PERSON THAT IS REGISTERED AS A VENDOR THROUGH THE
6 PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY’S VENDOR REGISTRATION PROCESS; AND

7 (2) MAY ENTER INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH
8 THE COUNTY TO IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

9 16–414.1.

10 THE BOARD OF COMMUNITY COLLEGE TRUSTEES FOR PRINCE GEORGE’S
11 COUNTY:

12 (1) SHALL ACCEPT AS A REGISTERED VENDOR FOR PRINCE
13 GEORGE’S COMMUNITY COLLEGE ANY PERSON THAT IS REGISTERED AS A VENDOR
14 THROUGH THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY’S VENDOR REGISTRATION PROCESS;
15 AND

16 (2) MAY ENTER INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH
17 THE COUNTY TO IMPLEMENT THIS SECTION.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
19 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2