START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 546

F1 6lr1100
CF 6lr2513

By: Delegate Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Primary and Secondary Education – Educator Professional Development –
3 Course on Well–Being and Flourishing

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Department of Education to make available a
5 continuing professional development course on educator well–being and flourishing
6 to school personnel and administrators on or before a certain date; and generally
7 relating to an educator professional development course on well–being and
8 flourishing.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 6–132
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 6–132.

18 (A) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE
19 AVAILABLE A CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COURSE ON EDUCATOR
20 WELL–BEING AND FLOURISHING.

21 (2) THE COURSE SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO ALL SCHOOL
22 PERSONNEL AND ADMINISTRATORS.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0546*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 546

1 (3) THE COURSE MAY BE MADE AVAILABLE THROUGH SYNCHRONOUS
2 OR ASYNCHRONOUS INSTRUCTION.

3 (4) TO FULFILL THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
4 DEPARTMENT MAY:

5 (I) DEVELOP A COURSE;

6 (II) ADAPT AN EXISTING COURSE DEVELOPED BY A THIRD
7 PARTY; OR

8 (III) MAKE AVAILABLE AN EXISTING COURSE DEVELOPED BY A
9 THIRD PARTY.

10 (B) THE COURSE UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE AT A
11 COMPARABLE RATE TO CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COURSES FOR
12 LICENSED PERSONNEL THAT CONTAIN THE SAME NUMBER OF PROFESSIONAL
13 DEVELOPMENT POINTS.

14 (C) (1) THE COURSE MADE AVAILABLE BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER
15 THIS SECTION SHALL CONSIST OF INSTRUCTION ON UNDERSTANDING THE EIGHT
16 DIMENSIONS OF WELL–BEING IDENTIFIED BY THE FEDERAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND
17 MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION AND APPLYING THOSE LESSONS TO
18 INCREASING THE EDUCATOR’S PERSONAL WELL–BEING.

19 (2) THE COURSE SHALL INCLUDE INSTRUCTION ON:

20 (I) SOCIAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANCE OF
21 DIFFERENT TYPES OF RELATIONSHIPS AND BUILDING FRIENDSHIPS AND A SENSE
22 OF BELONGING AND COMMUNITY;

23 (II) ENVIRONMENTAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING:

24 1. THE IMPORTANCE OF A CONNECTION TO NATURE AND
25 THE OUTDOORS; AND

26 2. THE IMPORTANCE OF FEELING SAFE TO AN
27 EDUCATOR’S OVERALL WELL–BEING;

28 (III) PHYSICAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANCE OF A
29 HEALTHY BODY TO OVERALL WELL–BEING;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 546 3

1 (IV) EMOTIONAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANCE
2 OF BEING ABLE TO EXPRESS FEELINGS, ADJUST TO EMOTIONAL CHALLENGES, COPE
3 WITH LIFE’S STRESSORS, AND ENJOY LIFE;

4 (V) SPIRITUAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANCE OF
5 A SENSE OF MEANING, PURPOSE, AND CHARACTER;

6 (VI) OCCUPATIONAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE
7 IMPORTANCE OF WORK TO AN INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL WELL–BEING;

8 (VII) INTELLECTUAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE
9 IMPORTANCE OF BEING ABLE TO KEEP AN ACTIVE BRAIN, CULTIVATE PERSONAL
10 INTERESTS, AND PURSUE LIFELONG LEARNING; AND

11 (VIII) FINANCIAL WELL–BEING, INCLUDING THE IMPORTANCE OF
12 UNDERSTANDING FINANCIAL PROCESSES AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
14 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3