START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 517

M3, L6 6lr2019
HB 1058/25 – ENT

By: Delegates Terrasa, Acevero, Bagnall, Charkoudian, Kaufman, Lehman,
Moreno, Ruth, Taveras, and Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Emission Standards, Ambient Air Quality Standards, and Solid Waste
3 Management – Local Authority

4 FOR the purpose of altering certain provisions of law relating to the authority of a political
5 subdivision to adopt certain ordinances, rules, or regulations that set certain
6 emission standards or ambient air quality standards; specifying that a certain
7 requirement for the Department of the Environment to approve a certain county
8 water and sewerage plan does not limit certain authority of the county; specifying
9 that certain provisions of law do not limit certain authority of a political subdivision
10 to regulate refuse disposal systems or solid waste, subject to a certain condition;
11 requiring the Department to publish certain information on its website on or before
12 a certain date; and generally relating to local authority and emission standards,
13 ambient air quality standards, and solid waste management.

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Environment
16 Section 2–104
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Environment
21 Section 9–502
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY adding to
25 Article – Environment
26 Section 9–731 to be under the new part “Part IV. Refuse Disposal Systems and Solid
27 Waste Regulation”

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0517*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 517

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

3 Preamble

4 WHEREAS, The General Assembly has previously enacted State laws to expressly
5 authorize political subdivisions to adopt local ordinances, rules, or regulations to ensure
6 clean air and to regulate solid waste management within the jurisdictional boundaries of
7 the political subdivisions so long as the local standards are at least as stringent as State or
8 federal standards; and

9 WHEREAS, Certain court decisions have made it apparent that the legislative intent
10 under the prior enactments regarding local authority has not been made sufficiently clear;
11 now, therefore,

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Environment

15 2–104.

16 (a) (1) Except as provided in this [section] SUBSECTION, this title does not
17 limit the power of a political subdivision to adopt ordinances, rules, or regulations that set
18 emission standards or ambient air quality standards.

19 (2) A political subdivision may not adopt any ordinance, rule, or regulation
20 that sets an emission standard or ambient air quality standard less stringent than the
21 standards set by the Department under this title.

22 (b) [The] IN ADDITION TO THE AUTHORITY PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION
23 (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE governing body of any political subdivision may ALSO ask the
24 Department to adopt rules and regulations that set more restrictive emission standards or
25 ambient air quality standards in that political subdivision.

26 (C) AN ORDINANCE, A RULE, OR A REGULATION ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE
27 WITH THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO BE IN CONFLICT WITH A STANDARD
28 SET BY THE DEPARTMENT IF:

29 (1) THE LOCAL STANDARD IS AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE
30 STANDARD SET BY THE DEPARTMENT; AND

31 (2) IT IS TECHNICALLY POSSIBLE FOR A REGULATED ENTITY TO
32 COMPLY WITH THE DEPARTMENT’S STANDARD AND THE LOCAL STANDARD.

33 9–502.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 517 3

1 (a) Unless the operation of a water supply system would interfere with a cleanup
2 or remediation action of the Department, this subtitle does not prohibit the installation or
3 operation of a water supply system that is used only to supply water for purposes other
4 than human or animal consumption.

5 (b) If a county is exempt from the provisions of this subtitle, the county may not
6 receive funds from the sanitary facilities fund.

7 (c) Any rule or regulation adopted under this subtitle does not limit or supersede
8 any other county, municipal, or State law, rule, or regulation that provides greater
9 protection to the public health, safety, or welfare.

10 (D) THE REQUIREMENT FOR THE DEPARTMENT TO APPROVE A COUNTY
11 WATER AND SEWERAGE PLAN UNDER § 9–503 OF THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT LIMIT:

12 (1) THE CONTRACTING AUTHORITY OF A COUNTY; OR

13 (2) THE AUTHORITY OF A COUNTY TO SET EMISSION STANDARDS OR
14 AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–104 OF THIS ARTICLE.

15 9–729. RESERVED.

16 9–730. RESERVED.

17 PART IV. REFUSE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS AND SOLID WASTE REGULATION.

18 9–731.

19 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS PART, THIS TITLE DOES NOT LIMIT THE
20 POWER OF A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION TO ADOPT ANY ORDINANCE, RULE, OR
21 REGULATION TO REGULATE REFUSE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS OR SOLID WASTE.

22 (B) A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MAY NOT ADOPT ANY ORDINANCE, RULE, OR
23 REGULATION TO REGULATE REFUSE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS OR SOLID WASTE IN A
24 MANNER THAT IS LESS STRINGENT THAN THE STANDARDS SET BY THE DEPARTMENT
25 UNDER THIS TITLE.

26 (C) AN ORDINANCE, A RULE, OR A REGULATION ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE
27 WITH THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO BE IN CONFLICT WITH A STANDARD
28 SET BY THE DEPARTMENT IF THE LOCAL STANDARD IS AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS
29 THE STANDARD SET BY THE DEPARTMENT.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before October 1, 2026,
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 517

1 the Department of the Environment shall publish information on its website recognizing
2 the legal authority of political subdivisions to adopt local ordinances, rules, or regulations
3 to ensure clean air and to regulate solid waste management within the jurisdictional
4 boundaries of the political subdivisions so long as the local standards are at least as
5 stringent as State and federal standards.

6 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
7 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4