START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 522

A2 6lr2167
CF 6lr1620

By: Delegate Pruski
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Class C Per Diem
3 License Fees

4 FOR the purpose of altering the license fee structure for Class C per diem beer, beer and
5 wine, and beer, wine, and liquor licenses issued by the Board of License
6 Commissioners for Anne Arundel County; and generally relating to alcoholic
7 beverages licenses in Anne Arundel County.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
10 Section 11–102
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
15 Section 11–1311
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

21 11–102.

22 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

23 11–1311.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0522*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 522

1 (a) [The] FOR AN EVENT WITH AN ESTIMATED ATTENDANCE OF FEWER
2 THAN 500 INDIVIDUALS:

3 (1) THE fee for a Class C per diem beer license and a Class C per diem beer
4 and wine license is $25 per day[.]; AND

5 [(b)] (2) [The] THE fee for a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license is
6 $50 per day.

7 (B) FOR AN EVENT WITH AN ESTIMATED ATTENDANCE OF 500 OR MORE
8 INDIVIDUALS:

9 (1) THE FEE FOR A CLASS C PER DIEM BEER LICENSE AND A CLASS C
10 PER DIEM BEER AND WINE LICENSE IS $25 PER POINT OF SALE LOCATION THAT
11 SERVES ALCOHOL AT THE EVENT PER DAY; AND

12 (2) THE FEE FOR A CLASS C PER DIEM BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
13 LICENSE IS $50 PER POINT OF SALE LOCATION THAT SERVES ALCOHOL AT THE
14 EVENT PER DAY.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
16 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2