START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 535

J1 6lr1969

By: Delegates Arentz, Ghrist, Jacobs, T. Morgan, and Reilly
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Food Establishments – Cottage Food Businesses – Maximum Annual Revenue

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the maximum amount of annual revenue a business may
4 generate from the sale of cottage food products to be considered a cottage food
5 business; and generally relating to cottage food businesses.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Health – General
8 Section 21–301(a) and (b–2)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Health – General
13 Section 21–301(b–1)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Health – General

19 21–301.

20 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (b–1) “Cottage food business” means a business that:

22 (1) Produces or packages cottage food products in a residential kitchen;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0535*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 535

1 (2) Sells the cottage food products in accordance with § 21–330.1 of this
2 subtitle and regulations adopted by the Department; and

3 (3) Has annual revenues from the sale of cottage food products in an
4 amount not exceeding [$50,000] $100,000.

5 (b–2) “Cottage food product” means a nonhazardous food, as specified in regulations
6 adopted by the Department, that is sold in the State in accordance with § 21–330.1 of this
7 subtitle and regulations adopted by the Department:

8 (1) Directly to a consumer from a residence, at a farmer’s market, at a
9 public event, by personal delivery, or by mail delivery; or

10 (2) To a retail food store, including a grocery store, or a food cooperative.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
12 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2