START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 504

J2 6lr2498
HB 830/22 – HGO

By: Delegates Martinez, Alston, Guzzone, Hutchinson, S. Johnson, Kaufman,
Lopez, and Reilly
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
3 Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists – Physician Members –
4 Repeal

5 FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the State Board of Examiners for
6 Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music
7 Therapists by removing the physician members; and generally relating to physician
8 members of the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
9 Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Health Occupations
12 Section 2–201
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Health Occupations
17 Section 2–202(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Health Occupations

23 2–201.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0504*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 504

1 There is a State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
2 Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists in the Department.

3 2–202.

4 (a) (1) The Board consists of [15] 13 members.

5 (2) Of the [15] 13 Board members:

6 (i) 3 shall be licensed audiologists who have at least 5 years’ paid
7 work experience in audiology and are currently practicing audiology in the State;

8 (ii) 3 shall be licensed speech–language pathologists who have at
9 least 5 years’ paid work experience in speech–language pathology and are currently
10 practicing speech–language pathology in the State;

11 (iii) [2 shall be physicians who shall be voting members of the Board,
12 except on proposals that expand or restrict the practice of audiology as defined in § 2–101(q)
13 of this title or that expand or restrict the practice of speech–language pathology as defined
14 in § 2–101(r) of this title, and who:

15 1. Are licensed to practice medicine in the State;

16 2. Hold a certificate of qualification from the American Board
17 of Otolaryngology; and

18 3. Are currently practicing in the State;

19 (iv)] 2 shall be consumer members, 1 of whom shall be a consumer of
20 services provided by an individual licensed by the Board;

21 [(v)] (IV) 3 shall be licensed hearing aid dispensers who have at
22 least 5 years’ paid work experience in dispensing hearing aids and are currently practicing
23 hearing aid dispensing in the State; and

24 [(vi)] (V) 2 shall be licensed music therapists who have at least 5
25 years’ paid work experience in music therapy and are currently practicing music therapy
26 in the State.

27 (3) [(i) The Governor shall appoint the physician members, with the
28 advice of the Secretary, from a list submitted to the Secretary and the Governor by the
29 Maryland Society of Otolaryngology.

30 (ii) There shall be at least 3 names on the list.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 504 3

1 (4)] (i) The Governor shall appoint the speech–language pathologist
2 members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list submitted to the Secretary and the
3 Governor by the Board.

4 (ii) The number of names on the list shall be at least 3 times the
5 number of vacancies.

6 (iii) For each licensed speech–language pathologist vacancy, the
7 Board shall notify all licensed speech–language pathologists in the State of the vacancy to
8 solicit nominations to fill the vacancy.

9 [(5)] (4) (i) Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, the
10 Governor shall appoint the audiologist members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a
11 list submitted to the Secretary and the Governor by the Maryland Academy of Audiology.

12 (ii) The number of names on the list shall be at least 3 times the
13 number of vacancies.

14 (iii) For each audiologist vacancy, the Board shall notify all licensed
15 audiologists in the State of the vacancy to solicit nominations to fill the vacancy.

16 [(6)] (5) (i) The Governor shall appoint the hearing aid dispenser
17 members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list submitted to the Secretary and the
18 Governor by the Board.

19 (ii) The number of names on the list shall be at least 3 times the
20 number of vacancies.

21 (iii) For each hearing aid dispenser vacancy, the Board shall notify
22 all licensed hearing aid dispensers in the State of the vacancy to solicit nominations to fill
23 the vacancy.

24 [(7)] (6) (i) The Governor shall appoint the consumer members with
25 the advice of the Secretary and the advice and consent of the Senate.

26 (ii) The Board and the Secretary may solicit applications for
27 consumer member vacancies from the general public.

28 (iii) 1. The Governor shall appoint the consumer member who is
29 a consumer of services provided by an individual licensed by the Board from a list submitted
30 by the Secretary.

31 2. An organization representing patients or family members
32 of patients served by individuals licensed by the Board may submit recommendations for
33 the consumer Board member appointed under this subparagraph to the Secretary.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 504

1 3. The Board and the Secretary may notify organizations
2 representing patients or family members of patients served by individuals licensed by the
3 Board of a vacancy for the consumer member appointed under this subparagraph.

4 [(8)] (7) (i) The Governor shall appoint the music therapist members,
5 with the advice of the Secretary, from a list submitted to the Secretary and the Governor
6 by the Maryland Association for Music Therapy.

7 (ii) The number of names on the list shall be at least 3 times the
8 number of vacancies.

9 (iii) On or before December 31, 2021, the music therapist members
10 shall be board certified music therapists, as defined in § 2–4A–01 of this title.

11 (iv) On or after January 1, 2022, the music therapist members shall
12 be licensed professional music therapists, as defined in § 2–4A–01 of this title.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the two physician
14 members of the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
15 Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists in office on the effective date of this
16 Act shall terminate on June 30, 2026.

17 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4