START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 508

E4 6lr1285
CF SB 330

By: Delegates Hornberger, Adams, Arentz, Arikan, Baker, Buckel, Chisholm,
Ciliberti, Grammer, Griffith, Hutchinson, Jacobs, A. Johnson, S. Johnson,
T. Morgan, Reilly, Schmidt, and Valentine
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Police Accountability – Investigation Records Relating to Not
3 Administratively Charged, Unfounded, and Exonerated Complaints

4 FOR the purpose of requiring that certain investigation records relating to a complaint of
5 misconduct by a police officer be removed from the police officer’s personnel record a
6 certain amount of time after an administrative charging committee issues a
7 determination not to administratively charge the police officer in connection with the
8 complaint or a trial board issues a finding of unfounded or exonerated in connection
9 with the complaint; and generally relating to police accountability.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Public Safety
12 Section 3–101(a), (b), (d), (f), and (k)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Public Safety
17 Section 3–112
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Public Safety

23 3–101.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0508*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 508

1 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (b) “Administratively charged” means that a police officer has been formally
3 accused of misconduct in an administrative proceeding.

4 (d) “Exonerated” means that a police officer acted in accordance with the law and
5 agency policy.

6 (f) “Not administratively charged” means that a determination has been made
7 not to administratively charge a police officer in connection with alleged misconduct.

8 (k) “Unfounded” means that the allegations against a police officer are not
9 supported by fact.

10 3–112.

11 (A) [A] IN THIS SECTION, “INVESTIGATION RECORD” MEANS A record relating
12 to an administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer, including
13 an internal affairs investigatory record, a hearing record, and records relating to a
14 disciplinary decision[,].

15 (B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, AN
16 INVESTIGATION RECORD may not be:

17 (1) expunged; or

18 (2) destroyed by a law enforcement agency.

19 (C) ALL INVESTIGATION RECORDS RELATING TO A COMPLAINT OF
20 MISCONDUCT BY A POLICE OFFICER SHALL BE REMOVED FROM THE POLICE
21 OFFICER’S PERSONNEL RECORD 3 YEARS AFTER:

22 (1) AN ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGING COMMITTEE ISSUES A
23 DETERMINATION NOT TO ADMINISTRATIVELY CHARGE THE POLICE OFFICER IN
24 CONNECTION WITH THE COMPLAINT UNDER § 3–104 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

25 (2) A TRIAL BOARD ISSUES A FINDING OF UNFOUNDED OR
26 EXONERATED IN CONNECTION WITH THE COMPLAINT UNDER § 3–106 OF THIS
27 SUBTITLE.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2