START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 519

A2 6lr2168
CF 6lr1617

By: Delegate Pruski
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages – Entertainment Permits

3 FOR the purpose of altering the titles of certain entertainment permits for certain alcoholic
4 beverages license holders in Anne Arundel County; altering the authorized forms of
5 entertainment that certain entertainment permit holders in the county may provide;
6 adding a certain zoning requirement for residential property applicable to certain
7 entertainment permit holders in the county; and generally relating to alcoholic
8 beverages entertainment permits in Anne Arundel County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 11–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 11–1102(a), (b), (c), and (d)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22 11–102.

23 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

24 11–1102.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0519*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 519

1 (a) (1) On the premises, or on adjacent property over which a license holder
2 has ownership or control, a license holder:

3 (i) may allow piped–in background music or one television screen;
4 but

5 (ii) unless issued a permit described in this section that authorizes
6 the activity, may not allow:

7 1. the playing of music, including live music;

8 2. the operation of a karaoke machine;

9 3. the playing of music by a disc jockey; or

10 4. [dancing,] floor shows[,] or any other similar type of
11 entertainment.

12 (2) The Board may issue a permit described in this section only if the Board
13 finds that:

14 (i) the applicant can control the individuals using the licensed
15 premises;

16 (ii) the operation of the premises under the permit will not unduly
17 disturb the peace of the residents of the neighborhood in which the place of business is
18 located; and

19 (iii) the issuing of the permit:

20 1. is necessary to accommodate the public;

21 2. will not be detrimental to the public welfare; and

22 3. will not violate a county fire, health, or building
23 regulation.

24 (b) (1) There is a [music] BACKGROUND ENTERTAINMENT permit.

25 (2) The Board may issue the permit to a holder of a Class B license, a Class
26 BLX license, a Class D license, or a Class H license.

27 (3) The permit authorizes the playing of:

28 (I) MORE THAN ONE TELEVISION; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 519 3

1 (II) recorded music or [live music with not more than two musicians]
2 PIPED–IN BACKGROUND MUSIC.

3 (4) The permit holder may not allow [dancing,] floor shows[,] or similar
4 live entertainment.

5 (5) The annual permit fee is $100.

6 (c) (1) There is [an] A GENERAL entertainment permit.

7 (2) The Board may issue the permit to a holder of a Class B license, a Class
8 BLX license, a Class D license, or a Class H license.

9 (3) The permit authorizes:

10 (i) THE HOLDER TO PROVIDE THE ENTERTAINMENT ALLOWED
11 UNDER A BACKGROUND ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT;

12 (II) live music with not more than four musicians; and

13 [(ii)] (III) the playing of:

14 1. [more than one television] TRIVIA GAMES;

15 2. a karaoke machine; and

16 3. music by a disc jockey.

17 (4) (I) The permit holder may not allow [dancing,] floor shows[,] or
18 similar live entertainment.

19 (II) IF THE ENTERTAINMENT AUTHORIZED UNDER PARAGRAPH
20 (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION WILL OCCUR OUTSIDE, THE AREA USED FOR THE EVENT
21 SHALL BE AT LEAST 100 FEET FROM ANY RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY.

22 (5) The annual permit fees are:

23 (i) $200 for a holder of a beer and wine license; and

24 (ii) $300 for a holder of a beer, wine, and liquor license.

25 (d) (1) There is a [dancing] FULL ENTERTAINMENT permit.

26 (2) The Board may issue the permit to a holder of:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 519

1 (i) a Class B license;

2 (ii) except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, a Class
3 BLX license;

4 (iii) a Class C license;

5 (iv) a Class D license; or

6 (v) except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, a Class H
7 license.

8 (3) The permit authorizes the holder to provide:

9 (I) THE ENTERTAINMENT ALLOWED UNDER A GENERAL
10 ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT; AND

11 (II) music, [dancing] A PERMANENT DANCE FLOOR, A STAGE
12 AREA, FLOOR SHOWS, and other legal forms of entertainment.

13 (4) (i) The Board may not issue the permit to a holder of a Class BLX
14 license or a Class H license if the premises for which the Class BLX license or Class H
15 license is issued is within 1,000 feet in a straight line from entry to entry from a place of
16 worship or school.

17 (ii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the Board
18 may issue the permit to the holder of a Class H license if the licensed premises is located
19 within 1,000 feet in a straight line from entry to entry from a school located at the Annapolis
20 Mall.

21 (III) IF THE ENTERTAINMENT AUTHORIZED UNDER PARAGRAPH
22 (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION WILL OCCUR OUTSIDE, THE AREA USED FOR THE EVENT
23 SHALL BE AT LEAST 100 FEET FROM ANY RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY.

24 (5) The annual permit fees are:

25 (i) $200 for a holder of a beer and wine license;

26 (ii) $400 for a holder of a beer, wine, and liquor license; and

27 (iii) no charge for a holder of a Class C license.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
29 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4