START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 597

C5, L6 6lr1716

By: Montgomery County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Montgomery County – Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program –
3 Alterations

4 MC 17–26

5 FOR the purpose of altering the beginning and ending dates for the Community Choice
6 Aggregation Pilot Program; altering the dates on which the Public Service
7 Commission must submit certain pilot program reports to the Governor and the
8 General Assembly; and generally relating to the Community Choice Aggregation
9 Pilot Program.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Public Utilities
12 Section 7–510.3(b) and (c)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Public Utilities
17 Section 7–510.3(t) and (u)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Public Utilities

23 7–510.3.

24 (b) This section applies only in Montgomery County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0597*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 597

1 (c) (1) There is a Community Choice Aggregation Pilot Program.

2 (2) Beginning December 31, 2023, a county may form a community choice
3 aggregator under this section.

4 (t) (1) The pilot program shall:

5 (i) begin on the earlier of:

6 1. the date that a county gives notice to the Commission of
7 its intention to initiate a process to form a community choice aggregator, in accordance with
8 subsection (d)(1)(v) of this section; or

9 2. April 1, [2024] 2026; and

10 (ii) end [7] 9 years after the beginning date, but not sooner than
11 April 1, 2031.

12 (2) On or before April 1 of the [sixth] SEVENTH year after the beginning of
13 the pilot program, the Commission shall, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
14 Government Article, report to the General Assembly on the status and effectiveness of the
15 pilot program.

16 (u) (1) At the conclusion of the pilot program described in this section, the
17 Commission shall study:

18 (i) the overall costs and benefits of the pilot program;

19 (ii) whether there were any incremental costs borne by standard
20 offer service customers resulting from the migration of customers between the community
21 choice aggregator and standard offer service; and

22 (iii) what mechanisms could be implemented to hold standard offer
23 service customers harmless from any incremental costs borne by standard offer service
24 customers identified under item (ii) of this paragraph.

25 (2) The Commission shall seek the advice and recommendation of the
26 Community Choice Energy Workgroup in the study required under this subsection.

27 (3) On or before December 31, [2031] 2035, the Commission shall report
28 the findings of the study to the Governor and the General Assembly, in accordance with §
29 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2