START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 582

A2 6lr1069

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Voter Registration
3 Requirement

4 PG 318–26

5 FOR the purpose of repealing the requirement that a certain individual be a registered
6 voter to apply for or sign an application on behalf of certain entities for certain
7 alcoholic beverages licenses in Prince George’s County; and generally relating to
8 alcoholic beverages license requirements in Prince George’s County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 26–102, 26–1004(a), 26–1005(a), 26–1008(a), 26–1009(a), 26–1019(a),
12 26–1405(a), and 26–1406(a)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
17 Section 26–1004(b), 26–1005(b), 26–1008(b), 26–1009(b), 26–1019(b), 26–1405(c),
18 and 26–1406(c)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

24 26–102.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0582*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 582

1 This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

2 26–1004.

3 (a) There is a Class C (country club) beer, wine, and liquor license.

4 (b) An application for the license shall be signed by at least one officer of the
5 country club who is a resident[, registered voter,] and taxpayer.

6 26–1005.

7 (a) There is a Class C (country and golf club) beer, wine, and liquor license.

8 (b) An application for the license shall be signed by at least one officer of the
9 country and golf club who is a resident[, registered voter,] and taxpayer of the county.

10 26–1008.

11 (a) There is a Class B/ECF (educational conference facility) beer, wine, and liquor
12 license for the University College Center for Adult Education of the University of Maryland.

13 (b) The Board may issue the license to an individual who is:

14 (1) authorized by the University College Center for Adult Education to:

15 (i) act on its behalf;

16 (ii) assume all responsibility; and

17 (iii) be subject to all the penalties, conditions, and restrictions
18 imposed on licenses; and

19 (2) a resident [and registered voter] of the county.

20 26–1009.

21 (a) There is a Class B–ECF/DS (Education Conference Facility/Dining Service)
22 beer, wine, and liquor license.

23 (b) The Board may issue the license to an individual who is:

24 (1) (i) authorized by the University of Maryland, College Park Campus
25 to:

26 1. act on its behalf under the license; and

27 2. be subject to the penalties, conditions, and restrictions
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 582 3

1 under this title; and

2 (ii) a resident [and registered voter] of the county; or

3 (2) (i) authorized by the Prince George’s Community College Main
4 Campus to:

5 1. act on its behalf under the license; and

6 2. be subject to the penalties, conditions, and restrictions
7 under this title; and

8 (ii) a resident [and registered voter] of the county.

9 26–1019.

10 (a) There is a Class C (yacht club) beer, wine, and liquor license.

11 (b) The application for the license shall be signed by at least one officer of the
12 yacht club who is a resident[, registered voter,] and taxpayer of the county.

13 26–1405.

14 (a) This section does not apply to:

15 (1) a racetrack license;

16 (2) a Class BLX license;

17 (3) an arena license;

18 (4) a Class BCE (catering) license;

19 (5) a Class B–CC (convention center) license;

20 (6) a Class B/ECF (educational conference facility) license;

21 (7) the issuance, renewal, or transfer of Class B–DD (development district)
22 licenses; or

23 (8) a business whose stock or interest is authorized for sale by the United
24 States Securities and Exchange Commission.

25 (c) (1) This subsection does not apply to a Class B–Stadium (baseball stadium)
26 beer, wine, and liquor license, a 7–day Class B–ECR on–sale beer, wine, and liquor license,
27 or a Class B–WPL (waterfront pavilion) beer, wine, and liquor license.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 582

1 (2) To be eligible to receive a license, a partner shall[:

2 (i)] be a resident of the State at the time the application is filed and
3 continue to be a resident as long as the license is in effect[; and

4 (ii) be a registered voter of the State].

5 26–1406.

6 (a) This section does not apply to:

7 (1) a racetrack license;

8 (2) a Class BLX license;

9 (3) an arena license;

10 (4) a Class BCE (catering) license;

11 (5) a Class B–CC (convention center) license;

12 (6) a Class B/ECF (educational conference facility) license;

13 (7) the issuance, renewal, or transfer of Class B–DD (development district)
14 licenses; or

15 (8) a business whose stock or interest is authorized for sale by the United
16 States Securities and Exchange Commission.

17 (c) (1) This subsection does not apply to a Class B–Stadium (baseball stadium)
18 beer, wine, and liquor license, a 7–day Class B–ECR on–sale beer, wine, and liquor license,
19 or a Class B–WPL (waterfront pavilion) beer, wine, and liquor license.

20 (2) To be eligible to receive a license, an applicant shall[:

21 (i)] be a resident of the State at the time the application is filed and
22 continue to be a resident as long as the license is in effect[; and

23 (ii) be a registered voter of the State].

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4