START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 556

Q1 6lr2336

By: Delegates J. Long, Alston, Crutchfield, Fair, Holmes, Lopez, Taylor, and
Woods
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Property Tax Credit – Utility Service Expenses for Dwellings
3 (Maryland Family Utility Tax Relief Act)

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the
5 governing body of a county or municipal corporation to grant, by law, a credit against
6 the county or municipal corporation property tax imposed on the dwelling of an
7 individual who pays at least a certain amount for utility service expenses during the
8 taxable year; and generally relating to a property tax credit on dwellings for utility
9 service expenses.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Tax – Property
12 Section 9–276
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Tax – Property

18 9–276.

19 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (2) “DWELLING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–105 OF THIS
22 TITLE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0556*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 556

1 (3) “ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO, DURING
2 THE TAXABLE YEAR, PAYS AT LEAST 25% OF HOUSEHOLD NET INCOME ON EXPENSES
3 FOR UTILITY SERVICES FOR THE INDIVIDUAL’S DWELLING.

4 (4) “NET INCOME” MEANS THE PART OF EARNINGS THAT REMAIN
5 AFTER DEDUCTION OF ANY AMOUNT REQUIRED TO BE WITHHELD BY LAW.

6 (5) “UTILITY SERVICE” MEANS ELECTRICITY, GAS, WATER, OR
7 INTERNET SERVICE.

8 (B) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
9 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY GRANT, BY LAW,
10 A TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION PROPERTY TAX
11 IMPOSED ON AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL’S DWELLING LOCATED IN THE COUNTY OR
12 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.

13 (C) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
14 GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY PROVIDE, BY
15 LAW, FOR:

16 (1) THE AMOUNT AND DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS
17 SECTION;

18 (2) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE TAX CREDIT UNDER
19 THIS SECTION; AND

20 (3) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
22 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2