START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 532

K3 6lr1953
HB 205/25 – APP CF 6lr1954

By: Delegate Solomon
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Employment Standards – Firefighters – Payment of Wages and Payroll
3 Information

4 FOR the purpose of requiring governmental units that employ firefighters to compute
5 overtime pay in a certain manner; requiring counties and municipalities to provide
6 certain payroll information to each firefighter employed by the county or
7 municipality; authorizing a firefighter or the firefighter’s exclusive representative to
8 initiate a certain grievance if a county or municipality does not provide the payroll
9 information as required or wages due; and generally relating to wages and payroll
10 information for firefighters.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Labor and Employment
13 Section 3–420
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Local Government
18 Section 1–210
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Labor and Employment

24 3–420.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0532*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 532

1 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “EMPLOYER” INCLUDES A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT
2 THAT EMPLOYS A FIREFIGHTER.

3 [(a)] (B) Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employer shall compute
4 the wage for overtime under § 3–415 of this subtitle on the basis of each hour over 40 hours
5 that an employee works during 1 workweek.

6 [(b)] (C) Notwithstanding § 3–415(b)(2) of this subtitle, an employer that is not
7 a nonprofit organization and is a concert promoter, legitimate theater, music festival, music
8 pavilion, or theatrical show shall pay overtime for a craft or trade employee as required in
9 subsection [(a)] (B) of this section.

10 [(c)] (D) The wage for overtime may be computed on the basis of each hour over
11 60 hours that an employee works during 1 workweek for an employee who:

12 (1) is engaged in agriculture; and

13 (2) is exempt from the overtime provisions of the federal Act.

14 [(d)] (E) The wage for overtime may be computed on the basis of each hour over
15 48 hours that an employee works during 1 workweek:

16 (1) for an employee of a bowling establishment; and

17 (2) for an employee of an institution that:

18 (i) is not a hospital; but

19 (ii) is engaged primarily in the care of individuals who:

20 1. are aged, intellectually disabled, or sick or have a mental
21 disorder; and

22 2. reside at the institution.

23 (F) (1) THE WAGE FOR OVERTIME FOR A FIREFIGHTER EMPLOYED BY A
24 GOVERNMENTAL UNIT SHALL BE COMPUTED ON THE BASIS OF EACH HOUR OVER 168
25 HOURS THAT THE FIREFIGHTER WORKS DURING A 28–DAY WORK PERIOD.

26 (2) IN CALCULATING HOURS WORKED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
27 THIS SUBSECTION, THE EMPLOYER:

28 (I) SHALL INCLUDE ALL REGULARLY SCHEDULED HOURS; AND

29 (II) IF THE FIREFIGHTER USED EARNED OR ACCRUED LEAVE
30 DURING ALL OR PART OF THE REGULARLY SCHEDULED HOURS, MAY NOT BE
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 532 3

1 REQUIRED TO INCLUDE EARNED OR ACCRUED LEAVE IN EXCESS OF 42 HOURS PER
2 WEEK.

3 (3) A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT MAY NOT BE DETERMINED TO HAVE
4 VIOLATED THIS SECTION IF THE GOVERNMENTAL UNIT:

5 (I) PAYS OVERTIME WAGES USING AN AVERAGE OF:

6 1. NOT MORE THAN 42 HOURS PER WEEK; AND

7 2. A WORK PERIOD OF BETWEEN 7 AND 28 DAYS; OR

8 (II) IS A PARTY TO A FIREFIGHTER COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
9 AGREEMENT THAT DEFINES A SHIFT AS 42 HOURS PER WEEK.

10 Article – Local Government

11 1–210.

12 (A) EACH COUNTY AND MUNICIPALITY SHALL PROVIDE FOR EACH
13 FIREFIGHTER EMPLOYED BY THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY:

14 (1) AT THE TIME OF HIRING AND AT THE TIME OF ANY CHANGE OF THE
15 FIREFIGHTER’S RATE OF PAY, NOTICE OF:

16 (I) THE FIREFIGHTER’S RATE OF PAY;

17 (II) THE REGULAR PAY PERIODS; AND

18 (III) THE FIREFIGHTER’S OVERTIME RATE OF PAY; AND

19 (2) FOR EACH PAY PERIOD, A STATEMENT OF THE HOURS WORKED,
20 GROSS EARNINGS, AND ANY DEDUCTIONS FROM THE GROSS EARNINGS.

21 (B) IF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY DOES NOT PROVIDE PAYROLL
22 INFORMATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION OR WAGES
23 DUE, THE FIREFIGHTER OR THE FIREFIGHTER’S EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY
24 INITIATE A GRIEVANCE UNDER THE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED UNDER
25 ANY APPLICABLE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE OR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
26 AGREEMENT.

27 (C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF A
28 GRIEVANCE IS INITIATED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A FIREFIGHTER
29 IS ENTITLED TO WAGES AND DAMAGES UNLESS THE WAGE IS WITHHELD AS A RESULT
30 OF A BONA FIDE DISPUTE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 532

1 (2) IF THE GRIEVANCE WAS FILED:

2 (I) IN THE FIRST 3 BUSINESS DAYS OF A PAY PERIOD, THE
3 DAMAGES SHALL START IN THE FOLLOWING REGULAR PAY PERIOD; OR

4 (II) AFTER THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY OF A PAY PERIOD, THE
5 DAMAGES SHALL START IN THE SECOND REGULAR PAY PERIOD FOLLOWING THE PAY
6 PERIOD IN WHICH THE FIREFIGHTER WAS NOT PAID THE FIREFIGHTER’S FULL
7 WAGE.

8 (3) THE DAMAGES UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

9 (I) MAY NOT BEGIN UNTIL AT LEAST ONE REGULAR PAY PERIOD
10 HAS ELAPSED SINCE THE FIREFIGHTER WAS NOT PAID THE FIREFIGHTER’S FULL
11 WAGE DUE FOR A PAY PERIOD;

12 (II) SHALL INCREASE PER PAY PERIOD BY 30% OF:

13 1. THE WAGE THAT THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY
14 FAILED TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION FOR AS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
15 OF THIS SECTION; OR

16 2. THE WAGE THAT THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY
17 FAILED TO PAY;

18 (III) SHALL CONTINUE UNTIL THE PAY PERIOD WHEN THE
19 COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY PROVIDES THE MISSING WAGES AND DAMAGES TO THE
20 FIREFIGHTER; AND

21 (IV) MAY NOT EXCEED THREE TIMES THE AMOUNT OF:

22 1. THE WAGE DUE FOR A PAY PERIOD FOR WHICH THE
23 COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY FAILED TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION AS REQUIRED
24 UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; OR

25 2. THE MISSING WAGES.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
27 apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
28 application to any collective bargaining agreements in effect before the effective date of this
29 Act.

30 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4