START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 534

F1 6lr1583
HB 184/25 – W&M

By: Delegates Smith, Acevero, Amprey, Coley, Conaway, Davis, J. Long, Ruff,
Toles, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Nonpublic Schools – Transcripts – Prohibition on Punitive Measures Related to
3 Student Debt

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting nonpublic schools that participate in State–funded
5 education programs from refusing to issue a transcript to a current or former student
6 or the student’s parent or guardian or taking other punitive measures regarding a
7 student’s transcript request because the student owes a debt to the nonpublic school;
8 and generally relating to the issuance of transcripts by nonpublic schools.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 7–118
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 7–118.

18 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
19 INDICATED.

20 (2) (I) “DEBT” MEANS ANY MONEY, OBLIGATION, CLAIM, OR SUM
21 DUE OR OWED BY A STUDENT OR FORMER STUDENT TO A NONPUBLIC SCHOOL.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0534*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 534

1 (II) “DEBT” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE FEE, IF ANY, CHARGED TO
2 A STUDENT FOR THE ACTUAL COSTS OF PROVIDING A TRANSCRIPT.

3 (3) “NONPUBLIC SCHOOL” MEANS A NONPUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE
4 STATE THAT PARTICIPATES IN STATE–FUNDED EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

5 (4) “STUDENT” INCLUDES CURRENT STUDENTS AND FORMER
6 STUDENTS OF A NONPUBLIC SCHOOL.

7 (B) A NONPUBLIC SCHOOL MAY NOT:

8 (1) REFUSE TO ISSUE A TRANSCRIPT TO A STUDENT OR THE PARENT
9 OR GUARDIAN OF A STUDENT BECAUSE THE STUDENT OWES A DEBT;

10 (2) CONDITION THE ISSUANCE OF A TRANSCRIPT ON THE PAYMENT
11 OF A DEBT;

12 (3) CHARGE A HIGHER FEE FOR OBTAINING A TRANSCRIPT BECAUSE
13 THE STUDENT OWES A DEBT;

14 (4) PROVIDE LESS FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF A TRANSCRIPT
15 REQUEST BECAUSE A STUDENT OWES A DEBT; OR

16 (5) USE TRANSCRIPT ISSUANCE AS A TOOL OF DEBT COLLECTION.

17 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2