START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 592

E5 6lr2211

By: Delegates Mireku–North, Acevero, Coley, Embry, Feldmark, Kaiser,
Palakovich Carr, Pasteur, Ruff, Taveras, and Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary and Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Task Force to Study Forced Infant Separation From Incarcerated Individuals

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Task Force to Study Forced Infant Separation From
4 Incarcerated Individuals; and generally relating to the Task Force to Study Forced
5 Infant Separation From Incarcerated Individuals.

6 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
7 That:

8 (a) There is a Task Force to Study Forced Infant Separation From Incarcerated
9 Individuals.

10 (b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

11 (1) one member of the Senate, appointed by the President of the Senate;

12 (2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
13 House;

14 (3) the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, or the
15 Secretary’s designee;

16 (4) the Secretary of Health, or the Secretary’s designee;

17 (5) the Public Defender, or the Public Defender’s designee; and

18 (6) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

19 (i) one formerly incarcerated individual;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0592*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 592

1 (ii) one family member of a currently incarcerated male individual;

2 (iii) one family member of a currently incarcerated female individual;

3 (iv) one social worker specializing in early childhood;

4 (v) one attorney specializing in juvenile law;

5 (vi) one attorney from a Maryland nonprofit law firm that represents
6 children in child welfare cases and focuses on the rights of children;

7 (vii) one representative of AFSCME Maryland Council 13;

8 (viii) one representative of a nonprofit organization focused on
9 women’s health;

10 (ix) one representative of a nonprofit organization focused on
11 pediatric health; and

12 (x) one representative of a nonprofit organization focused on the
13 rights of incarcerated individuals.

14 (c) The Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and
15 Policy shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

16 (d) The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy shall provide staff for
17 the Task Force.

18 (e) A member of the Task Force:

19 (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

20 (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
21 Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

22 (f) The Task Force shall study:

23 (1) the number of pregnant and postpartum incarcerated individuals in the
24 State’s prisons;

25 (2) the ability of the Division of Correction to create a space within the
26 prerelease unit, when completed, for pregnant and postpartum incarcerated individuals;

27 (3) the impact of forced infant separation from the infant’s mother;

28 (4) the best practices of other state correctional systems in handling:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 592 3

1 (i) forced infant separation;

2 (ii) pregnant and postpartum incarcerated individuals; and

3 (iii) visitation between postpartum incarcerated individuals and
4 their children; and

5 (5) any other issues that the Task Force considers relevant.

6 (g) The Task Force shall make legislative recommendations regarding methods
7 to reduce forced infant separation in the State and facilitate bonds between postpartum
8 incarcerated individuals and their children.

9 (h) On or before December 31, 2027, the Task Force shall report its findings and
10 recommendations, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the
11 General Assembly.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
13 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of June 30, 2028,
14 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
15 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 3