START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 548

C9, L6 6lr1544
HB 503/25 – ENT CF SB 325

By: Delegates Behler, Acevero, Addison, Allen, Amprey, Boafo, Boyce, Edelson,
Fair, Holmes, Ivey, Lewis, Moreno, Palakovich Carr, Pasteur, Qi, Ross, Ruff,
Schindler, Simmons, Stewart, Vogel, and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Land Use – Permitting – Development Rights
3 (Maryland Housing Certainty Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the approval of a housing development project application by
5 a local regulatory authority or the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning
6 Commission to be governed only by certain laws and regulations in effect at the time
7 of submission of a substantially complete application; granting the proponent of an
8 approved housing development project certain vested rights related to use and
9 development for a certain time period; prohibiting the collection of certain
10 development excise taxes and development impact fees before a housing development
11 project is completed; and generally relating to housing development and land use.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Land Use
14 Section 1–401 and 10–103
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY adding to
18 Article – Land Use
19 Section 12–101 through 12–301 to be under the new title “Title 12. Maryland
20 Housing Certainty Act”
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2012 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY adding to
24 Article – Local Government
25 Section 20–128
26 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0548*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 548

1 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
3 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

4 Article – Land Use

5 1–401.

6 (a) Except as provided in this section, this division does not apply to charter
7 counties.

8 (b) The following provisions of this division apply to a charter county:

9 (1) this subtitle, including Parts II and III
10 (Charter county – Comprehensive plans);

11 (2) § 1–101(l), (m), and (o) (Definitions – “Plan”, “Priority funding area”,
12 and “Sensitive area”);

13 (3) § 1–201 (Visions);

14 (4) § 1–206 (Required education);

15 (5) § 1–207 (Annual report – In general);

16 (6) § 1–208 (Annual report – Measures and indicators);

17 (7) Title 1, Subtitle 3 (Consistency);

18 (8) Title 1, Subtitle 5 (Growth Tiers);

19 (9) § 4–104(c) (Limitations – Bicycle parking);

20 (10) § 4–104(d) (Limitations – Manufactured homes and modular dwellings);

21 (11) § 4–208 (Exceptions – Maryland Accessibility Code);

22 (12) § 4–210 (Permits and variances – Solar panels);

23 (13) § 4–211 (Change in zoning classification – Energy generating systems);

24 (14) § 4–212 (Agritourism);

25 (15) § 4–213 (Alcohol production);

26 (16) § 4–214 (Agricultural alcohol production);
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 548 3

1 (17) § 4–215 (Pollinator–friendly vegetation management);

2 (18) § 4–216 (Limitations – Family child care homes and large family child
3 care homes);

4 (19) Title 4, Subtitle 5 (Accessory Dwelling Units);

5 (20) § 5–102(d) (Subdivision regulations – Burial sites);

6 (21) § 5–104 (Major subdivision – Review);

7 (22) Title 7, Subtitle 1 (Development Mechanisms);

8 (23) Title 7, Subtitle 2 (Transfer of Development Rights);

9 (24) except in Montgomery County or Prince George’s County, Title 7,
10 Subtitle 3 (Development Rights and Responsibilities Agreements);

11 (25) Title 7, Subtitle 4 (Inclusionary Zoning);

12 (26) Title 7, Subtitle 5 (Housing Expansion and Affordability);

13 (27) § 8–401 (Conversion of overhead facilities);

14 (28) for Baltimore County only, Title 9, Subtitle 3 (Single–County Provisions
15 – Baltimore County);

16 (29) for Frederick County only, Title 9, Subtitle 10 (Single–County
17 Provisions – Frederick County);

18 (30) for Howard County only, Title 9, Subtitle 13 (Single–County Provisions
19 – Howard County);

20 (31) for Talbot County only, Title 9, Subtitle 18 (Single–County Provisions
21 – Talbot County); [and]

22 (32) Title 11, Subtitle 2 (Civil Penalty); AND

23 (33) TITLE 12 (MARYLAND HOUSING CERTAINTY ACT).

24 (c) This section supersedes any inconsistent provision of Division II of this
25 article.

26 10–103.

27 (a) Except as provided in this section, this division does not apply to Baltimore
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 548

1 City.

2 (b) The following provisions of this division apply to Baltimore City:

3 (1) this title;

4 (2) § 1–101(m) (Definitions – “Priority funding area”);

5 (3) § 1–101(o) (Definitions – “Sensitive area”);

6 (4) § 1–201 (Visions);

7 (5) § 1–206 (Required education);

8 (6) § 1–207 (Annual report – In general);

9 (7) § 1–208 (Annual report – Measures and indicators);

10 (8) Title 1, Subtitle 3 (Consistency);

11 (9) Title 1, Subtitle 4, Parts II and III (Home Rule Counties
12 – Comprehensive Plans; Implementation);

13 (10) § 4–104(c) (Limitations – Bicycle parking);

14 (11) § 4–104(d) (Limitations – Manufactured homes and modular dwellings);

15 (12) § 4–205 (Administrative adjustments);

16 (13) § 4–208 (Exceptions – Maryland Accessibility Code);

17 (14) § 4–210 (Permits and variances – Solar panels);

18 (15) § 4–211 (Change in zoning classification – Energy generating systems);

19 (16) § 4–215 (Pollinator–friendly vegetation management);

20 (17) § 4–216 (Limitations – Family child care homes and large family child
21 care homes);

22 (18) Title 4, Subtitle 5 (Accessory Dwelling Units);

23 (19) § 5–102(d) (Subdivision regulations – Burial sites);

24 (20) Title 7, Subtitle 1 (Development Mechanisms);

25 (21) Title 7, Subtitle 2 (Transfer of Development Rights);
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 548 5

1 (22) Title 7, Subtitle 3 (Development Rights and Responsibilities
2 Agreements);

3 (23) Title 7, Subtitle 4 (Inclusionary Zoning);

4 (24) Title 7, Subtitle 5 (Housing Expansion and Affordability); [and]

5 (25) Title 11, Subtitle 2 (Civil Penalty); AND

6 (26) TITLE 12 (MARYLAND HOUSING CERTAINTY ACT).

7 TITLE 12. MARYLAND HOUSING CERTAINTY ACT.

8 SUBTITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

9 12–101.

10 (A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
11 INDICATED.

12 (B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND–NATIONAL CAPITAL PARK AND
13 PLANNING COMMISSION.

14 (C) “HOUSING CONSTRUCTION PERMIT” MEANS A BUILDING PERMIT
15 REQUIRED BY A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION TO
16 COMMENCE OR CONTINUE THE CONSTRUCTION, SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION, OR
17 IMPROVEMENT OF RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE.

18 (D) “HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT” MEANS THE NEW CONSTRUCTION
19 OR SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION OF A RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT.

20 (E) “HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT APPLICATION” MEANS AN
21 APPLICATION FOR A BUILDING PERMIT, CERTIFICATION, AUTHORIZATION, SITE
22 PLAN APPROVAL, SUBDIVISION APPROVAL, CONCEPTUAL PLAN, OR ANY OTHER
23 DETERMINATION BY A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION
24 RELATING TO A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT THAT HAS BEEN SUBMITTED TO
25 A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION IN COMPLIANCE WITH
26 APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS.

27 (F) “LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY” MEANS:

28 (1) THE GOVERNING BODY OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION; OR
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 548

1 (2) A DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OR OTHER ENTITY OF A
2 LOCAL JURISDICTION RESPONSIBLE FOR PROCESSING OR APPROVING AN
3 APPLICATION FOR A HOUSING CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.

4 (G) “PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN” MEANS A SUBDIVISION OR SITE PLAN IN
5 WHICH THE APPLICANT PROPOSES TO DEVELOP A PROPERTY IN 2 OR MORE
6 INDIVIDUAL PHASES OVER A PERIOD OF TIME.

7 (H) “SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE APPLICATION” MEANS A HOUSING
8 DEVELOPMENT PROJECT APPLICATION THAT SATISFIES A SUBSTANTIAL MAJORITY
9 OF THE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, BUT MAY CONTAIN NONSUBSTANTIVE
10 ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR SIMILAR INCONSEQUENTIAL DEFICIENCIES.

11 SUBTITLE 2. LOCAL REGULATORY PROCEDURES.

12 12–201.

13 (A) (1) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
14 APPROVAL, CONDITIONAL APPROVAL, OR DENIAL OF A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
15 PROJECT APPLICATION BY A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION
16 SHALL BE GOVERNED ONLY BY THE DULY ADOPTED LAWS AND REGULATIONS IN
17 EFFECT AT THE TIME OF SUBMISSION OF A SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE
18 APPLICATION.

19 (2) (I) WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF A HOUSING
20 DEVELOPMENT PROJECT APPLICATION, A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE
21 COMMISSION SHALL MAKE A DETERMINATION AS TO WHETHER THE APPLICATION IS
22 A SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE APPLICATION.

23 (II) AFTER MAKING A DETERMINATION UNDER THIS
24 PARAGRAPH, THE LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION SHALL:

25 1. PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE APPLICANT OF THE
26 DETERMINATION AND THE DATE OF THE DETERMINATION; AND

27 2. IF THE LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE
28 COMMISSION HAS DETERMINED THAT THE APPLICATION IS NOT A SUBSTANTIALLY
29 COMPLETE APPLICATION, PROVIDE THE APPLICANT WITH A LIST OF DEFICIENCIES
30 AND A REASONABLE TIME FRAME FOR CURING THE DEFICIENCIES.

31 (3) IF A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE COMMISSION FAILS
32 TO NOTIFY AN APPLICANT OF ITS DETERMINATION REGARDING THE COMPLETENESS
33 OF A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION WITHIN 20 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 548 7

1 THE APPLICATION, THE APPLICATION IS DEEMED TO BE A SUBSTANTIALLY
2 COMPLETE APPLICATION FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION.

3 (4) (I) WHEN A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE
4 COMMISSION PROVIDES FOR THE APPROVAL OF A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
5 PROJECT IN MULTIPLE STAGES, THE DATE OF A COMPLETE OR SUBSTANTIALLY
6 COMPLETE APPLICATION SUBMISSION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
7 SHALL BE THE DATE OF THE FIRST COMPLETE OR SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE
8 APPLICATION SUBMISSION FOR ANY PROCESS THAT MAY CULMINATE IN THE FINAL
9 APPROVAL OF THE APPLICATION.

10 (II) A ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT, APPLICATION FOR
11 REZONING, OR OTHER LOCAL EQUIVALENT MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED AS A PROCESS
12 THAT MAY CULMINATE IN THE FINAL APPROVAL OF AN APPLICATION UNDER THIS
13 PARAGRAPH.

14 (B) AFTER A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT HAS RECEIVED ALL
15 REQUIRED APPROVALS, THE PROPONENT OF THE PROJECT SHALL HAVE A VESTED
16 RIGHT TO THAT AUTHORIZED USE AND DEVELOPMENT FOR THE LONGER OF:

17 (1) 5 YEARS; OR

18 (2) A PERIOD DETERMINED BY THE LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY
19 OR THE COMMISSION.

20 (C) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, EACH DISCRETE PHASE OF A
21 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT SUBJECT TO A PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN
22 SHALL BE CONSIDERED A DISCRETE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.

23 (D) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO:

24 (1) PREVENT THE EXPIRATION OF AN APPROVAL OF A HOUSING
25 DEVELOPMENT PROJECT APPLICATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OR
26 REGULATIONS GOVERNING A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE
27 COMMISSION; OR

28 (2) LIMIT THE ABILITY OF A LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY OR THE
29 COMMISSION TO:

30 (I) REQUIRE APPROVALS OR PERMITS FOR EACH PHASE OF A
31 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT SUBJECT TO A PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN IN
32 ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS AND REGULATIONS IN EFFECT AT THE TIME OF
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 548

1 SUBMISSION OF A SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE APPLICATION FOR EACH RESPECTIVE
2 PHASE;

3 (II) ENFORCE HEALTH AND SAFETY LAWS OR REGULATIONS
4 THAT ARE NECESSARY TO ADDRESS IMMEDIATE THREATS TO PUBLIC SAFETY;

5 (III) EXECUTE A DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
6 AGREEMENT UNDER TITLE 7, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

7 (IV) APPROVE A ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT, APPLICATION FOR
8 REZONING, OR OTHER LOCAL EQUIVALENT TO INCREASE THE DENSITY OF A
9 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT BEYOND THE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE AMOUNT AT
10 THE TIME OF COMPLETE OR SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE APPLICATION SUBMISSION
11 UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

12 (E) THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION APPLY TO A LOCAL REGULATORY
13 AUTHORITY AND THE COMMISSION ONLY TO THE EXTENT THAT THE REQUIREMENTS
14 DO NOT CONFLICT WITH OTHER STATE OR FEDERAL LAWS OR REGULATIONS.

15 SUBTITLE 3. SHORT TITLE.

16 12–301.

17 THIS TITLE MAY BE CITED AS THE MARYLAND HOUSING CERTAINTY ACT.

18 Article – Local Government

19 20–128.

20 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

22 (2) “DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAX” MEANS AN EXCISE TAX IMPOSED BY
23 A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY ON THE CONSTRUCTION OR IMPROVEMENT OF A
24 BUILDING.

25 (3) “DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE” MEANS A FEE IMPOSED BY A
26 COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY FOR THE PURPOSE OF FINANCING ANY OF THE CAPITAL
27 COSTS OF ADDITIONAL OR EXPANDED PUBLIC WORKS, IMPROVEMENTS, AND
28 FACILITIES REQUIRED TO ACCOMMODATE NEW CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT.

29 (4) “RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT” INCLUDES A MIXED–USE
30 DEVELOPMENT THAT INCLUDES RESIDENTIAL UNITS.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 548 9

1 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO:

2 (1) A COUNTY THAT:

3 (I) IS A CHARTER COUNTY THAT IMPOSES, BY LAW,
4 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES, SURCHARGES, OR DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAXES;

5 (II) IS A CODE COUNTY WITH PUBLIC LOCAL LAWS THAT
6 REQUIRE THE PAYMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES, SURCHARGES, OR
7 DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAXES; OR

8 (III) IS A COMMISSION COUNTY THAT:

9 1. HAS BEEN AUTHORIZED TO ENACT DEVELOPMENT
10 IMPACT FEES, SURCHARGES, OR DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAXES; AND

11 2. HAS ENACTED, BY LOCAL LAW, DEVELOPMENT
12 IMPACT FEES, SURCHARGES, OR DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAXES; AND

13 (2) A MUNICIPALITY THAT IMPOSES, BY LOCAL LAW, DEVELOPMENT
14 IMPACT FEES, SURCHARGES, OR DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAXES.

15 (C) ANY DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAX OR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
16 IMPOSED ON A RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT UNDER THE AUTHORITY
17 GRANTED IN THIS ARTICLE MAY NOT BE COLLECTED UNTIL AFTER:

18 (1) CONSTRUCTION OF THE RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT IS
19 COMPLETE; AND

20 (2) ALL REQUIREMENTS FOR A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY,
21 OCCUPANCY PERMIT, OR OTHER LOCAL EQUIVALENT FOR THE RESIDENTIAL REAL
22 ESTATE PROJECT HAVE BEEN MET.

23 (D) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY
24 THAT IMPOSES A DEVELOPMENT EXCISE TAX OR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ON A
25 RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT UNDER THE AUTHORITY GRANTED IN THIS
26 ARTICLE MAY DENY, WITHHOLD, OR REVOKE A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY,
27 OCCUPANCY PERMIT, OR OTHER LOCAL EQUIVALENT IF THE DEVELOPMENT EXCISE
28 TAX OR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE IS NOT PAID WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME
29 PERIOD SET BY THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9