START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 591

R5 6lr2000
CF SB 367

By: Delegates Beauchamp, Adams, Arentz, Hartman, Hutchinson, and
Sample–Hughes
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Wicomico County – Highway Pedestrian Safety Act

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person in Wicomico County from standing in a roadway,
4 shoulder, median divide, or intersection determined by the county or a municipal
5 corporation in the county to be inherently dangerous; prohibiting a police officer from
6 issuing a citation for a violation of this Act unless certain conditions are met; and
7 generally relating to prohibiting standing in inherently dangerous roadways,
8 shoulders, median dividers, or intersections in Wicomico County.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Transportation
11 Section 21–507.1
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Transportation

17 21–507.1.

18 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN WICOMICO COUNTY.

19 (B) IN THIS SECTION, “INHERENTLY DANGEROUS” MEANS POSING A
20 SERIOUS RISK OF INJURY TO A PEDESTRIAN, A DRIVER OR PASSENGER IN A VEHICLE,
21 OR OTHER PERSONS THAT CANNOT BE MITIGATED WITH THE EXERCISE OF
22 ORDINARY CARE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0591*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 591

1 (C) A PERSON MAY NOT STAND IN A ROADWAY, SHOULDER, MEDIAN
2 DIVIDER, OR INTERSECTION DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
3 CORPORATION IN THE COUNTY TO BE INHERENTLY DANGEROUS.

4 (D) A POLICE OFFICER MAY NOT ISSUE A CITATION FOR A VIOLATION OF
5 THIS SECTION UNLESS:

6 (1) THE INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ROADWAY, SHOULDER, MEDIAN
7 DIVIDER, OR INTERSECTION HAS APPROPRIATE SIGNS INSTALLED THAT NOTIFY THE
8 PUBLIC THAT A PERSON MAY NOT STAND IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION; AND

9 (2) THE SIGNS ARE INSTALLED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MANUAL
10 AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR A UNIFORM SYSTEM OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
11 ADOPTED BY THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION UNDER § 25–104 OF THIS
12 ARTICLE.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
14 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2