START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 500 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 500 
(Delegate Hartman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Precious Metal Bullion or Coins - Exemption 
 
   
This bill expands a State sales and use tax exemption for the sale of precious metal bullion 
or coins, by exempting all such sales from the State sales and use tax. Under current law, 
only sales exceeding $1,000 and occurring at the Baltimore Convention Center are exempt. 
The bill also alters the definition of precious metal bullion or coins for purposes of 
exemption eligibility. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by at least $2.5 million in FY 2027 and by 
at least $2.8 million in FY 2031. Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) revenues 
decrease by $0.3 million in FY 2027 and by $0.4 million in FY 2031. Expenditures are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Vendors that deal in the sale of precious 
metal bullion or coins may realize additional transactions as a result of the change. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 604 of 2025 (Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025) 
imposed the State sales and use tax on the sale of precious metal bullion or coins with a 
sales price greater than $1,000 – unless the sale is made at the Baltimore Convention Center 
– beginning in fiscal 2026. Prior to fiscal 2026, the State sales and use tax did not apply to 
the sale of precious metal bullion or coins that had a sales price greater than $1,000.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 500/ Page 2 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.1 billion in fiscal 2026 and $6.2 billion in fiscal 2027, 
according to the December 2025 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18.0% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties, and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County,  
York County, and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal 
hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to BMFF the following percentage of the remaining sales and use tax revenues: 
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 500/ Page 3 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Based on the fiscal note for Chapter 604, it is estimated that general fund 
revenues decrease by at least $2.5 million in fiscal 2027 and by at least $2.8 million in 
fiscal 2031. BMFF revenues decrease by $0.3 million in fiscal 2027 and by $0.4 million in 
fiscal 2031.  
 
Due to limited data available on the sale of gold and other precious metals in the State, the 
actual impact on State revenues depends on the number of transactions that occur each year 
and the value of these transactions. To the extent the volume of sales and the prices of 
various precious metals vary over time, State revenues will be affected accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 357 and SB 1017 of 2025, HB 1322 of 2024, and HB 1169 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 309 (Senator Jennings) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3