START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 528 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 528 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Retirement Income of Fire, Rescue, and 
Emergency Services Personnel - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the public safety employee retirement income subtraction 
modification to include specified retirement income attributable to service as a fire, rescue, 
or emergency services personnel of the District of Columbia. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s change with 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount annually 
beginning in FY 2027. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  As authorized by Chapters 3 and 4 of 2022, an individual who is at least 
55 years old on the last day of the tax year may claim a subtraction modification against 
the personal income tax for the first $15,000 of income received from an employee 
retirement system (within the meaning of the State’s standard pension exclusion, as 
discussed below) that is attributable to service as a public safety employee. “Public safety 
employee” means an individual who is a retired correctional officer; law enforcement 
officer; or fire, rescue, or emergency services personnel of the United States, the State, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 528/ Page 2 
a political subdivision of the State. “Emergency services personnel” means emergency 
medical technicians or paramedics. As discussed below, an individual who is at least 
age 65, is totally disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may qualify for and claim 
the standard State pension exclusion for retirement income that is not excluded under the 
public safety employee retirement income subtraction. 
 
Maryland Pension Exclusion  
 
Under Maryland’s standard pension exclusion, an individual who is at least age 65, who is 
totally disabled, or whose spouse is totally disabled may subtract certain taxable pension 
and retirement annuity income from federal adjusted gross income for purposes of 
determining Maryland adjusted gross income. The maximum value of the subtraction is 
indexed to the maximum annual benefit payable under the Social Security Act  
($41,200 for 2025) and is reduced by the amount of any benefit payments received under 
the Social Security Act or Railroad Retirement Act (“Social Security offset”).  
 
The pension exclusion is limited to income received from an “employee retirement 
system,” which is defined as a plan (1) established and maintained by an employer for the 
benefit of its employees and (2) qualified under § 401(a), § 403, or § 457(b) of the 
Internal Revenue Code. This includes defined benefit and defined contribution pension 
plans, 401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, and 457(b) plans. Public safety employee retirement 
income that is excluded under the public safety employee retirement income subtraction 
modification is not taken into account for purposes of the standard pension exclusion. 
 
Other Tax Relief for Retirees and Seniors 
 
Social Security benefits and benefits received under the federal Railroad Retirement Act 
are totally exempt from Maryland income tax, though they may be partly taxable for federal 
income tax purposes. Other income tax relief provided to seniors include an additional 
exemption of $1,000 for individuals age 65 and older (in addition to the regular personal 
exemption) as well as the senior tax credit for qualifying taxpayers age 65 and older. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease by an indeterminate amount annually beginning in fiscal 2027 due to increased 
subtraction modifications claimed against the personal income tax. It is unknown how 
many taxpayers may become eligible for the subtraction modification as a result of the bill; 
thus, a precise estimate of the bill’s effect on State and local revenues is not feasible at this 
time. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 528/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 271 (Senator Gile) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3