START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 542 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 542 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Earned Income Tax Credit - Individuals Without Qualifying Children - 
Eligibility 
 
 
This bill enhances the State’s earned income credit for individuals without a qualifying 
child by increasing the income threshold at which the credit begins to phase out. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $101.3 million in FY 2027; 
future years reflect projected growth in eligible tax credits. The Comptroller’s Office can 
implement the bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($101.3) 
($105.4) 
($109.6) 
($114.0) 
($117.9) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($101.3) 
($105.4) 
($109.6) 
($114.0) 
($117.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Montgomery County expenditures for its earned income credit supplement 
program may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Local revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Maryland’s earned income credit offers both refundable 
and nonrefundable credits against the State income tax and a nonrefundable credit against 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 542/ Page 2 
the local income tax for low- to moderate-income resident taxpayers. The State 
nonrefundable credit is generally equal to 50% of the amount of an eligible taxpayer’s 
federal earned income credit for the taxable year. A taxpayer for whom the State 
nonrefundable credit is less than the taxpayer’s State income tax liability may also be 
eligible to claim the State and local poverty level credits. 
 
Earned Income Credit for Individuals without Qualifying Children 
 
Legislation enacted in the 2018, 2021, and 2023 sessions expanded the State’s earned 
income credit for individuals without qualifying children. Specifically:   
 
 
Chapters 611 and 612 of 2018 allowed individuals without qualifying children to 
claim the State and local earned income credits without regard to the federal 
minimum age requirement for childless claimants; 
 
for tax years 2020 through 2022, Chapter 39 of 2021 increased the value of the State 
refundable credit for individuals without qualifying children to 100% of the 
individual’s federal earned income credit (minus any pre-credit State income tax 
liability), up to a maximum of $530; 
 
for tax years 2020 through 2022, Chapter 40 of 2021 generally expanded eligibility 
for Maryland’s earned income credit to taxpayers who would be eligible for the 
federal earned income credit but for specified identification requirements; and 
 
Chapters 3 and 4 of 2023 permanently extended beyond tax year 2022 the temporary 
expansions to the earned income credit enacted in 2021 and eliminated the 
$530 limit on the value of the State refundable credit for individuals without 
qualifying children. 
 
Thus, for tax year 2023 and beyond, an eligible individual without a qualifying child may 
claim a fully refundable State earned income credit in an amount equal to the allowable 
federal earned income credit, without limitation. The federal earned income credit for 
individuals without qualifying children is equal to 7.65% of an eligible taxpayer’s earned 
income up to the “earned income amount” ($8,680 for tax year 2026), minus 7.65% of the 
taxpayer’s earned income in excess of the “phaseout amount” ($10,860 for tax year 2026). 
The maximum value of the federal earned income credit for individuals without qualifying 
children is $664 for tax year 2026.  
 
Under the bill, the State’s earned income credit for individuals without qualifying children 
is further enhanced through an increase in the income threshold at which the credit begins 
to phase out. Specifically, beginning in tax year 2026, the value of the credit is calculated 
by substituting $19,160 (as adjusted for inflation, as specified) for the federal phaseout 
amount ($10,860 for tax year 2026). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 542/ Page 3 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $101.3 million in 
fiscal 2027 and $117.9 million in fiscal 2031 due to increases in the number and amount 
of credits claimed against the personal income tax. This estimate is based on an analysis of 
tax year 2022 claims for the existing State earned income credit for individuals without 
qualifying children. The Comptroller’s Office has previously advised the Department of 
Legislative Services that, in tax year 2022, approximately 164,000 returns qualified for the 
State earned income credit for individuals without qualifying children, and an additional 
171,000 returns may have been eligible for the credit were the changes contemplated in 
this bill in effect for tax year 2022. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Montgomery County expenditures for the Working Families Income 
Supplement Program, which provides a match to county residents based on the amount of 
the State earned income credit, may increase beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 668 and HB 708 of 2025 and HB 608 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 377 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3