START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 538

F2 6lr0984
HB 611/25 – APP CF 6lr1219

By: Delegate Wolek
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Institutions of Higher Education – Mandatory Disclosures for New and
3 Prospective Students
4 (Informed Enrollment Act)

5 FOR the purpose of requiring institutions of higher education in the State to provide certain
6 information to new and prospective students and display and share the information
7 in a certain manner; and generally relating to the provision of information to new
8 and prospective students at institutions of higher education.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 15–141
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 15–141.

18 (A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, ON OR BEFORE JULY 1,
19 2027, EACH INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE THAT ADMITS
20 FIRST–TIME UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS SHALL PROMINENTLY DISPLAY ON ITS
21 PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE PROSPECTIVE STUDENT WEBSITE A LINK TO THE U.S.
22 DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION COLLEGE SCORECARD WEBSITE.

23 (B) EACH INSTITUTION SHALL:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0538*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 538

1 (1) INCLUDE WITH THE LINK REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
2 THIS SECTION AN EXPLANATION OF THE RESOURCE AND THE INFORMATION IT
3 PROVIDES AS IT RELATES TO:

4 (I) COST OF ATTENDANCE;

5 (II) GRADUATION RATES;

6 (III) SALARY OUTCOMES; AND

7 (IV) DEBT OUTCOMES; AND

8 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, SHARE THE
9 INFORMATION AND WHERE TO FIND THE INFORMATION ON THE INSTITUTION’S
10 WEBSITES:

11 (I) DURING INCOMING STUDENT ORIENTATION AND
12 RECRUITMENT EVENTS;

13 (II) IN RELATED RECRUITMENT MATERIALS; AND

14 (III) REGULARLY WITH:

15 1. PROSPECTIVE STUDENTS AND THEIR GUARDIANS OR
16 PARENTS;

17 2. NEW INCOMING STUDENTS;

18 3. CURRENT STUDENTS;

19 4. ACADEMIC ADVISORS; AND

20 5. CAMPUS CAREER COUNSELORS.

21 (C) AS APPLICABLE, EACH INSTITUTION SHALL SHARE THE LINK AND
22 EXPLANATIONS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTIONS (A) AND (B) OF THIS SECTION ON:

23 (1) THE INSTITUTION’S SOCIAL MEDIA ACCOUNTS AT LEAST ONCE
24 EACH SEMESTER; AND

25 (2) THE WEBSITE FOR THE INSTITUTION’S CAMPUS CAREER CENTER.

26 (D) (1) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE INTERPRETED TO:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 538 3

1 (I) REQUIRE AN INSTITUTION TO DISCARD OR REPRINT ANY
2 EXISTING RELATED INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS; OR

3 (II) PROHIBIT AN INSTITUTION FROM USING EXISTING
4 RELATED INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS.

5 (2) ON OR AFTER JULY 1, 2027, ANY NEW RELATED INFORMATIONAL
6 MATERIALS SHALL BE DESIGNED, PRINTED, AND SHARED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
7 THIS SECTION.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

9 (a) Section 1 of this Act is contingent on the publication and administration of the
10 College Scorecard resource by the U.S. Department of Education or another federal agency.

11 (b) If the Secretary of Higher Education determines that the College Scorecard
12 resource has been terminated or discontinued by the U.S. Department of Education or
13 another federal agency, the Secretary shall notify the Department of Legislative Services
14 within 10 days of the date of that determination.

15 (c) If the Department of Legislative Services receives notice that the Secretary of
16 Higher Education has determined that the College Scorecard resource has been terminated
17 or discontinued, Section 1 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
18 Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3