START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 565

F3, G1 6lr2339

By: Delegate J. Long
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Education – Elections – District Voting
3 (Fair Representation Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring an election of members of certain county boards of education
5 to represent a specific district to be decided by a plurality of the votes cast within
6 that district; and generally relating to county boards of education elections.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 3–301(a), 3–4A–01(a), 3–601(b), 3–901(b), 3–10A–01(a) and (c)(1), and
10 3–1101(e)(1)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 3–301(d), 3–4A–01(b), 3–601(d)(1), 3–901(f)(2), 3–10A–01(b), and
16 3–1101(e)(2)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Education

22 3–301.

23 (a) The Calvert County Board consists of five voting members and one nonvoting
24 student member.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0565*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 565

1 (d) Of the five voting members of the county board:

2 (1) One shall be elected from each of the three county commissioner
3 districts BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST WITHIN THAT DISTRICT; and

4 (2) Two shall be elected from the county at large.

5 3–4A–01.

6 (a) The Cecil County Board consists of six members as follows:

7 (1) One voting member elected from each of the five commissioner districts;
8 and

9 (2) One nonvoting student member.

10 (b) The five voting members of the county board shall be elected [at]:

11 (1) AT a general election as required by subsection (c) of this section; AND

12 (2) BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST WITHIN EACH RESPECTIVE
13 COMMISSIONER DISTRICT.

14 3–601.

15 (b) The Garrett County Board consists of:

16 (1) One elected member from each county commissioner district;

17 (2) Two elected members from the county at large; and

18 (3) One nonvoting student member.

19 (d) (1) Elected members of the board shall be elected [at]:

20 (I) AT a general election as required by subsection (e) of this section;
21 AND

22 (II) FOR THE MEMBERS ELECTED FROM EACH COUNTY
23 COMMISSIONER DISTRICT, BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST WITHIN THAT
24 COMMISSIONER DISTRICT.

25 3–901.

26 (b) The Montgomery County Board consists of:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 565 3

1 (1) 5 elected members, each of whom resides in a different board of
2 education district;

3 (2) 2 elected members who may reside anywhere in the county; and

4 (3) 1 student member.

5 (f) (2) (I) [Elected] THE ELECTED members of the county board WHO
6 MAY RESIDE ANYWHERE IN THE COUNTY shall be elected by the voters of the entire
7 county.

8 (II) THE ELECTED MEMBERS FROM EACH OF THE BOARD OF
9 EDUCATION DISTRICTS SHALL BE ELECTED BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST
10 WITHIN THAT BOARD OF EDUCATION DISTRICT.

11 3–10A–01.

12 (a) The Queen Anne’s County Board consists of:

13 (1) Five voting, nonpartisan, elected members; and

14 (2) One nonvoting student representative from each public high school in
15 the county.

16 (b) The five voting, nonpartisan, elected members shall be elected [by the voters
17 of the entire county] at a general election in accordance with subsection (c) of this section
18 AS FOLLOWS:

19 (1) FOR THE MEMBER ELECTED FROM THE COUNTY AT LARGE, BY
20 THE VOTERS OF THE ENTIRE COUNTY; AND

21 (2) FOR THE MEMBERS ELECTED FROM EACH OF THE FOUR COUNTY
22 COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS, BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST WITHIN THAT
23 DISTRICT.

24 (c) (1) (i) One voting member shall reside in and be elected from each of
25 the four county commissioner districts; and

26 (ii) One member shall reside in the county and be elected from the
27 county at large.

28 3–1101.

29 (e) (1) The St. Mary’s County Board consists of five voting members who shall
30 be elected as follows:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 565

1 (i) One member shall be elected from the county at large; and

2 (ii) One member shall be elected from each of the four commissioner
3 districts.

4 (2) Voting members of the county board shall be elected:

5 (i) At a general election as required by this section; and

6 (ii) 1. [On] FOR THE MEMBER ELECTED FROM THE COUNTY
7 AT LARGE, ON a general countywide ticket; AND

8 2. FOR THE MEMBERS ELECTED FROM EACH OF THE
9 FOUR COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS, BY A PLURALITY OF THE VOTES CAST WITHIN
10 THAT DISTRICT.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act:

12 (1) shall be applicable to the elections for county boards of education in
13 which members are elected from individual districts held in 2028 and all subsequent
14 elections; and

15 (2) may not be construed to affect the tenure of an elected member of a
16 county board of education who is elected from an individual district serving in office before
17 the beginning of the next regular full term of office that begins after the effective date of
18 this Act.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4