START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 586

F5 6lr0832
CF 6lr2025

By: Delegates Behler, Ebersole, Forbes, D. Jones, Pruski, Ruth, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 County Boards of Library Trustees – Membership – Student Member

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing a county board of library trustees to provide for the
4 selection of a student member of the board; establishing the qualifications, term of
5 office, and voting rights of the student member of a county board of library trustees,
6 if selected; and generally relating to the membership of county boards of library
7 trustees.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 23–403 and 23–404
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Education

16 23–403.

17 (a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection AND
18 SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION, each board of library trustees consists of seven
19 APPOINTED members appointed by the county governing body from nominees submitted
20 by the board of library trustees.

21 (2) A board that existed before 1945 under a corporate charter may
22 continue as constituted if:

23 (i) It has at least seven APPOINTED members;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0586*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 586

1 (ii) The APPOINTED members are chosen on the basis of character,
2 ability, and demonstrated interest in library matters; and

3 (iii) The APPOINTED members meet the qualifications required
4 under subsection (b) of this section.

5 (3) In Harford County, the Board of Trustees consists of at least 7
6 APPOINTED members, but not more than 11 APPOINTED members, appointed by the
7 county governing body from nominees submitted by the Board of Trustees.

8 (b) The APPOINTED members of the board shall be:

9 (1) Representative of the area the library serves; and

10 (2) Residents of the county that the library serves.

11 (c) (1) (I) Except as provided in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, [a]
12 AN APPOINTED member of a board serves for a term of 5 years and until a successor is
13 appointed and qualifies.

14 (II) [These] THE terms OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS are
15 staggered as required by the terms of the APPOINTED members serving on the board as of
16 July 1, 1978.

17 (2) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, [a] AN
18 APPOINTED member may be reappointed but may not serve more than two consecutive
19 terms.

20 (3) [A] AN APPOINTED member appointed to fill a vacancy in an
21 unexpired term:

22 (i) Serves only for the remainder of that term and until a successor
23 is appointed and qualifies; and

24 (ii) Is eligible for appointment to serve two additional consecutive
25 terms.

26 (4) [A] AN APPOINTED member of the Board of the Prince George’s
27 County Memorial Library System may serve an unlimited number of consecutive terms of
28 office.

29 (d) In Charles County, [a] AN APPOINTED member of the Board serves for a term
30 of 4 years.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 586 3

1 (e) In Harford County, [a] AN APPOINTED member of the Board serves for a term
2 of 5 years, beginning on July 1, and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

3 (f) Each member of a board serves without compensation.

4 (G) (1) A BOARD MAY PROVIDE FOR THE SELECTION OF A STUDENT
5 MEMBER OF THE BOARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

6 (2) A STUDENT MEMBER SHALL BE SELECTED BY A PROCESS
7 ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD.

8 (3) THE STUDENT MEMBER OF A BOARD SHALL:

9 (I) BE A JUNIOR OR SENIOR YEAR STUDENT ENROLLED IN A
10 PUBLIC OR NONPUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY THAT THE LIBRARY SERVES,
11 WHO IS OF GOOD CHARACTER AND IS IN GOOD STANDING IN THE STUDENT’S HIGH
12 SCHOOL;

13 (II) BE SELECTED IN THE STUDENT’S SOPHOMORE OR JUNIOR
14 YEAR BY A METHOD ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD;

15 (III) HAVE AN INTEREST IN LIBRARY MATTERS; AND

16 (IV) SERVE A TERM OF 1 YEAR.

17 (4) A STUDENT MEMBER SELECTED TO FILL A VACANCY IN AN
18 UNEXPIRED TERM:

19 (I) SERVES ONLY FOR THE REMAINDER OF THAT TERM AND
20 UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS SELECTED AND QUALIFIES; AND

21 (II) IS ELIGIBLE FOR SELECTION FOR A FULL TERM IF THE
22 STUDENT MEETS THE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
23 SUBSECTION.

24 (5) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
25 STUDENT MEMBER OF A BOARD MAY VOTE ON ALL POLICY MATTERS BEFORE THE
26 BOARD.

27 (II) A BOARD MAY ADOPT A POLICY OR BYLAW TO AUTHORIZE A
28 STUDENT MEMBER TO VOTE ON ADDITIONAL NONPOLICY MATTERS BEFORE THE
29 BOARD.

30 23–404.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 586

1 (a) Each year, each board of library trustees:

2 (1) Shall elect one of its APPOINTED members as its [chairman] CHAIR;
3 and

4 (2) May elect any other officer it requires FROM AMONG THE APPOINTED
5 MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.

6 (b) The treasurer of each board of library trustees shall be bonded adequately.

7 (c) Each board of library trustees may determine the time and place of its
8 meetings and may adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. However:

9 (1) Each board shall meet at least once every 3 months;

10 (2) Any final action of a board shall be taken at a public meeting; and

11 (3) The minutes of board meetings shall be open to the public.

12 (d) (1) Any member of a board of library trustees who fails to attend at least
13 half of the scheduled meetings of the board during any calendar year shall be considered to
14 have resigned from the board.

15 (2) The [chairman] CHAIR of the board of library trustees shall report the
16 member’s name and nonattendance to the county governing body by January 15 of the
17 following year.

18 (3) The county governing body may reject the resignation if the member
19 explains his nonattendance satisfactorily.

20 (4) The resignation is effective from the date of the final review by the
21 county governing body, which shall be within 10 days after it receives the report from the
22 [chairman] CHAIR of the board of library trustees. The county governing body shall fill any
23 resulting vacancy as provided in § 23–403 of this subtitle.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
25 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4