START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 507 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 507 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Qualifying Nonprofit Organizations - Incarcerated Individual Training and 
Reentry Grant Fund - Extension 
 
 
This bill extends by one year (through fiscal 2029) the authorization for the Governor to 
include an appropriation of $1.0 million in the annual budget bill to be used solely as an 
operating grant to qualifying nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing training 
to formerly incarcerated individuals in automotive repair. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although funding is discretionary, this analysis assumes that general fund 
expenditures increase by $1.0 million in FY 2029 to support the operating grants. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
1,000,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($1,000,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 892 of 2024 authorizes the Governor, for fiscal 2026 through 2028, 
to include each year in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million to be used 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 507/ Page 2 
solely as an operating grant to qualifying nonprofit organizations for the purpose of 
providing training to formerly incarcerated individuals in automotive repair. The 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) must administer the grant 
funds in accordance with existing provisions related to GOCPP grant programs. A 
qualifying nonprofit organization that receives a grant pursuant to the bill must submit, for 
each fiscal year, specified information to the Executive Director of GOCPP. The 
authorization terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
An eligible qualifying nonprofit organization that receives a grant from the fund must 
submit, for each fiscal year, the following information to the Executive Director of 
GOCPP:  (1) proof of the expenditure of the grant funds and the purposes for which the 
funds were expended; (2) the total number of incarcerated and formerly incarcerated 
individuals who received services; and (3) any related outcome-based performance 
measures. 
 
A nonprofit organization that receives funding from the fund must also comply with any 
data sharing and reporting requirements established by GOCPP as a condition of receiving 
funding.  
 
“Qualifying nonprofit organization” means an organization that (1) provides training and 
reentry assistance for incarcerated and formerly incarcerated individuals; (2) provides 
training for at least 50 incarcerated or formerly incarcerated individuals per year in 
automotive repair; (3) is able to provide an automotive repair certificate from a nationally 
recognized automotive repair organization to eligible participants; and (4) demonstrates a 
minimum of a 50% employment placement rate for eligible participants in a paid 
automotive repair job. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2025 budget included $500,000 in general funds for 
GOCPP for the purpose of providing an operating grant to Vehicles for Change Inc., and 
the fiscal 2026 budget includes $150,000 for such grants; however, no funding for the 
grants is included in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced. Although the bill does not 
mandate funding in fiscal 2029 to support the operating grants, the bill explicitly extends 
by one year – through fiscal 2029 – the authorization for the Governor to include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million for the operating grants. Although 
funding for such grants is discretionary, consistent with the bill’s intent, this analysis 
assumes that, in fiscal 2029, $1.0 million in general funds is provided to support the 
operating grants. Actual expenditures will vary with the amount of any discretionary 
funding included in the budget bill and ultimately passed by the General Assembly. 
 
GOCPP can implement the bill with existing staff. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 507/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 305 (Senators Hettleman and McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3