START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 581

G1 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr2032

By: Delegates R. Long and Mangione
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore County – Absentee Ballots – Signature Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the Baltimore County Board of Elections from removing an
4 absentee ballot from a return envelope or ballot/return envelope or counting the
5 ballot unless the return envelope or ballot/return envelope is signed by the voter and,
6 except under certain circumstances, a witness and the Board verifies the voter’s
7 signature; and generally relating to absentee ballots in Baltimore County.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Election Law
10 Section 9–303 and 9–310(a)(5) and (c)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Election Law
15 Section 9–310.1
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Election Law

21 9–303.

22 (a) The State Board shall establish guidelines for the administration of absentee
23 voting by the local boards.

24 (b) The guidelines shall provide for:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0581*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 581

1 (1) the application process;

2 (2) late application for absentee ballots;

3 (3) ballot security, including storage of returned ballots;

4 (4) determining timeliness of receipt of applications and ballots, including
5 applications and ballots for overseas voters;

6 (5) the canvass process;

7 (6) notice of the canvass to candidates, political parties, campaign
8 organizations, news media, and the general public;

9 (7) observers of the process;

10 (8) review of voted ballots and envelopes for compliance with the law and
11 for machine tabulation acceptability;

12 (9) standards for disallowance of ballots during the canvass;

13 (10) storage and retention of ballots following canvass and certification;
14 [and]

15 (11) the permanent absentee ballot list; AND

16 (12) IN BALTIMORE COUNTY, VERIFICATION OF SIGNATURES ON
17 ABSENTEE BALLOT ENVELOPES.

18 (c) The State Board shall:

19 (1) in consultation with the local boards, assess the guidelines before each
20 primary election; and

21 (2) revise the guidelines if indicated.

22 9–310.

23 (a) (5) When voted and returned to the local board, an absentee ballot shall be
24 enclosed in a ballot envelope or ballot/return envelope, on which has been printed [an oath]
25 THE APPLICABLE OATHS prescribed by the State Board.

26 (c) If an absentee ballot is sent by the Internet or facsimile transmission, the local
27 board shall provide the voter with an envelope template, the [oath] APPLICABLE OATHS
28 prescribed by the State Board, and instructions for marking and returning the absentee
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 581 3

1 ballot.

2 9–310.1.

3 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED
4 IN 10 U.S.C. § 101.

5 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN BALTIMORE COUNTY.

6 (C) THE LOCAL BOARD MAY NOT REMOVE AN ABSENTEE BALLOT FROM THE
7 RETURN ENVELOPE OR BALLOT/RETURN ENVELOPE OR COUNT THE BALLOT
8 UNLESS:

9 (1) THE RETURN ENVELOPE OR BALLOT/RETURN ENVELOPE IS
10 SIGNED BY:

11 (I) THE VOTER TO WHOM THE BALLOT WAS ISSUED; AND

12 (II) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION,
13 A WITNESS OTHER THAN THE VOTER TO WHOM THE BALLOT WAS ISSUED; AND

14 (2) THE VOTER’S SIGNATURE IS VERIFIED AS PROVIDED IN
15 SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

16 (D) THE WITNESS SIGNATURE REQUIREMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1)(II)
17 OF THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN ABSENTEE BALLOT THAT IS VOTED AND
18 RETURNED BY:

19 (1) AN ACTIVE DUTY MEMBER OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES WHO IS
20 SERVING OVERSEAS; OR

21 (2) THE SPOUSE OR DEPENDENT OF AN ACTIVE DUTY MEMBER OF THE
22 UNIFORMED SERVICES WHO IS SERVING OVERSEAS IF THE SPOUSE OR DEPENDENT
23 LIVES OVERSEAS.

24 (E) THE LOCAL BOARD SHALL VERIFY THE SIGNATURE OF THE VOTER ON
25 THE RETURN ENVELOPE OR BALLOT/RETURN ENVELOPE BY COMPARING THE
26 SIGNATURE WITH THE VOTER’S REGISTRATION RECORD IN ACCORDANCE WITH
27 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE STATE BOARD.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
29 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
30 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 581

1 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
2 enacted.
END OF PAGE 4