START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 574

F3, O4, D2 6lr1028
HB 359/25 – W&M CF 6lr1475

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support Program and Fee in Child
3 Support Cases – Established

4 PG 504–26

5 FOR the purpose of establishing the Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support
6 Program to provide certain students attending a public high school in Prince
7 George’s County with certain assistance relating to child care and parenting;
8 requiring the Circuit Court for Prince George’s County to collect a certain fee in
9 certain cases pertaining to child support; requiring the revenue generated from the
10 fee to be remitted to the Prince George’s County Board of Education and used to
11 support the Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support Program in the county;
12 and generally relating to the Prince George’s County Teen Pregnancy Support
13 Program.

14 BY adding to
15 Article – Education
16 Section 3–1009
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – Family Law
21 Section 12–103.1
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Education

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0574*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 574

1 3–1009.

2 (A) THERE IS A PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY TEEN PREGNANCY SUPPORT
3 PROGRAM.

4 (B) THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD SHALL ASSIST STUDENTS WHO
5 ARE EXPECTING TO BECOME, OR HAVE BECOME, A PARENT TO A CHILD WHILE
6 ATTENDING A PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY BY PROVIDING TO STUDENTS:

7 (1) CASH VOUCHERS TO ASSIST IN PAYING FOR CHILD CARE
8 EXPENSES;

9 (2) PARENTING EDUCATION; AND

10 (3) OTHER RESOURCES THAT SUPPORT FIRST–TIME PARENTS.

11 (C) THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD SHALL:

12 (1) ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR PROVIDING THE SUPPORT
13 DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION; AND

14 (2) USE THE REVENUE FROM THE FEES COLLECTED AND REMITTED
15 UNDER § 12–103.1 OF THE FAMILY LAW ARTICLE TO FUND THE SUPPORT
16 DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

17 Article – Family Law

18 12–103.1.

19 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

20 (B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE COURT IN
21 PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY SHALL COLLECT A FEE OF $100 IN ANY CASE IN WHICH
22 AN INDIVIDUAL:

23 (1) APPLIES FOR A DECREE OR MODIFICATION OF A DECREE OF CHILD
24 SUPPORT; OR

25 (2) FILES ANY FORM OF PROCEEDING TO RECOVER ARREARAGES OF
26 OR TO ENFORCE A DECREE OF CHILD SUPPORT.

27 (C) THE REVENUE GENERATED FROM THE FEES COLLECTED UNDER THIS
28 SECTION SHALL BE REMITTED QUARTERLY TO THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 574 3

1 BOARD OF EDUCATION AND USED TO SUPPORT THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
2 TEEN PREGNANCY SUPPORT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 3–1009 OF THE
3 EDUCATION ARTICLE.

4 (D) THE FEE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION IS IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER
5 FEES OR COSTS IMPOSED UNDER LAW, REGULATION, OR RULE.

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
7 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3