START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 558

A2 6lr1045

By: Prince George’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Wine Festival Licenses

3 PG 316–26

4 FOR the purpose of repealing the restriction on the number of wine festival licenses that
5 the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County may issue annually;
6 and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Prince George’s County.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
9 Section 26–102
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
14 Section 26–1304
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20 26–102.

21 This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

22 26–1304.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0558*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 558

1 (a) [In this section, “Festival” means the Prince George’s County Wine Festival.

2 (b) (1)] There is a [Prince George’s County Wine Festival license] WINE
3 FESTIVAL LICENSE.

4 [(2) The Board may issue one license each year.]

5 [(c)] (B) The Board may issue the license to a holder of a retail license, Class 3
6 winery license, or Class 4 limited winery license.

7 [(d)] (C) The license authorizes the license holder to display and sell wine that
8 is:

9 (1) manufactured and processed in any state; and

10 (2) distributed in the State when the license application is filed.

11 [(e)] (D) A license holder shall display and sell wine:

12 (1) for on– and off–premises consumption; and

13 (2) during the hours and days designated for the [Festival] WINE
14 FESTIVAL.

15 [(f)] (E) (1) The Board shall:

16 (i) choose [a] THE location for the [Festival] WINE FESTIVAL that:

17 1. is not in the 24th Legislative District; and

18 2. is not already licensed; and

19 (ii) ensure that the primary focus of the [Festival] WINE FESTIVAL
20 is the promotion of Maryland wine.

21 (2) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, each year the Board may
22 choose [1 weekend] THE WEEKENDS, Friday through Sunday, inclusive, for the [Festival]
23 WINE FESTIVALS.

24 (3) The [weekend] WEEKENDS chosen for [the Festival] WINE FESTIVALS
25 may not:

26 (i) be within 14 days before or after the dates chosen for the
27 Maryland Wine Festival in Carroll County; or

28 (ii) conflict with the dates chosen for the:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 558 3

1 1. Anne Arundel County Beer and Wine Festival;

2 2. Calvert County Wine Festival;

3 3. Charles County Beer and Wine Festival; or

4 4. Howard County Wine Festival.

5 [(g)] (F) The license holder may hold another license of a different class or
6 nature.

7 [(h)] (G) Wine displayed and sold shall be:

8 (1) invoiced to the license holder by a licensed wholesaler, Class 3 winery,
9 or Class 4 limited winery; and

10 (2) delivered to the [Festival] WINE FESTIVAL from the licensed premises
11 of the wholesaler, Class 3 winery, or Class 4 limited winery.

12 [(i)] (H) A holder of a wholesale, Class 3 winery, or Class 4 limited winery
13 license may enter into an agreement with the license holder to:

14 (1) deliver wine not earlier than 2 days before the effective date of the
15 license; and

16 (2) accept returns not later than 2 days after the expiration date of the
17 license.

18 [(j)] (I) The Board may set the license fee.

19 [(k)] (J) The Board shall adopt regulations to carry out this section.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3