START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 524

P1 6lr1055

By: Delegates Mireku–North, Acevero, Boafo, Bouchat, Boyce, Coley, Edelson,
Fair, Feldmark, Fraser–Hidalgo, Holmes, Kaiser, Kaufman, Lewis, Lopez,
Moreno, Nkongolo, Pasteur, Ruff, Simmons, Stinnett, Taveras, Taylor,
Wims, Wolek, and Woods
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Provisions – Commemorative Months – African Heritage Month

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor annually to proclaim a certain month as African
4 Heritage Month; requiring the proclamation to urge certain organizations to observe
5 the month with certain programs and activities; and generally relating to African
6 Heritage Month.

7 BY renumbering
8 Article – General Provisions
9 Section 7–505 through 7–507
10 to be Section 7–506 through 7–508, respectively
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – General Provisions
15 Section 7–505
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That Section(s) 7–505 through 7–507 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code
20 of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–506 through 7–508, respectively.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
22 as follows:

23 Article – General Provisions

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0524*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 524

1 7–505.

2 (A) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF
3 SEPTEMBER AS AFRICAN HERITAGE MONTH IN RECOGNITION OF THE
4 CONTRIBUTIONS THAT AFRICAN AMERICANS HAVE MADE TO THE STATE.

5 (B) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL URGE EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL
6 ORGANIZATIONS TO OBSERVE AFRICAN HERITAGE MONTH WITH APPROPRIATE
7 PROGRAMS, CEREMONIES, AND ACTIVITIES.

8 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2