START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 553

E4 6lr2321
CF SB 286

By: Delegates Ruff, Amprey, Acevero, Allen, Behler, Boyce, Conaway, Fair, Hill,
Ivey, Lewis, McCaskill, Palakovich Carr, Rogers, Ross, Stewart, Taveras,
Taylor, Toles, Williams, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Elevator Inspection Certificates – Searchable Database

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to post a
4 user–friendly, searchable database of active elevator inspection certificates on the
5 Maryland Department of Labor’s website; requiring the database to allow certain
6 searches; and generally relating to elevator inspection certificates.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Public Safety
9 Section 12–811
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Public Safety

15 12–811.

16 (a) If an inspection discloses that an elevator unit complies with the Safety Code
17 and other regulations adopted by the Commissioner, the Commissioner shall issue a
18 certificate to the owner or lessee of the elevator unit.

19 (b) The certificate shall be posted conspicuously in or on the elevator unit.

20 (c) While a certificate is in effect, it authorizes the holder to operate the elevator
21 unit in a building, structure, or place of employment in the State.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0553*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 553

1 (D) (1) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL POST ON THE MARYLAND
2 DEPARTMENT OF LABOR’S WEBSITE A USER–FRIENDLY, SEARCHABLE DATABASE OF
3 ACTIVE CERTIFICATES ISSUED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

4 (2) THE DATABASE DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
5 SUBSECTION SHALL ALLOW A USER TO SEARCH ACTIVE CERTIFICATES BY:

6 (I) STREET ADDRESS;

7 (II) CITY; AND

8 (III) COUNTY.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
10 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2