START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 523 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 523 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Residential Foreclosures - Commencement Restrictions 
 
 
This bill requires that an order to docket (OTD) or a complaint seeking to foreclose a 
mortgage or deed of trust on residential property must be filed within 10 years after the 
date the default is alleged to have occurred. Additionally, if a secured party commences 
foreclosure on acquired debt that was in default for 5 or more years prior to the acquisition, 
the secured party must present the documents generally required for a debt buyer or 
collector under § 5‐1203(b) of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article with the OTD 
or complaint. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Initiation of the Foreclosure Process in Maryland – Generally  
 
Generally, to foreclose on residential property in Maryland, the secured party must 
first send a notice of intent to foreclose (NOI) to the mortgagor or grantor and the record 
owner, then file and serve an OTD or a complaint to foreclose. (Whether an OTD or a 
complaint to foreclose is appropriate is based on the lien instrument held by the secured 
party.) An OTD or a complaint to foreclose a mortgage or deed of trust on residential 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 523/ Page 2 
property must be accompanied by certain documents, including among others, (1) the 
original or a certified copy of the mortgage or deed of trust; (2) if applicable, a copy of the 
NOI; and (3) a copy of the debt instrument accompanied by an affidavit certifying 
ownership of the debt instrument.  
 
For more information regarding the State’s foreclosure process, see the Appendix – 
Foreclosure Process. 
 
Consumer Debt Collection – Documentation  
 
Generally, under § 5‐1203 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, a debt buyer or 
a collector on behalf of a debt buyer must introduce certain evidence in a consumer debt 
collection action. A debt buyer or a collector acting on behalf of a debt buyer may generally 
not initiate a consumer debt collection action unless the debt buyer or collector possesses 
specified documents pertaining to proof of the existence of the debt or account, proof of 
terms and conditions of the debt, proof of the plaintiff’s ownership of the consumer debt, 
identification and nature of the debt or account, future services contract information, 
account charge-off information, information for debts and accounts not charged off, and 
collection agency licensing information. Statute includes additional specifications and 
exceptions for these items.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses holding a mortgage impacted by the bill’s 
requirements are subject to additional procedural requirements in order to utilize the 
foreclosure process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 682 and HB 769 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 353 (Senator Charles) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 523/ Page 3 
Appendix – Foreclosure Process 
 
 
Beginning with the financial downturn in 2007, Maryland saw a significant increase in the 
number of foreclosure actions. Foreclosure activity likely peaked in 2010, when the 
number of foreclosure events exceeded 50,000. Due to a multitude of factors, including 
legislation addressing the State’s foreclosure mediation process, consumer outreach 
efforts, and enhanced mortgage industry regulation and enforcement surrounding many 
banks’ and mortgage companies’ foreclosure practices, the number of foreclosure events 
decreased significantly to 16,049 in 2011. However, these changes also resulted in the 
general lengthening of the foreclosure process, leaving many housing units in limbo for 
years at a time. The most recent statewide data regarding foreclosures can be found on the 
online database maintained by the Maryland Department of Labor. 
 
Foreclosure Process in Maryland 
 
Generally, to foreclose on residential property in Maryland, the secured party must first 
send a notice of intent to foreclose (NOI) to the mortgagor or grantor and the record owner, 
then file and serve an order to docket (OTD) or a complaint to foreclose. A copy of the 
NOI must be sent to the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, and if the property is 
owner-occupied, the NOI must be accompanied by a loss mitigation application. Whether 
the filing of an OTD, or a complaint to foreclose, is appropriate depends on the  
lien instrument held by the secured party. An action to foreclose a mortgage or deed of 
trust may not be filed until the later of (1) 90 days (or 120 days if the loan is “federally 
related”) after a default in a condition on which the mortgage or deed of trust specifies that 
a sale may be made or (2) 45 days after an NOI is sent. An OTD or complaint to foreclose 
must be filed with the circuit court, and a copy must be served on the mortgagor or grantor. 
An OTD or a complaint to foreclose must include, if applicable, the license number of both 
the mortgage originator and the mortgage lender. The OTD or complaint to foreclose must 
also contain an affidavit stating the date and nature of the default and, if applicable, that 
the NOI was sent and that the contents of the NOI were accurate at the time it was sent. 
 
A secured party may petition the circuit court for leave to immediately commence an action 
to foreclose the mortgage or deed of trust if: 
 
 
the loan secured by the mortgage or deed of trust was obtained by fraud or 
deception; 
 
no payments have ever been made on the loan secured by the mortgage or deed of 
trust; 
 
the property subject to the mortgage or deed of trust has been destroyed; 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 523/ Page 4 
 
the default occurred after the stay has been lifted in a bankruptcy proceeding; or 
 
the property is found by a court to be vacant and abandoned. 
 
The court may rule on the petition with or without a hearing. If the petition is granted, the 
action may be filed at any time after a default in a condition on which the mortgage or deed 
of trust provides that a sale may be made, and the secured party is not required to send a 
written NOI. 
 
Prerequisites for Foreclosure Sales 
 
Generally, if the residential property is not owner-occupied, a foreclosure sale may not 
occur until at least 45 days after specified notice is given. If the residential property is 
owner-occupied, and foreclosure mediation is not held, a foreclosure sale may not occur 
until the later of (1) at least 45 days after providing specified notice that includes a final 
loss mitigation affidavit or (2) at least 30 days after a final loss mitigation affidavit is 
mailed. Finally, if the residential property is owner-occupied residential property and 
postfile mediation is requested, a foreclosure sale may not occur until at least 15 days after 
the date the postfile mediation is held or, if no postfile mediation is held, the date the Office 
of Administrative Hearings (OAH) files its report with the court. 
 
A foreclosure mediation may be extended for good cause by OAH for up to 30 days, unless 
all parties agree to a longer extension. Additionally, both parties have an obligation to 
provide instructions regarding documents and information to each other and the mediator. 
Any motion to stay a foreclosure sale must come within 15 days of the date the postfile 
mediation is held. Notice of the sale of a foreclosed property must be sent 10 days before 
the date of sale. 
 
Generally, notice of the time, place, and terms of a foreclosure sale must be published in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the county where the action is pending at least once a 
week for three successive weeks. The first publication of the notice must be more than 
15 days before the sale, and the last publication must be within one week of the sale. 
 
Curing Defaults 
 
The mortgagor or grantor of residential property has the right to cure a default and reinstate 
the loan at any time up to one business day before a foreclosure sale by paying all past‑due 
payments, penalties, and fees. Upon request, and within a reasonable time, the secured 
party or the secured party’s authorized agent must notify the mortgagor or grantor or his or 
her attorney of the amount necessary to cure the default and reinstate the loan as well as 
provide instructions for delivering the payment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 523/ Page 5 
Expedited Foreclosure Process for Vacant and Abandoned Property 
 
Statutory provisions also set forth an expedited foreclosure process for vacant and 
abandoned property. Generally, if the residential property is found to be vacant and 
abandoned and the court grants the petition for leave to immediately begin an action to 
foreclose a mortgage or deed of trust, specified mediation and other preliminary foreclosure 
process requirements do not apply. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5