START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 555

F2 6lr2469
CF SB 364

By: The Speaker (By Request – Department of Legislative Services – Code
Revision)
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Code Revision – Higher Education – Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance
3 Repayment Program

4 FOR the purpose of revising, restating, and recodifying the laws of this State relating to
5 the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program; and generally relating
6 to laws relating to the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program.

7 BY renumbering
8 Article – Education
9 Section 18–1503 through 18–1506
10 to be Section 18–1506 through 18–1509, respectively
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 18–1502
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That Section(s) 18–1503 through 18–1506 of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of
20 Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 18–1506 through 18–1509, respectively.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
22 as follows:

23 Article – Education

24 18–1502.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0555*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 555

1 (a) There is a program of loan assistance repayment known as the Janet L.
2 Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program in the State.

3 (B) THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS ARE ELIGIBLE FOR FINANCIAL
4 ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM:

5 (1) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO RECEIVES A GRADUATE, PROFESSIONAL, OR
6 UNDERGRADUATE DEGREE FROM:

7 (I) A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY IN THE STATE OF MARYLAND;

8 (II) A SCHOOL OF LAW IN THE STATE OF MARYLAND; OR

9 (III) FOR A VETERINARY PRACTITIONER OR VETERINARY
10 TECHNICIAN, AN ACCREDITED VETERINARY COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY;

11 (2) A LICENSED CLINICAL ALCOHOL AND DRUG COUNSELOR, A
12 LICENSED CLINICAL MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY COUNSELOR, OR A LICENSED
13 CLINICAL PROFESSIONAL COUNSELOR WHO IS ELIGIBLE UNDER § 18–1503 OF THIS
14 SUBTITLE; OR

15 (3) AN EDUCATION–RELATED PROFESSIONAL WHO QUALIFIES
16 UNDER § 18–1504 OF THIS SUBTITLE WHO:

17 (I) RECEIVES A RESIDENT TEACHER LICENSE FROM THE
18 DEPARTMENT AFTER COMPLETING AN ALTERNATIVE TEACHING PREPARATION
19 PROGRAM APPROVED BY THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT;

20 (II) FOR A MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL, RECEIVES A
21 GRADUATE, PROFESSIONAL, OR UNDERGRADUATE DEGREE FROM ANY ACCREDITED
22 COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY; OR

23 (III) IS A PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHER.

24 REVISOR’S NOTE: Subsection (b)(1) of this section is new language from former §
25 18–1502(b)(1) of this subtitle added for clarity.

26 Subsection (b)(1)(iii) of this section is new language derived without
27 substantive change from former § 18–1502(d) of this subtitle.

28 Subsection (b)(2) of this section is derived without substantive change from
29 former § 18–1502(h) of this subtitle.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 555 3

1 Subsection (b)(3) of this section is derived without substantive change from
2 former §§ 18–1502(b)(1)(ii) and (c)(1) and (2) of this subtitle.

3 18–1503.

4 [(b)] (A) The Office [of Student Financial Assistance] shall assist in the
5 repayment of the amount of any higher education loan owed by an ELIGIBLE individual
6 UNDER § 18–1502(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE who:

7 (1) [(i) Receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from:

8 1. A college or university in the State of Maryland;

9 2. A school of law;

10 3. For a mental health professional, any accredited college or
11 university; or

12 4. For a veterinary practitioner or veterinary technician, any
13 accredited veterinary college or university; or

14 (ii) Receives a Resident Teacher Certificate (RTC) from the
15 Department after completing an alternative teaching preparation program approved by the
16 State Superintendent;

17 (2)] Obtains eligible employment;

18 [(3)] (2) Receives an income that is less than the maximum eligible total
19 income levels established by the Office, including any additional sources of income; and

20 [(4)] (3) Satisfies any other criteria established by the Office.

21 [(c)] (B) Subject to the provisions of [subsection (b)] § 18–1502 of this [section]
22 SUBTITLE, the Office shall assist in the repayment of the amount of any higher education
23 loan owed by a VETERINARY PRACTITIONER WHO HAS PROVIDED VETERINARY
24 SERVICES OR A VETERINARY TECHNICIAN WHO HAS PROVIDED VETERINARY
25 TECHNICIAN SERVICES AS:

26 (1) AN EMPLOYEE IN THE STATE FOR A PERIOD NOT LESS THAN 5
27 YEARS; OR

28 (2) A VOLUNTEER FOR A MINIMUM OF 100 HOURS PER YEAR FOR A
29 PERIOD NOT LESS THAN 3 YEARS AT AN ANIMAL SHELTER THAT IS OWNED BY:

30 (I) A LOCAL GOVERNMENT;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 555

1 (II) AN ORGANIZATION CONTRACTED TO PERFORM ANIMAL
2 CONTROL SERVICES FOR A LOCAL GOVERNMENT; OR

3 (III) AN ORGANIZATION THAT SHELTERS ANIMALS AND WAS A
4 RECIPIENT OF THE MARYLAND SPAY AND NEUTER GRANTS PROGRAM DURING THE
5 PRIOR YEAR.

6 (C) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF § 18–1502 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
7 OFFICE SHALL ASSIST IN THE REPAYMENT OF THE AMOUNT OF ANY HIGHER
8 EDUCATION LOAN OWED BY A LICENSED CLINICAL ALCOHOL AND DRUG
9 COUNSELOR, A LICENSED CLINICAL MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY COUNSELOR,
10 OR A LICENSED CLINICAL PROFESSIONAL COUNSELOR WHOSE PRACTICE IS
11 LOCATED IN A HIGH–NEED GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE STATE AS DETERMINED BY
12 THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.

13 REVISOR’S NOTE: This section is new language derived without substantive
14 change from former § 18–1502 of this subtitle.

15 Subsection (b) of this section is derived without substantive change from
16 former § 18–1502(d) of this subtitle.

17 Subsection (c) of this section is derived without substantive change from
18 former § 18–1502(h) of this subtitle.

19 The only other changes were in style.

20 18–1504.

21 (A) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF § 18–1502 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
22 OFFICE SHALL ASSIST IN THE REPAYMENT OF THE AMOUNT OF ANY HIGHER
23 EDUCATION LOAN OWED BY AN EDUCATION–RELATED PROFESSIONAL DESCRIBED
24 IN THIS SECTION.

25 (B) (1) A GRANT AWARDED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE KNOWN AS
26 THE NANCY GRASMICK PUBLIC SCHOOL PROFESSIONAL AWARD.

27 (2) A RECIPIENT OF A NANCY GRASMICK PUBLIC SCHOOL
28 PROFESSIONAL AWARD SHALL BE KNOWN AS A NANCY GRASMICK PUBLIC SCHOOL
29 PROFESSIONAL SCHOLAR.

30 (C) [(1) Public] A PUBLIC school teacher in the State [who] QUALIFIES FOR
31 REPAYMENT UNDER THE PROGRAM IF THE INDIVIDUAL:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 555 5

1 [(i)] (1) Has taught in Maryland for at least 2 years:

2 [1.] (I) In science, technology, engineering, fine arts, or
3 math subjects;

4 [2.] (II) In a school in which at least [the following
5 percentages of the] 55% OF students are enrolled in the free and reduced price lunch
6 program in the State[:

7 A. 75% through June 30, 2025; and

8 B. 55% beginning July 1, 2025]; or

9 [3.] (III) In a school that:

10 [A.] 1. Had Title I status during the 2018–2019 school
11 year;

12 [B.] 2. Lost Title I status after the 2018–2019 school year;
13 and

14 [C.] 3. Participates in the United States Department of
15 Agriculture Community Eligibility Provision; and

16 [(ii)] (2) Has received a performance evaluation rating for the most
17 recent year available in the county in which the teacher taught[;].

18 [(2)] (D) [Mental] A MENTAL health professional [who] QUALIFIES FOR
19 REPAYMENT UNDER THE PROGRAM IF THE INDIVIDUAL has provided mental health
20 services in a public school for at least 2 years as an employee of:

21 [(i)] (1) A county school system; or

22 [(ii)] (2) A local health department through an agreement with a
23 county board[; or].

24 [(3)] (E) [Nurse who] A NURSE QUALIFIES FOR REPAYMENT UNDER
25 THE PROGRAM IF THE INDIVIDUAL has been a school nurse for at least 2 years.

26 [(d) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the Office shall assist
27 in the repayment of the amount of any higher education loan owed by:

28 (1) A veterinarian practitioner who has provided veterinary services as:

29 (i) An employee in the State for a period not less than 5 years; or
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 555

1 (ii) A volunteer for a minimum of 100 hours per year for a period not
2 less than 3 years at an animal shelter that is owned by:

3 1. A local government;

4 2. An organization contracted to perform animal control
5 services for a local government; or

6 3. An organization that shelters animals and was a recipient
7 of the Maryland Spay and Neuter Grants Program during the prior year; or

8 (2) A veterinary technician who has provided veterinary technician
9 services as:

10 (i) An employee in the State for a period not less than 5 years; or

11 (ii) A volunteer for a minimum of 100 hours per year for a period not
12 less than 3 years at an animal shelter that is owned by:

13 1. A local government;

14 2. An organization contracted to perform animal control
15 services for a local government; or

16 3. An organization that shelters animals and was a recipient
17 of the Maryland Spay and Neuter Grants Program during the prior year.

18 (e) (1) A grant awarded under subsection (c) of this section shall be known as
19 the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award.

20 (2) A recipient of a Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award shall
21 be known as a Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Scholar.]

22 REVISOR’S NOTE: Subsection (a) of this section is new language added to clarify
23 the scope of the section.

24 Subsection (b) of this section is derived without substantive change from §
25 18–1502(e) of this subtitle.

26 Subsection (c) of this section is derived without substantive change from §
27 18–1502(c)(1) of this subtitle. New subsection (c)(1)(ii) removes obsolete
28 language and adds “55% of” for clarity.

29 Subsection (d) of this section is derived without substantive change from §
30 18–1502(c)(2) of this subtitle.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 555 7

1 Subsection (e) of this section is derived without substantive change from §
2 18–1502(c)(3) of this subtitle.

3 The only other changes were in style.

4 18–1505.

5 [(f)] (A) An applicant for assistance in the repayment of a commercial loan shall
6 demonstrate to the Office that the commercial loan was used for tuition, educational
7 expenses, or living expenses for graduate or undergraduate study.

8 [(g)] (B) Assistance in the repayment of a loan from an entity set forth in §
9 18–1501(c)(2) of this subtitle shall require the approval of the Office.

10 [(h) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the Office shall assist
11 in the repayment of the amount of any higher education loan owed by a licensed clinical
12 alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or a
13 licensed clinical professional counselor whose practice is located in a high–need geographic
14 area of the State as determined by the Maryland Department of Health.]

15 REVISOR’S NOTE: This section is derived without substantive change from former
16 § 18–1502(f) and (g) of this subsection.

17 The only changes were in style.

18 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
19 Assembly that, except as expressly provided in this Act, this Act shall be construed as a
20 nonsubstantive revision, and may not otherwise be construed to render any substantive
21 change in the law of the State.

22 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Revisor’s Notes contained
23 in this Act are not law and may not be considered to have been enacted as part of this Act.

24 SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
25 Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
26 Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
27 General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act or by
28 any other Act of the General Assembly of 2026 that affects provisions enacted by this Act.
29 The publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note
30 following the section affected.

31 SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
32 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7