START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 541

F1, J1 6lr0989
CF SB 307

By: Delegates Guzzone, Bagnall, Boyce, Feldmark, Foley, Hill, D. Jones, Moreno,
Shetty, Simpson, Terrasa, Williams, Wolek, and Ziegler
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools – Restocking Menstrual Hygiene Products – Requirement

3 FOR the purpose of requiring each county board of education to ensure that each public
4 school regularly restocks dispensers in the women’s restrooms at the school with
5 menstrual hygiene products; and generally relating to the provision of menstrual
6 hygiene products in public schools.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 7–449
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Education

15 7–449.

16 (a) In this section, “menstrual hygiene products” means size–appropriate
17 tampons or sanitary napkins for use in connection with the menstrual cycle.

18 (b) Subject to subsection (c) of this section, each county board shall ensure that
19 each public school [provide]:

20 (1) PROVIDE, at no charge to students, menstrual hygiene products via
21 dispensers in the women’s restrooms at the school; AND

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0541*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 541

1 (2) REGULARLY RESTOCK THE DISPENSERS WITH MENSTRUAL
2 HYGIENE PRODUCTS TO ENSURE AVAILABILITY.

3 (c) (1) [A] EACH public middle or high school shall install menstrual hygiene
4 product dispensers in:

5 (i) At least two women’s restrooms on or before October 1, 2022; and

6 (ii) On or before August 1, 2025, all women’s restrooms.

7 (2) [A] EACH public elementary school shall install menstrual hygiene
8 product dispensers in at least one restroom on or before October 1, 2022.

9 (d) (1) The State shall reimburse a county board for the costs of purchasing
10 and installing menstrual hygiene product dispensers to comply with the requirements of
11 subsection (c) of this section.

12 (2) Each county board shall submit to the Department a request for
13 reimbursement for the costs of purchasing and installing menstrual hygiene product
14 dispensers to comply with the requirements of:

15 (i) Subsection (c)(1)(i) and (2) of this section, on or before November
16 1, 2022; and

17 (ii) Subsection (c)(1)(ii) of this section, on or before September 1,
18 2025.

19 (3) For fiscal year 2023, the Governor shall include in the annual budget
20 bill an appropriation of $500,000 to be used to reimburse each county board for the costs
21 reported to the Department under paragraph (2) of this subsection.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2