START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 512

A2 6lr2169
CF 6lr1614

By: Delegate Pruski
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Board of License Commissioners and Part–Time
3 Inspectors – Compensation

4 FOR the purpose of increasing the annual salaries and providing for cost–of–living salary
5 increases for the chair, certain part–time inspectors, and other members of the Board
6 of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County; and generally relating to
7 alcoholic beverages and the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
8 County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 11–101(a) and (b) and 11–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 11–204(a) and 11–206(a)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22 11–101.

23 (a) In this title:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0512*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 512

1 (1) the definitions in § 1–101 of this article apply without exception or
2 variation; and

3 (2) the following words have the meanings indicated.

4 (b) “Board” means the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County.

5 11–102.

6 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

7 11–204.

8 (a) (1) The chair of the Board shall receive:

9 (I) an annual salary [of] THAT:

10 1. IS not [more] LESS than [$18,000] $21,240; and

11 2. INCLUDES ANY COST–OF–LIVING INCREASE
12 AVAILABLE TO ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY EMPLOYEES; AND

13 (II) reimbursement for expenses reasonably incurred.

14 (2) Each other member of the Board shall receive:

15 (I) an annual salary [of] THAT:

16 1. IS not [more] LESS than [$15,000] $17,700; and

17 2. INCLUDES ANY COST–OF–LIVING INCREASE
18 AVAILABLE TO ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY EMPLOYEES; AND

19 (II) reimbursement for expenses reasonably incurred.

20 11–206.

21 (a) (1) The Board may employ:

22 (i) one part–time deputy chief inspector at an annual salary [of]
23 THAT:

24 1. IS NOT LESS THAN $18,000; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 512 3

1 2. INCLUDES ANY COST–OF–LIVING INCREASE
2 AVAILABLE TO ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY EMPLOYEES; AND

3 (ii) 18 part–time inspectors at an annual salary [of $7,000] THAT:

4 1. IS NOT LESS THAN $8,260 each; AND

5 2. INCLUDES ANY COST–OF–LIVING INCREASE
6 AVAILABLE TO ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY EMPLOYEES.

7 (2) Each inspector shall receive a monthly expense allowance of $300,
8 subject to the approval of the Executive Director.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
10 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3