START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 659

F1 6lr2556

By: Delegates Guzzone, Allen, Alston, Boyce, Crutchfield, Embry, Fair, Forbes,
Guyton, Hill, D. Jones, Lewis, McCaskill, Moreno, Palakovich Carr,
Pasteur, Phillips, Pruski, Spiegel, Taveras, Taylor, Terrasa, Watson,
White Holland, Williams, Wolek, and Ziegler
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Education – Membership – Early Childhood Development
3 Professional

4 FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the State Board of Education to include a
5 certain early childhood development professional as a member; and generally
6 relating to the membership of the State Board of Education.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 2–202
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Education

15 2–202.

16 (a) The State Board consists of 13 regular members, and 1 student member,
17 appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.

18 (b) (1) In making appointments to the State Board, the Governor shall
19 consider representation from:

20 (i) All parts of this State; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0659*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 659

1 (ii) Areas of this State with concentrations of population or unique
2 needs.

3 (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (4) through [(6)] (7) of this
4 subsection, the members of the Board shall be appointed from the general public.

5 (3) The following individuals may not be appointed to the Board:

6 (i) Except for the teacher member, EARLY CHILDHOOD
7 DEVELOPMENT MEMBER, and student member, any individual who is subject to the
8 authority of the Board;

9 (ii) The Governor; and

10 (iii) The State Superintendent.

11 (4) (i) Of the 13 regular members of the State Board, one regular
12 member shall be a certified teacher who is actively teaching.

13 (ii) The Governor shall appoint the teacher member, with the advice
14 and consent of the Senate, who received the highest number of votes after an election by
15 teachers in the State.

16 (iii) The Department shall provide notice of a teacher member
17 vacancy on the State Board to:

18 1. All certified teachers who are actively teaching in the
19 State; and

20 2. All teachers’ organizations representing teachers in the
21 State for purposes of collective bargaining.

22 (iv) 1. The election shall be conducted under regulations that the
23 Department adopts.

24 2. The Department may consult with the State Retirement
25 Agency of the Maryland State Retirement and Pension System to conduct the election
26 required under this subparagraph.

27 (v) The teacher member may attend and participate in an executive
28 session of the State Board.

29 (vi) The teacher member may not vote on any matter that relates to
30 appeals to the State Board under § 6–202 of this article.

31 (5) (I) OF THE 13 REGULAR MEMBERS OF THE STATE BOARD, ONE
32 REGULAR MEMBER SHALL BE AN EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT PROFESSIONAL
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 659 3

1 WITH EXTENSIVE EXPERIENCE, AS DETERMINED BY THE OFFICE OF CHILD CARE
2 ADVISORY COUNCIL, IN THE OPERATIONS OF A CHILD CARE BUSINESS AND EARLY
3 CHILDHOOD CURRICULUM AND DEVELOPMENT.

4 (II) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE EARLY CHILDHOOD
5 DEVELOPMENT MEMBER, WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE, FROM A
6 LIST OF THREE QUALIFIED INDIVIDUALS SUBMITTED TO THE GOVERNOR FROM THE
7 OFFICE OF CHILD CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

8 (III) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE INITIAL
9 EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT MEMBER VACANCY AND ANY SUBSEQUENT
10 VACANCY TO ALL LICENSED CHILD CARE PROVIDERS IN THE STATE.

11 (IV) THE EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT MEMBER MAY
12 ATTEND AND PARTICIPATE IN AN EXECUTIVE SESSION OF THE STATE BOARD.

13 [(5)] (6) (i) Of the 13 regular members of the State Board, one regular
14 member shall be the parent of a student enrolled in a public school in the State.

15 (ii) The Governor shall appoint the parent member, with the advice
16 and consent of the Senate, from a list of three qualified individuals submitted to the
17 Governor by the Maryland PTA.

18 (iii) The Department shall provide notice of the parent member
19 vacancy on the State Board to the Maryland PTA.

20 (iv) The parent member may attend and participate in an executive
21 session of the State Board.

22 [(6)] (7) The student member shall be selected by the Governor from a list
23 of 2 persons nominated by the Maryland Association of Student Councils.

24 (c) (1) The student member shall be:

25 (i) A regularly enrolled student; and

26 (ii) In good standing in a public high school in the State.

27 (2) The student member may attend and participate in an executive
28 session of the Board.

29 (3) The student member may not vote on any matter that relates to:

30 (i) The dismissal of or other disciplinary action involving personnel;
31 or
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 659

1 (ii) Appeals to the State Board under § 2–205 of this subtitle or §
2 4–205 or § 6–202 of this article.

3 (d) (1) Each regular member serves for a term of 4 years and until a successor
4 is appointed and qualifies. These terms are staggered as required by the terms of the
5 members serving on the State Board as of July 1, 1989.

6 (2) The Governor shall appoint a new member to fill any vacancy on the
7 Board for the remainder of that term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

8 (3) A member is eligible for reappointment but may not serve for more than
9 two full 4–year terms.

10 (4) The student member shall serve for a term of 1 year. A student member
11 is eligible for reappointment but may not serve more than two full 1–year terms.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
13 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4