START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 639

R2, E4 6lr1940
CF 6lr1941

By: Delegate Charkoudian
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Transportation – Aviation – Passenger Health and Safety
3 (Aviation Health and Safety Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Aviation Administration to develop certain
5 passenger forms for aircraft traveling with detained individuals; requiring the flight
6 crew on each aircraft to distribute and collect certain forms; requiring certain
7 aeronautical service providers to confirm that certain forms are on board an aircraft
8 before providing service to the aircraft; requiring certain aeronautical service
9 providers to compile, and a member of each flight crew to sign, and submit to the
10 Administration certain reports; prohibiting certain agreements with airlines that
11 transport detained individuals unless certain information is provided; prohibiting
12 the refueling of an aircraft if an individual on board is in any kind of restraint;
13 requiring that a restrained individual who is removed from an aircraft to refuel the
14 aircraft be provided certain services; and generally relating to health and safety of
15 aircraft passengers.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Transportation
18 Section 5–101(a) and (b)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Transportation
23 Section 5–107, 5–108, and 5–1010
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 Preamble

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0639*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 639

1 WHEREAS, In the event of an emergency that occurs at an airport facility, the
2 State’s fire, rescue, and emergency medical services, as well as the State’s health care
3 systems, are tasked with responding to these emergencies, and as such the responders and
4 health care systems require medical information about potential patients; now, therefore,

5 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
6 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

7 Article – Transportation

8 5–101.

9 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

10 (b) “Administration” means the Maryland Aviation Administration.

11 5–107.

12 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
13 INDICATED.

14 (2) “AERONAUTICAL SERVICES” INCLUDES:

15 (I) FUELING, HANGARING, TYING DOWN, OR PARKING AN
16 AIRCRAFT;

17 (II) AIRCRAFT RENTAL;

18 (III) AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE; AND

19 (IV) FLIGHT INSTRUCTION.

20 (3) “AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY” MEANS A SINGLE–SERVICE FIXED
21 BASE OPERATOR (FBO) THAT OFFERS SPECIALIZED AERONAUTICAL SERVICES.

22 (4) “DETAINED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS A PASSENGER WHO IS
23 TRAVELING INVOLUNTARILY OR WHILE BEING HELD IN ANY KIND OF RESTRAINT.

24 (5) “FIXED BASE OPERATOR” OR “FBO” MEANS A COMMERCIAL
25 BUSINESS THAT AN AIRPORT HAS GRANTED THE RIGHT TO:

26 (I) OPERATE AT AN AIRPORT FACILITY; AND

27 (II) PROVIDE AERONAUTICAL SERVICES.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 639 3

1 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO AN AIRCRAFT TRAVELING WITH A
2 DETAINED INDIVIDUAL.

3 (C) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL DEVELOP A FORM TO BE USED FOR ANY
4 PASSENGER ON AN AIRCRAFT WHO IS A DETAINED INDIVIDUAL THAT:

5 (1) COLLECTS INFORMATION ON:

6 (I) THE INDIVIDUAL’S MEDICAL HISTORY, INCLUDING:

7 1. ALLERGIES;

8 2. CURRENT MEDICAL CONDITIONS; AND

9 3. MEDICATIONS; AND

10 (II) THE INDIVIDUAL’S LEGAL HISTORY, INCLUDING:

11 1. CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE INDIVIDUAL’S
12 ATTORNEY; AND

13 2. ANY PENDING LEGAL PROCEEDINGS;

14 (2) IDENTIFIES WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL IS A MINOR AND, IF SO,
15 PROVIDES GUARDIANSHIP INFORMATION IF THE GUARDIAN IS NOT ON BOARD THE
16 AIRCRAFT;

17 (3) STATES THAT THE FORMS WILL BE REVIEWED BY AN FBO OR AN
18 AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY AND, IN THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY, SHARED WITH
19 EMERGENCY RESPONDERS;

20 (4) INFORMS THE INDIVIDUAL THAT COMPLETION OF THE FORM IS
21 VOLUNTARY; AND

22 (5) FOR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO CHOOSES NOT TO COMPLETE THE FORM,
23 CONTAINS A SPACE FOR THE INDIVIDUAL TO AFFIRMATIVELY INDICATE THAT THEY
24 HAVE SEEN THE FORM AND ARE CHOOSING NOT TO COMPLETE THE FORM.

25 (D) COPIES OF THE FORM DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION
26 SHALL BE:

27 (1) KEPT ON BOARD EACH AIRCRAFT; AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 639

1 (2) IN THE EVENT OF AN EMERGENCY, PROVIDED TO EMERGENCY
2 RESPONDERS OR HOSPITALS IN THE STATE.

3 (E) THE FLIGHT CREW ON EACH AIRCRAFT SHALL DISTRIBUTE AND
4 COLLECT THE FORMS DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION FROM EACH
5 DETAINED PASSENGER ON BOARD THE AIRCRAFT.

6 (F) BEFORE PROVIDING SERVICE TO AN AIRCRAFT, EACH FBO OR
7 AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY SHALL INSPECT THE AIRCRAFT TO CONFIRM THAT THE
8 FORMS DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION ARE ON BOARD THE
9 AIRCRAFT.

10 (G) (1) EACH FBO OR AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY SHALL:

11 (I) COMPILE A REPORT THAT DOCUMENTS, FOR EACH
12 AIRCRAFT TRAVELING WITH A DETAINED INDIVIDUAL:

13 1. THE AGENCY OR COMPANY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
14 AIRCRAFT;

15 2. THE PRESENCE OF THE FORMS DESCRIBED IN
16 SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION; AND

17 3. COMPLIANCE WITH § 5–1010 OF THIS TITLE; AND

18 (II) SUBMIT MONTHLY TO THE ADMINISTRATION THE REPORTS
19 DESCRIBED IN THIS SUBSECTION.

20 (2) A MEMBER OF EACH FLIGHT CREW AND FBO OR AVIATION
21 SERVICE COMPANY SHALL SIGN EACH REPORT DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF
22 THIS SUBSECTION.

23 5–108.

24 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
25 INDICATED.

26 (2) “AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
27 5–107 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

28 (3) “DETAINED INDIVIDUAL” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–107
29 OF THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 639 5

1 (4) “FIXED BASE OPERATOR” OR “FBO” HAS THE MEANING STATED
2 IN § 5–107 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

3 (5) “PERSON” INCLUDES:

4 (I) THE STATE;

5 (II) A COUNTY, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, OR ANY OTHER
6 POLITICAL SUBDIVISION; AND

7 (III) A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT OR A POLITICAL
8 SUBDIVISION.

9 (B) A PERSON MAY NOT ENTER INTO A CONTRACT, GRANT, OR OTHER
10 AGREEMENT WITH AN AIRLINE THAT TRANSPORTS DETAINED INDIVIDUALS UNLESS
11 THE AIRLINE PROVIDES EVIDENCE OF:

12 (1) A VALID WARRANT ISSUED BY A FEDERAL COURT OR COURT OF
13 THE STATE;

14 (2) A VALID COURT ORDER; OR

15 (3) THE GOVERNOR’S AUTHORIZATION OF THE EXTRADITION OF THE
16 DETAINED INDIVIDUAL TO ANOTHER STATE.

17 (C) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY NOT ENTER INTO A CONTRACT, GRANT, OR
18 OTHER AGREEMENT WITH AN FBO OR AN AVIATION SERVICE COMPANY THAT
19 SERVICES AIRLINES THAT TRANSPORT DETAINED INDIVIDUALS THROUGH
20 BALTIMORE–WASHINGTON INTERNATIONAL THURGOOD MARSHALL AIRPORT
21 UNLESS THE AIRLINE PROVIDES EVIDENCE OF:

22 (1) A VALID WARRANT ISSUED BY A FEDERAL COURT OR COURT OF
23 THE STATE;

24 (2) A VALID COURT ORDER; OR

25 (3) THE GOVERNOR’S AUTHORIZATION OF THE EXTRADITION OF THE
26 DETAINED INDIVIDUAL TO ANOTHER STATE.

27 5–1010.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 639

1 (A) AN AIRCRAFT MAY NOT BE REFUELED IF AN INDIVIDUAL ON BOARD THE
2 AIRCRAFT IS IN ANY KIND OF RESTRAINT.

3 (B) IF A RESTRAINED INDIVIDUAL IS REMOVED FROM AN AIRCRAFT FOR
4 THE AIRCRAFT TO REFUEL, THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL:

5 (1) BE PLACED IN A CLIMATE CONTROLLED ENCLOSURE; AND

6 (2) HAVE ACCESS TO RESTROOMS AND WATER.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6