START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 626

E2, E3 6lr0927
HB 165/25 – JUD

By: Delegates Acevero, Ivey, Alston, Fair, Fennell, Martinez, McCaskill, Ruff,
Simpson, Stinnett, Taylor, Turner, Woods, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Custodial Interrogation of Minors – Admissibility of Statements
3 (Exonerated 5 Act)

4 FOR the purpose of establishing a certain rebuttable presumption that a statement made
5 by a minor during a custodial interrogation is involuntary and is inadmissible in a
6 juvenile or criminal proceeding against the minor under certain circumstances; and
7 generally relating to the admissibility of statements made by minors during
8 custodial interrogation.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
11 Section 10–926
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

17 10–926.

18 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “CUSTODIAL INTERROGATION” RETAINS ITS
19 JUDICIALLY DETERMINED MEANING.

20 (B) (1) THERE IS A REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION THAT A STATEMENT
21 MADE BY A MINOR DURING A CUSTODIAL INTERROGATION IS INVOLUNTARY AND IS
22 INADMISSIBLE IN A JUVENILE OR CRIMINAL PROCEEDING AGAINST THE MINOR IF

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0626*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 626

1 THE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER INTENTIONALLY USED INFORMATION KNOWN BY
2 THE OFFICER TO BE FALSE IN ORDER TO ELICIT THE STATEMENT.

3 (2) THE PRESUMPTION DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
4 SUBSECTION MAY BE REBUTTED BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT THE
5 STATEMENT WAS VOLUNTARY AND NOT MADE IN RESPONSE TO THE FALSE
6 INFORMATION USED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TO ELICIT THE
7 STATEMENT.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2