START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 679

J2 6lr1808
HB 1399/25 – HGO

By: Delegates Arikan, Adams, Anderson, Beauchamp, Chisholm, Fisher,
Grammer, Kipke, M. Morgan, Nawrocki, Sample–Hughes, and Szeliga
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Occupations – Cross–Sex Hormone Therapy for Minors

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a licensed health care practitioner from prescribing,
4 dispensing, or administering a cross–sex hormone or otherwise providing cross–sex
5 hormone therapy for the treatment of certain mental health diagnoses to an
6 individual who is a minor; and generally relating to cross–sex hormone therapy.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Health Occupations
9 Section 1–212.2
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Health Occupations

15 1–212.2.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) “CROSS–SEX HORMONE” MEANS A PRESCRIPTION HORMONE,
19 INCLUDING ESTROGEN AND TESTOSTERONE, OR HORMONE BLOCKER, INCLUDING A
20 TESTOSTERONE BLOCKER.

21 (3) “CROSS–SEX HORMONE THERAPY” MEANS A TREATMENT USED TO
22 DEVELOP SECONDARY SEX CHARACTERISTICS FOR AN INDIVIDUAL TRANSITIONING

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0679*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 679

1 FROM THE INDIVIDUAL’S ASSIGNED SEX AT BIRTH TO THE INDIVIDUAL’S
2 EXPERIENCED OR EXPRESSED GENDER.

3 (B) A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER LICENSED UNDER THIS ARTICLE MAY
4 NOT PRESCRIBE, DISPENSE, OR ADMINISTER CROSS–SEX HORMONES OR OTHERWISE
5 PROVIDE CROSS–SEX HORMONE THERAPY FOR THE PURPOSES OF TREATING A
6 MENTAL HEALTH DIAGNOSIS ASSOCIATED WITH GENDER NONCONFORMITY,
7 INCLUDING GENDER DYSPHORIA, TO AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A MINOR.

8 (C) A PERSON THAT VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A FELONY AND
9 ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING LIFE.

10 (D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
11 SECTION.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2