START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 630

E5 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr2331

By: Delegates Schindler, Behler, Fair, A. Johnson, Martinez, Moreno, Simmons,
Spiegel, Vogel, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Correctional Services – Immigration Detention Facilities – Original Design and
3 Construction

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from operating an immigration detention facility
5 at a building, structure, or facility that was not originally designed and constructed
6 for the purpose of housing or detaining individuals; and generally relating to
7 immigration detention.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Correctional Services
10 Section 1–101(a), (j), and (n)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Correctional Services
15 Section 1–102
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Correctional Services

21 1–101.

22 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0630*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 630

1 (j) “Immigration detention facility” means any building, facility, or structure
2 used, in whole or in part, to house or detain individuals for federal civil immigration
3 violations.

4 (n) “Person” means an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, personal
5 representative, fiduciary, representative of any kind, partnership, firm, association,
6 corporation, or other entity.

7 1–102.

8 (a) The State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or an agency, officer,
9 employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government may not:

10 (1) enter into an agreement of any kind for the detention of individuals in
11 an immigration detention facility owned, managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a
12 private entity;

13 (2) pay, reimburse, subsidize, or defray in any way any costs related to the
14 sale, purchase, construction, development, ownership, management, or operation of an
15 immigration detention facility that is or will be owned, managed, or operated, in whole or
16 in part, by a private entity;

17 (3) receive any payment related to the detention of individuals in an
18 immigration detention facility owned, managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a
19 private entity; or

20 (4) otherwise give any financial incentive or benefit to any private entity
21 or person in connection with the sale, purchase, construction, development, ownership,
22 management, or operation of an immigration detention facility that is or will be owned,
23 managed, or operated, in whole or in part, by a private entity.

24 (b) The State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or an agency, officer,
25 employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government may not approve a zoning
26 variance or issue a permit for the construction of a building or the reuse of existing
27 buildings or structures by any private entity for use as an immigration detention facility
28 unless the governmental entity:

29 (1) provides notice to the public of the proposed zoning variance or permit
30 action at least 180 days before authorizing the variance or issuing the permit; and

31 (2) solicits and hears public comments on the proposed zoning variance or
32 permit action in at least two separate meetings open to the public.

33 (c) (1) The State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or an agency,
34 officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government may not enter into or
35 renew an immigration detention agreement.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 630 3

1 (2) The State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or an agency,
2 officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government with an existing
3 immigration detention agreement shall exercise the termination provision contained in the
4 immigration detention agreement not later than October 1, 2022.

5 (D) A PERSON MAY NOT OPERATE AN IMMIGRATION DETENTION FACILITY
6 AT A BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR FACILITY THAT WAS NOT ORIGINALLY DESIGNED
7 AND CONSTRUCTED FOR THE PURPOSE OF HOUSING OR DETAINING INDIVIDUALS.

8 [(d)] (E) In any dispute over an immigration detention agreement with the
9 State, the provisions of this section govern.

10 [(e)] (F) Nothing in this section may be construed to authorize or prohibit the
11 State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or an agency, officer, employee, or agent
12 of the State or a unit of local government from entering into an agreement under 8 U.S.C.
13 § 1357(g).

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
15 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
16 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
17 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
18 enacted.
END OF PAGE 3