START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 621

G1 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr1956
CF SB 443

By: Delegates D. Jones, Lehman, Pruski, and Tomlinson
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Local Boards of Elections – Board Counsel – Qualifications

3 FOR the purpose of altering the qualifications for counsel to local boards of elections; and
4 generally relating to local boards of elections.

5 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
6 Article – Election Law
7 Section 2–201(a)(1)
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Election Law
12 Section 2–205(a)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Election Law

18 2–201.

19 (a) (1) There is a county board of elections in each county of the State.

20 2–205.

21 (a) Each local board may appoint or retain as counsel an individual who is:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0621*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 621

1 (1) a registered voter of [its county] THE STATE; and

2 (2) admitted to practice law in the State.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
4 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
5 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
6 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
7 enacted.
END OF PAGE 2