START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 635

F5 6lr2800
CF SB 359

By: Delegates Miller, Alston, and Mireku–North
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Child Care Facilities – Criminal History Records Check – Requirement

3 FOR the purpose of repealing the limitation on the number of Deputy State
4 Superintendents of Schools that the State Superintendent can appoint; requiring
5 individuals who will have direct contact with children in certain child care facilities
6 to submit to a criminal history records check; requiring the State Department of
7 Education to establish a centralized unit for the processing and management of
8 information about criminal history records checks; altering the applicability of
9 probationary employment qualifications for first–time child care teachers in certain
10 child care centers; and generally relating to a criminal history records check for
11 individuals who will have direct contact with children in child care facilities.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Education
14 Section 2–104(a)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY adding to
18 Article – Education
19 Section 9.5–118
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
23 Article – Education
24 Section 9.5–404(a)
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

27 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0635*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 635

1 Article – Education
2 Section 9.5–404(b)(13)
3 Annotated Code of Maryland
4 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

5 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
6 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

7 Article – Education

8 2–104.

9 (a) The following employees shall be appointed to positions in the Department:

10 (1) [No more than three] ANY Deputy State Superintendents of Schools;

11 (2) Any assistant State superintendents and directors authorized by the
12 State Board and provided in the State budget; and

13 (3) Any other employees to fill positions authorized by the State Board and
14 provided in the State budget.

15 9.5–118.

16 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (2) (I) “APPLICANT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS APPLYING FOR
19 A POSITION INVOLVING DIRECT CONTACT WITH CHILDREN IN A CHILD CARE
20 FACILITY.

21 (II) “APPLICANT” INCLUDES A VOLUNTEER OR OTHER
22 INDIVIDUALS WHO MAY BE SUBJECT TO FEDERALLY REQUIRED BACKGROUND
23 CHECKS.

24 (3) “CENTRAL REPOSITORY” MEANS THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
25 INFORMATION SYSTEM CENTRAL REPOSITORY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
26 SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

27 (4) “CHILD CARE FACILITY” MEANS A CHILD CARE FACILITY
28 IDENTIFIED UNDER § 5–551 OF THE FAMILY LAW ARTICLE.

29 (B) AN APPLICANT WHO IS SEEKING A POSITION INVOLVING DIRECT
30 CONTACT WITH CHILDREN AT A CHILD CARE FACILITY SHALL SUBMIT TO A CRIMINAL
31 HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–555 OF THE FAMILY LAW
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 635 3

1 ARTICLE.

2 (C) (1) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A CENTRALIZED UNIT
3 FOR THE PROCESSING AND MANAGEMENT OF INFORMATION ABOUT CRIMINAL
4 HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS FOR APPLICANTS PROVIDING CHILD CARE SERVICES.

5 (II) THE CENTRALIZED UNIT MAY BE STAFFED BY LICENSING
6 SPECIALISTS IN THE REGIONAL CHILD CARE LICENSING OFFICES THROUGHOUT THE
7 STATE.

8 (2) THE CENTRALIZED UNIT SHALL NOTIFY AN APPLICANT FOR A
9 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK:

10 (I) OF THE STATUS OF THE APPLICATION WITHIN 10 DAYS
11 AFTER SUBMISSION; AND

12 (II) SUBJECT TO THE RECEIPT OF THE CRIMINAL HISTORY
13 RECORD INFORMATION FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY UNDER SUBSECTION (D)
14 OF THIS SECTION, WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER SUBMISSION, OF THE APPLICANT’S
15 ELIGIBILITY TO PROVIDE CHILD CARE SERVICES IN A CHILD CARE FACILITY.

16 (D) (1) THE CENTRALIZED UNIT SHALL REVIEW AND MAINTAIN
17 BACKGROUND CHECKS COMPLETED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–555 OF THE FAMILY
18 LAW ARTICLE.

19 (2) INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY
20 UNDER THIS SECTION:

21 (I) IS CONFIDENTIAL;

22 (II) MAY NOT BE DISSEMINATED WITHOUT THE EXPRESS
23 PERMISSION OF THE APPLICANT; AND

24 (III) MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE PURPOSES AUTHORIZED BY
25 THIS TITLE.

26 (E) (1) (I) THE CENTRALIZED UNIT MAY MAINTAIN A LIST OF
27 APPLICANTS WHO HAVE SUBMITTED A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN
28 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

29 (II) THE CENTRALIZED UNIT MAY SHARE THE NAME AND
30 STATUS OF AN APPLICANT ON THE LIST WITH:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 635

1 1. A CHILD CARE FACILITY AT WHICH THE APPLICANT
2 SEEKS TO BE EMPLOYED OR VOLUNTEER; AND

3 2. THE APPLICANT.

4 (2) ON REQUEST BY AN APPLICANT OR A CHILD CARE FACILITY, THE
5 CENTRALIZED UNIT MAY PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE APPLICANT OR THE
6 CHILD CARE FACILITY THAT AN APPLICANT WHO SEEKS TO BE EMPLOYED BY OR
7 VOLUNTEER WITH THE CHILD CARE FACILITY HAS A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
8 CHECK ON FILE WITH THE DEPARTMENT.

9 9.5–404.

10 (a) The State Board shall adopt rules and regulations for licensing and operating
11 child care centers.

12 (b) These rules and regulations shall:

13 (13) Subject to subsection (c) of this section, establish probationary
14 employment qualifications for an individual who is applying for the first time to be a child
15 care teacher in a child care center in the State that serves preschool or school–age children
16 who are at least [3] 2 years old.

17 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
18 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4