START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 612

E5, J1, K3 6lr1656

By: Delegates Pasteur, Coley, Mireku–North, Phillips, and Young
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Correctional Education and Workforce Skills Training Programs – State
3 Correctional Ombudsman and Certified Peer Recovery Specialist Training
4 Program for Incarcerated Individuals

5 FOR the purpose of requiring the Director of Education and Workforce Skills Training for
6 Correctional Institutions to consult with the State Correctional Ombudsman about
7 the operation of education and workforce skills training programs in adult
8 correctional institutions; establishing the Certified Peer Recovery Specialist
9 Training Program for Incarcerated Individuals in the Maryland Department of
10 Labor; requiring the Maryland Department of Labor to create certain positions to
11 provide correctional education staff and certified peer recovery specialists for the
12 Program; requiring the Maryland Department of Labor and the Department of
13 Public Safety and Correctional Services to use funds appropriated in the budget for
14 the Program for certain purposes; and generally relating to education and workforce
15 skills training programs provided by the Maryland Department of Labor.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Health – General
18 Section 7.5–101(a) and (n)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Labor and Employment
23 Section 11–101(a) and (b)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2025 Replacement Volume)

26 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
27 Article – Labor and Employment
28 Section 11–903

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0612*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 612

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2025 Replacement Volume)

3 BY adding to
4 Article – Labor and Employment
5 Section 11–903.1
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2025 Replacement Volume)

8 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
9 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

10 Article – Health – General

11 7.5–101.

12 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

13 (n) “Peer support services” means a set of nonclinical activities provided by
14 individuals in recovery from mental disorders, substance–related disorders, or addictive
15 disorders who use their personal, lived experiences and training to support other
16 individuals with mental disorders, substance–related disorders, or addictive disorders.

17 Article – Labor and Employment

18 11–101.

19 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

20 (b) “Department” means the Maryland Department of Labor.

21 11–903.

22 (a) The Department is responsible for the provision of education and workforce
23 skills training programs in the adult correctional institutions in the State.

24 (b) The Secretary shall appoint a Director of Education and Workforce Skills
25 Training for Correctional Institutions.

26 (c) The Director shall receive the salary provided in the budget of the
27 Department.

28 (d) The Director shall:

29 (1) implement and operate the educational and workforce skills training
30 programs developed by the Council in the correctional institutions;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 612 3

1 (2) meet with and advise the Council about the programs;

2 (3) consult with the Commissioner of Correction [and], the warden of each
3 institution, AND THE STATE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN, OR THE OMBUDSMAN’S
4 DESIGNEE, about the operation of the programs; and

5 (4) set qualification standards for teachers in workforce skills training
6 programs who are employed by the Department that are similar to the standards for
7 teachers providing CTE instruction in accordance with § 7–205.1 of the Education Article.

8 (e) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, each teacher in an educational
9 and workforce skills training program who is employed by the Department is in the
10 professional service in the State Personnel Management System.

11 11–903.1.

12 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
13 INDICATED.

14 (2) “CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST” MEANS AN
15 INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS BEEN CERTIFIED FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING PEER
16 SUPPORT SERVICES.

17 (3) “CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION” MEANS A PLACE OF DETENTION
18 OR CORRECTIONAL CONFINEMENT OPERATED BY OR FOR THE STATE.

19 (4) “INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS
20 ACTUALLY OR CONSTRUCTIVELY DETAINED OR CONFINED IN A CORRECTIONAL
21 INSTITUTION.

22 (5) “PEER SUPPORT SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
23 7.5–101 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

24 (6) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY
25 SPECIALIST TRAINING PROGRAM FOR INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

26 (B) THERE IS A CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST TRAINING
27 PROGRAM FOR INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN THE DEPARTMENT.

28 (C) THE PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM ARE TO:

29 (1) PROVIDE FUNDS TO ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN CERTIFIED PEER
30 RECOVERY SPECIALIST TRAINING FOR INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 612

1 (2) PROVIDE COMPENSATION FOR INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WHO
2 PARTICIPATE IN CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST TRAINING; AND

3 (3) PREPARE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WHO PARTICIPATE IN
4 CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST TRAINING FOR POSTRELEASE
5 EMPLOYMENT IN BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AND COMMUNITY RECOVERY SERVICES.

6 (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM IN
7 CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL
8 SERVICES, THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, AND THE MARYLAND
9 OFFICE OF OVERDOSE RESPONSE.

10 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE AT LEAST ONE POSITION TO
11 PROVIDE CORRECTIONAL EDUCATION STAFF FOR THE PROGRAM TO:

12 (I) PROVIDE DIRECT SUPPORT TO CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY
13 SPECIALIST TRAINEES;

14 (II) FACILITATE COMMUNICATION BETWEEN CORRECTIONAL
15 EDUCATION SCHOOLS AND THE CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST
16 SUPERVISORS; AND

17 (III) ASSIST WITH TRAINING, DATA MANAGEMENT, AND
18 CONSISTENT PROGRAM DELIVERY ACROSS CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS.

19 (3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CREATE AT LEAST ONE POSITION FOR
20 THE PROGRAM TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THE CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY
21 SPECIALISTS.

22 (E) (1) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
23 THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
24 SUFFICIENT FOR THE OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM.

25 (2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL USE FUNDS APPROPRIATED IN THE
26 BUDGET FOR THE PROGRAM TO:

27 (I) SUPPORT THE POSITIONS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION;
28 AND

29 (II) PROVIDE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESOURCES,
30 INCLUDING CONTINUING EDUCATION, CROSS–TRAININGS, AND PEER SUPERVISION
31 WORKSHOPS.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 612 5

1 (3) THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL
2 SERVICES SHALL USE FUNDS APPROPRIATED IN THE BUDGET FOR THE PROGRAM
3 TO:

4 (I) ENHANCE THE DAILY WAGE FOR INCARCERATED
5 INDIVIDUALS WHO PROVIDE CERTIFIED PEER RECOVERY SPECIALIST SERVICES;
6 AND

7 (II) PROVIDE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESOURCES,
8 INCLUDING CONTINUING EDUCATION, CROSS–TRAININGS, AND PEER SUPERVISION
9 WORKSHOPS.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
11 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5