START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 623

F1, F2 6lr2449
CF 6lr0737

By: Delegates Patterson, Allen, Arentz, Bagnall, Behler, Boafo, Buckel, Coley,
Crutchfield, Fair, Feldmark, Griffith, Hartman, Healey, Holmes,
Hornberger, Howard, Ivey, A. Johnson, S. Johnson, A. Jones, Kaufman,
J. Long, McComas, Miller, T. Morgan, Odom, Pasteur, Pruski, Queen, Reilly,
Roberts, Rogers, Rose, Sample–Hughes, Schmidt, Simmons, Simpson,
Spiegel, Stinnett, Taveras, Taylor, Turner, Wims, Wolek, and Woods
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Purple Star Schools Program and Purple Star Colleges Program

3 FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “military–connected student” under the Purple
4 Star Schools Program to conform with certain terms defined under State law;
5 establishing the Purple Star Colleges Program to recognize certain colleges that
6 provide strong services and support for military–connected students; and generally
7 relating to the establishment of the Purple Star Colleges Program.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 7–129(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 10–101(a), (c), and (h) through (j)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Education
20 Section 11–2001 through 11–2003 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 20. Purple
21 Star Colleges Program”
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0623*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 623

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Education

4 7–129.

5 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (2) “Military–connected student” means a student who is a dependent of:

7 (i) [An active duty uniformed services member;

8 (ii) A member of a reserve component] A SERVICE MEMBER; or

9 [(iii)] (II) A SERVICE member [described in item (i) or (ii) of this
10 paragraph] who was killed in the line of duty.

11 (3) “Program” means the Purple Star Schools Program.

12 10–101.

13 (a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (c) “Commission” means the Maryland Higher Education Commission.

15 (h) (1) “Institution of higher education” means an institution of postsecondary
16 education that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools, and awards
17 degrees at either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level.

18 (2) “Institution of higher education” includes public, private nonprofit, and
19 for–profit institutions of higher education.

20 (i) (1) “Institution of postsecondary education” means a school or other
21 institution that offers an educational program in the State for individuals who are at least
22 16 years old and who have graduated from or left elementary or secondary school.

23 (2) “Institution of postsecondary education” does not include:

24 (i) Any adult education, evening high school, or high school
25 equivalence program conducted by a public school system of the State; or

26 (ii) Any apprenticeship or on–the–job training program subject to
27 approval by the Apprenticeship and Training Council.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 623 3

1 (j) “Private career school” means a privately owned and privately operated
2 institution of postsecondary education other than an institution of higher education that
3 furnishes or offers to furnish programs, whether or not requiring a payment of tuition or
4 fee, for the purpose of training, retraining, or upgrading individuals for gainful employment
5 as skilled or semiskilled workers or technicians in recognized occupations or in new and
6 emerging occupations.

7 SUBTITLE 20. PURPLE STAR COLLEGES PROGRAM.

8 11–2001.

9 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
10 INDICATED.

11 (B) “COLLEGE” MEANS:

12 (1) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION; OR

13 (2) A PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOL.

14 (C) “MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENT” MEANS A STUDENT WHO IS:

15 (1) A SERVICE MEMBER;

16 (2) A VETERAN; OR

17 (3) A SPOUSE OR DEPENDENT OF AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEM
18 (1) OR (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

19 (D) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE PURPLE STAR COLLEGES PROGRAM.

20 11–2002.

21 (A) THERE IS A PURPLE STAR COLLEGES PROGRAM.

22 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO RECOGNIZE COLLEGES THAT
23 PROVIDE STRONG SERVICES AND SUPPORT FOR MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS.

24 (C) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

25 11–2003.

26 (A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION
27 SHALL DESIGNATE A COLLEGE AS A PURPLE STAR COLLEGE IF THE COLLEGE
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 623

1 APPLIES AND MEETS THE CRITERIA ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION FOR A PURPLE
2 STAR COLLEGE.

3 (B) AT A MINIMUM, THE COMMISSION’S CRITERIA FOR A PURPLE STAR
4 COLLEGE SHALL REQUIRE A COLLEGE TO:

5 (1) DESIGNATE A STAFF MEMBER AS A UNIFORMED SERVICES
6 LIAISON, WHOSE DUTIES SHALL INCLUDE:

7 (I) IDENTIFYING MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS WHO ARE
8 NEWLY ENROLLED AT THE COLLEGE;

9 (II) SERVING AS THE POINT OF CONTACT BETWEEN THE
10 COLLEGE AND NEWLY ENROLLED MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS;

11 (III) DETERMINING APPROPRIATE COLLEGE SERVICES
12 AVAILABLE TO NEWLY ENROLLED MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS;

13 (IV) ASSISTING IN COORDINATING COLLEGE PROGRAMS FOR
14 NEWLY ENROLLED MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS; AND

15 (V) GENERALLY ASSISTING IN A MILITARY–CONNECTED
16 STUDENT’S TRANSITION TO A NEW COLLEGE;

17 (2) ESTABLISH ON THE COLLEGE’S WEBSITE AN EASILY ACCESSIBLE
18 WEBPAGE THAT INCLUDES LINKS TO RESOURCES FOR MILITARY–CONNECTED
19 STUDENTS, INCLUDING LINKS TO INFORMATION REGARDING:

20 (I) RELOCATION TO, ENROLLMENT AT, REGISTRATION AT, AND
21 TRANSFERRING RECORDS TO THE COLLEGE;

22 (II) ACADEMIC PLANNING, COURSE SEQUENCES, AND
23 ADVANCED COURSES AVAILABLE AT THE COLLEGE; AND

24 (III) COUNSELING AND OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES AVAILABLE
25 FOR MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS TRANSITIONING INTO THE COLLEGE;

26 (3) MAINTAIN A TRANSITION PROGRAM LED BY STUDENTS, IF
27 APPROPRIATE, THAT ASSISTS MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS ENROLLED AT THE
28 COLLEGE; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 623 5

1 (4) OFFER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR STAFF MEMBERS ON
2 ISSUES RELATED TO MILITARY–CONNECTED STUDENTS TRANSFERRING TO NEW
3 COLLEGES.

4 (C) A COLLEGE MAY PARTNER WITH ITS GOVERNING BODY TO FULFILL THE
5 COMMISSION’S CRITERIA TO QUALIFY AS A PURPLE STAR COLLEGE.

6 (D) THE COMMISSION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND COLLEGE
7 COLLABORATION FOR STUDENT VETERANS COMMISSION, SHALL ADOPT
8 REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
10 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5