START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 691

P3, C9 6lr1788

By: Delegates Lopez, Kaufman, Spiegel, and Wims
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Government – Procedures – Permitting Efficiency for Housing
3 Development Projects

4 FOR the purpose of requiring certain units in the Executive Branch of State government
5 to adopt procedures to streamline certain permitting processes for housing
6 development projects; requiring the State Housing Ombudsman to ensure
7 consistency between certain permitting processes developed by different units;
8 authorizing the delegation of certain tasks related to the review or approval of
9 permits related to housing construction to certain local governmental units; and
10 generally relating to permitting efficiency for housing development projects.

11 BY renumbering
12 Article – State Government
13 Section 10–1701 and 10–1702 and the subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous”
14 to be Section 10–1801 and 10–1802, respectively, and the subtitle “Subtitle 18.
15 Miscellaneous”
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – State Government
20 Section 10–1701 through 10–1703 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 17.
21 Permitting Efficiency for Housing Development Projects”
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That Section(s) 10–1701 and 10–1702 and the subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous” of
26 Article – State Government of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be
27 Section(s) 10–1801 and 10–1802, respectively, and the subtitle “Subtitle 18. Miscellaneous”.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0691*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 691

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
2 as follows:

3 Article – State Government

4 SUBTITLE 17. PERMITTING EFFICIENCY FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.

5 10–1701.

6 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
7 INDICATED.

8 (B) “HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT” MEANS THE NEW CONSTRUCTION
9 OR SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION OF A RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE PROJECT.

10 (C) (1) “PERMIT RELATED TO HOUSING CONSTRUCTION” MEANS A
11 PERMIT OR AN APPROVAL REQUIRED BY LAW OR REGULATION TO BE ISSUED BY A
12 UNIT IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO A DEVELOPER,
13 CONTRACTOR, OR SUBCONTRACTOR IN ORDER TO COMMENCE, CONTINUE, OR
14 SUPPORT A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.

15 (2) “PERMIT RELATED TO HOUSING CONSTRUCTION” INCLUDES A
16 PERMIT OR AN APPROVAL RELATED TO THE CONSTRUCTION OR EXPANSION OF
17 SUPPORTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE SERVING A HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.

18 (D) “STATE HOUSING OMBUDSMAN” MEANS THE INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED
19 BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO
20 FACILITATE NAVIGATION THROUGH LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL PERMITTING
21 PROCESSES.

22 10–1702.

23 (A) EACH UNIT IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF STATE GOVERNMENT THAT
24 IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ISSUING A PERMIT RELATED TO HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
25 SHALL ADOPT PROCEDURES TO STREAMLINE THE PERMITTING PROCESS IN
26 ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

27 (B) A STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS ADOPTED UNDER THIS SECTION
28 SHALL, AT A MINIMUM:

29 (1) TO THE EXTENT FEASIBLE, ALLOW FOR THE CONCURRENT FILING
30 AND ADJUDICATION OF MULTIPLE PERMITS OR APPROVALS RELATED TO A
31 PARTICULAR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECT;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 691 3

1 (2) IN CASES IN WHICH CONCURRENT FILING AND ADJUDICATION IS
2 NOT FEASIBLE, PROVIDE FOR THE PREDICTABLE SEQUENCING OF FILINGS AND
3 ADJUDICATIONS; AND

4 (3) ESTABLISH A FRAMEWORK THAT ALLOWS FOR THE EXPEDITED
5 REVIEW OF PERMITS RELATED TO HOUSING CONSTRUCTION, INCLUDING CLEAR
6 ESCALATION AND PRIORITIZATION PATHWAYS.

7 (C) IN DEVELOPING A STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS UNDER THIS
8 SECTION, A UNIT SHALL CONSULT WITH:

9 (1) THE UNIT’S PERMITTING OPERATIONS STAFF;

10 (2) RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING ENTITIES THAT
11 FREQUENTLY APPLY FOR PERMITS; AND

12 (3) THE STATE HOUSING OMBUDSMAN.

13 (D) TO THE EXTENT FEASIBLE, THE STATE HOUSING OMBUDSMAN SHALL
14 ENSURE CONSISTENCY BETWEEN THE STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESSES
15 DEVELOPED BY DIFFERENT UNITS UNDER THIS SECTION.

16 10–1703.

17 NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, A UNIT IN THE
18 EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF STATE GOVERNMENT MAY, BY AGREEMENT WITH A COUNTY
19 OR MUNICIPALITY, DELEGATE TO AN APPROPRIATE LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL UNIT
20 ANY TASK RELATED TO THE REVIEW OR APPROVAL OF PERMITS RELATED TO
21 HOUSING CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY.

22 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before December 1,
23 2027, the State Housing Ombudsman within the Department of Housing and Community
24 Development shall report to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the
25 Environment and the House Government, Labor, and Elections Committee, in accordance
26 with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the development and implementation of
27 the streamlined permitting processes required by this Act.

28 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3