START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 610 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 610 
(Delegate T. Morgan) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
St. Mary's County - Gaming by Qualified Organization - License Required 
 
 
This bill requires a qualified organization to hold a gaming license whenever the qualified 
organization conducts gaming in St. Mary’s County in accordance with current law. The 
St. Mary’s County Commissioners must designate a person (designee) to issue gaming 
licenses and may adopt regulations, in consultation with the designee, to administer and 
enforce authorized gaming activities. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County expenditures may increase by approximately $23,100 in 
FY 2027 and by approximately $30,800 annually thereafter for a part-time employee to 
process gaming licenses. St. Mary’s County revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A qualified organization in St. Mary’s County may conduct a gaming event 
(a carnival, bazaar, or raffle) and may operate a gaming device (including a paddle wheel, 
a wheel of fortune, a chance book, bingo, Nevada card, and a stamp machine) for the 
exclusive benefit of a qualified organization if an individual or a group of individuals does 
not benefit financially from the gaming device or gaming event or receive any of the 
proceeds from the gaming device or gaming event for personal use or benefit. Qualified 
organizations include volunteer fire companies and bona fide religious, fraternal, civic, war 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 610/ Page 2 
veterans’, and charitable organizations. Members of qualified organizations must 
personally manage the operation of gaming devices and gaming events. 
 
If a qualified organization uses a gaming device on a daily basis, the qualified organization 
may not operate more than five gaming devices and the premises in which the qualified 
organization operates the gaming device may not contain more than five gaming devices. 
 
A qualified organization must keep accurate records of proceeds and expenditures 
involving gaming devices. On request, a qualified organization must allow the  
State’s Attorney for the county, a State Police officer, the designee, and the sheriff or 
deputy sheriff to examine these records. 
 
A qualified organization must have a bingo license to conduct bingo in St. Mary’s County. 
The St. Mary’s County Commissioners must designate a person to issue bingo licenses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  It is unknown how many qualified organizations may acquire a 
gaming license under the bill. Based on gaming license activity in Calvert and Charles 
counties, St. Mary’s County expects to issue a relatively significant number of licenses and 
therefore, is unable to administer gaming licenses with existing staff. Thus,  
St. Mary’s County expenditures increase by approximately $23,100 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by approximately  
$30,800 annually thereafter for a part-time administrator to issue gaming licenses. 
 
The bill does not explicitly grant the St. Mary’s County Commissioners authority to 
establish application and licensing fees for gaming licenses. While St. Mary’s County may 
impose existing fines on qualified organizations for violating gaming license requirements 
under the bill, the Department of Legislative Services assumes St. Mary’s County revenues 
are not materially affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 357 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Comptroller’s Office; Department of State 
Police; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 610/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3