START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 677

D1, C2, J2 6lr2081

By: Delegates Nkongolo, Arentz, Griffith, Odom, Rogers, Schmidt, and Simmons
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Reduction Facilities and Veterans Service Organizations – Hydrolyzed and Soil
3 Remains – Immunity

4 FOR the purpose of providing that a registered reduction operator is not civilly liable for
5 transferring and a veterans service organization is not civilly liable for receiving
6 unclaimed hydrolyzed or soil remains of a veteran or an eligible dependent of a
7 veteran for the purposes of disposition if acting in good faith; and generally relating
8 to reduction facilities, veterans service organizations, and the disposition of
9 unclaimed hydrolyzed or soil remains.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Business Regulation
12 Section 5–101(a), (q), and (z)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
17 Section 5–642
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Business Regulation

23 5–101.

24 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0677*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 677

1 (q) “Natural organic reduction” means the contained accelerated conversion of
2 human remains into soil.

3 (z) “Registered reduction operator” means an individual registered to operate a
4 reduction facility as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or a permit holder.

5 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

6 5–642.

7 (a) In this section, “veteran” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the State
8 Government Article.

9 (b) A licensed funeral establishment, REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR, or
10 holder of a permit to engage in the business of a crematory who acts in good faith is not
11 civilly liable for transferring the unclaimed [cremated] CREMAINS OR HYDROLYZED OR
12 SOIL remains of a veteran or an eligible dependent of a veteran to a veterans service
13 organization for purposes of disposition as provided in § 5–803 of the Business Regulation
14 Article and § 7–406 of the Health Occupations Article.

15 (c) A veterans service organization that acts in good faith is not civilly liable for
16 receiving the unclaimed [cremated] CREMAINS OR HYDROLYZED OR SOIL remains of a
17 veteran or an eligible dependent of a veteran for purposes of disposition as provided in §
18 5–803 of the Business Regulation Article and § 7–406 of the Health Occupations Article.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2