START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 641

G1 6lr1540
HB 317/25 – W&M

By: Delegates Williams, Coley, Foley, Hill, Lehman, Martinez, Moon,
Palakovich Carr, Solomon, Spiegel, Stinnett, Taveras, Wells, and Wilkins
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Election Law – Curbside Voting – Pilot Program

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Curbside Voting Pilot Program to test the viability of
4 curbside voting in the State; establishing requirements governing curbside voting,
5 including requirements related to the designation of curbside voting locations and
6 how to vote at a curbside voting location; and generally relating to the Curbside
7 Voting Pilot Program.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Election Law
10 Section 1–101(p–1) and 10–316
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Election Law
15 Section 9–102(d)(1)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Election Law

21 1–101.

22 (P–1) “CURBSIDE VOTING” MEANS THE PROCESS BY WHICH A VOTER
23 COMPLETES AND CASTS A BALLOT AT AN OUTSIDE LOCATION DESIGNATED UNDER §

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0641*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 641

1 10–316 OF THIS ARTICLE AND UNDER OBSERVATION OF ELECTION JUDGES.

2 9–102.

3 (d) The State Board may not certify a voting system unless the State Board
4 determines that:

5 (1) the voting system will:

6 (i) protect the secrecy of the ballot;

7 (ii) protect the security of the voting process;

8 (iii) count and record all votes accurately;

9 (iv) accommodate any ballot used under this article;

10 (v) protect all other rights of voters and candidates;

11 (vi) be capable of creating a paper record of all votes cast in order
12 that an audit trail is available in the event of a recount, including a manual recount; [and]

13 (vii) provide a voter–verifiable paper record that:

14 1. is an individual document that is physically separated
15 from any other similar document and not part of a continuous roll;

16 2. is sufficiently durable to withstand repeated handling for
17 the purposes of mandatory random audits and recounts; and

18 3. uses ink that does not fade, smear, or otherwise degrade
19 and obscure or obliterate the paper record over time; AND

20 (VIII) FOR A VOTING SYSTEM USED IN THE CURBSIDE VOTING
21 PILOT PROGRAM UNDER § 10–316 OF THIS ARTICLE, ACCOMMODATE CURBSIDE
22 VOTING;

23 10–316.

24 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE CURBSIDE VOTING
25 PILOT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

26 (B) THERE IS A CURBSIDE VOTING PILOT PROGRAM TO TEST THE
27 VIABILITY OF CURBSIDE VOTING IN THE STATE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 641 3

1 (C) THE STATE BOARD, IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE LOCAL BOARDS, SHALL
2 IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

3 (D) (1) THE STATE BOARD SHALL DESIGNATE THE FOLLOWING
4 COUNTIES IN WHICH TO IMPLEMENT THE PILOT PROGRAM:

5 (I) ONE COUNTY WITH A COMPARATIVELY SMALL NUMBER OF
6 REGISTERED VOTERS;

7 (II) ONE COUNTY WITH A COMPARATIVELY MEDIUM NUMBER OF
8 REGISTERED VOTERS; AND

9 (III) ONE COUNTY WITH A COMPARATIVELY LARGE NUMBER OF
10 REGISTERED VOTERS.

11 (2) AT LEAST 6 MONTHS BEFORE EACH STATEWIDE PRIMARY
12 ELECTION, THE LOCAL BOARD OF EACH COUNTY DESIGNATED UNDER PARAGRAPH
13 (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL DESIGNATE A LOCATION FOR CURBSIDE VOTING
14 OUTSIDE:

15 (I) DURING EARLY VOTING, ONE EARLY VOTING CENTER OR
16 OTHER APPROPRIATE BUILDING AS DETERMINED BY THE LOCAL BOARD; AND

17 (II) ON ELECTION DAY:

18 1. THE OFFICE OF THE LOCAL BOARD;

19 2. IF USING THE OFFICE OF THE LOCAL BOARD IS NOT
20 PRACTICABLE, ONE POLLING PLACE; OR

21 3. IF USING THE OFFICE OF THE LOCAL BOARD OR A
22 POLLING PLACE IS NOT PRACTICABLE, AN APPROPRIATE BUILDING AS DETERMINED
23 BY THE LOCAL BOARD.

24 (3) A LOCAL BOARD SHALL TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE FOLLOWING
25 FACTORS WHEN DETERMINING A LOCATION FOR CURBSIDE VOTING:

26 (I) ACCESSIBILITY OF THE LOCATION TO HISTORICALLY
27 DISENFRANCHISED COMMUNITIES;

28 (II) PROXIMITY OF THE LOCATION TO DENSE CONCENTRATIONS
29 OF VOTERS;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 641

1 (III) ACCESSIBILITY OF THE LOCATION BY PUBLIC
2 TRANSPORTATION; AND

3 (IV) MAXIMIZING VOTER PARTICIPATION, INCLUDING THROUGH
4 THE USE OF COMMUNITY CENTERS AND PUBLIC GATHERING PLACES AS LOCATIONS
5 FOR CURBSIDE VOTING.

6 (4) CURBSIDE VOTING SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE AT EACH
7 LOCATION ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO ANY
8 REGISTERED VOTER ON REQUEST ON THE DAYS AND DURING THE HOURS THAT
9 EARLY VOTING CENTERS AND POLLING PLACES ARE OPEN.

10 (5) THE CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION SHALL BE EQUIPPED TO:

11 (I) ALLOW THE VOTER TO COMPLETE THE BALLOT WITHOUT
12 ASSISTANCE, UNLESS ASSISTANCE IS REQUESTED BY THE VOTER; AND

13 (II) PRESERVE THE SECRECY OF THE VOTER’S BALLOT WHILE
14 VOTING.

15 (6) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH AND
16 IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE STATE BOARD, THE LOCAL
17 BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH:

18 1. A LINE AROUND EACH CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION
19 BEYOND WHICH CANVASSING, ELECTIONEERING, OR POSTING OF CAMPAIGN
20 MATERIAL IS PROHIBITED; AND

21 2. A BOUNDARY AROUND A CAR THAT IS WAITING IN LINE
22 FOR CURBSIDE VOTING WITHIN WHICH CANVASSING AND ELECTIONEERING IS
23 PROHIBITED.

24 (II) IF A CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION IS ESTABLISHED
25 OUTSIDE AN EARLY VOTING CENTER OR POLLING PLACE, THE LOCAL BOARD SHALL,
26 TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE:

27 1. ESTABLISH THE CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION WITHIN
28 THE LINE ESTABLISHED UNDER § 16–206(B) OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

29 2. AVOID EXPANDING THE AREA WITHIN THE LINE
30 ESTABLISHED UNDER § 16–206(B) OF THIS ARTICLE TO ACCOMMODATE THE
31 CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION.

32 (E) AT EACH CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION, THE LOCAL BOARD SHALL:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 641 5

1 (1) POST SIGNS INFORMING VOTERS OF:

2 (I) THE LOCATION OF CURBSIDE VOTING; AND

3 (II) HOW TO NOTIFY AN ELECTION JUDGE THAT THE VOTER IS
4 WAITING AT THE CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION; AND

5 (2) ENSURE THAT VOTERS RECEIVE PROMPT SERVICE FROM THE
6 ELECTION JUDGES.

7 (F) (1) A VOTER SEEKING TO USE CURBSIDE VOTING SHALL:

8 (I) REQUEST CURBSIDE VOTING FROM AN ELECTION JUDGE AT
9 THE CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION; AND

10 (II) PROVIDE AN ELECTION JUDGE WITH THE INFORMATION
11 REQUIRED TO CHECK IN THE VOTER THROUGH THE POLLBOOK AT THE CURBSIDE
12 VOTING LOCATION.

13 (2) AN ELECTION JUDGE SHALL GIVE A VOTER USING CURBSIDE
14 VOTING THE CHOICE TO VOTE BY MARKING A PAPER BALLOT OR BY USING A BALLOT
15 MARKING DEVICE AT THE CURBSIDE VOTING LOCATION.

16 (3) IF THE VOTER CHOOSES TO VOTE USING A PAPER BALLOT, AFTER
17 MARKING THE BALLOT, THE VOTER SHALL DEPOSIT THE BALLOT IN THE CONTAINER
18 PROVIDED BY THE ELECTION JUDGE TO BE COUNTED.

19 (4) IF THE VOTER CHOOSES TO VOTE USING A BALLOT MARKING
20 DEVICE, AN ELECTION JUDGE SHALL BRING A BALLOT MARKING DEVICE OUTSIDE
21 TO THE VOTER.

22 (G) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2031, THE STATE BOARD SHALL REPORT
23 TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
24 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CURBSIDE VOTING
25 PILOT PROGRAM.

26 (H) THE STATE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
27 SECTION.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 January 1, 2027. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and 9 months and, at the
30 end of September 30, 2032, this Act, with no further action required by the General
31 Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 5