START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 675

E4 6lr1927

By: Delegates Arikan, Adams, Anderson, Chisholm, Fisher, Kipke, Reilly, and
Szeliga
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Immigration Enforcement – Immigration Enforcement
3 Agreements

4 FOR the purpose of requiring certain local law enforcement agencies in the State to enter
5 into a certain immigration enforcement agreement; establishing certain penalties for
6 local law enforcement agencies that fail to comply with the requirements of this Act;
7 and generally relating to immigration enforcement.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Public Safety
10 Section 1–101(a) and (b)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Public Safety
15 Section 3–535
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Public Safety

21 1–101.

22 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) “County” means a county of the State or Baltimore City.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0675*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 675

1 3–535.

2 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (2) “IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT” MEANS AN
5 AGREEMENT OR A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE FEDERAL
6 GOVERNMENT MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH 8 U.S.C. § 1357 THAT AUTHORIZES A
7 LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY IN THE STATE TO ENFORCE CIVIL IMMIGRATION
8 LAW USING THE JAIL ENFORCEMENT MODEL.

9 (3) “LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” MEANS THE POLICE
10 DEPARTMENT, BUREAU, OR FORCE OF A COUNTY.

11 (4) “OFFICE” MEANS THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME
12 PREVENTION AND POLICY.

13 (B) THE OFFICE SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ENFORCING THE
14 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

15 (C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
16 ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, EACH LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT
17 OPERATES A CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL ENTER INTO AN IMMIGRATION
18 ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT.

19 (2) (I) A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY APPLY FOR A
20 ONE–TIME WAIVER FROM THE OFFICE IN ORDER TO DELAY THE DATE BY WHICH THE
21 LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MUST ENTER INTO AN IMMIGRATION
22 ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT.

23 (II) THE OFFICE MAY GRANT A ONE–TIME WAIVER TO A LOCAL
24 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY TO DELAY THE DATE BY WHICH THE LOCAL LAW
25 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MUST ENTER INTO AN IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT
26 AGREEMENT.

27 (III) A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT OBTAINS A
28 WAIVER UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL ENTER INTO AN IMMIGRATION
29 ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2027.

30 (D) (1) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2027, A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
31 THAT OPERATES A CORRECTIONAL FACILITY THAT HAS NOT MET THE
32 REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL, IF REQUESTED BY
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 675 3

1 FEDERAL IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES:

2 (I) DETAIN AN INDIVIDUAL FOR UP TO 48 HOURS IN ORDER TO
3 FACILITATE THE TRANSFER OF THE INDIVIDUAL TO FEDERAL IMMIGRATION
4 AUTHORITIES; AND

5 (II) TRANSFER AN INDIVIDUAL TO FEDERAL IMMIGRATION
6 AUTHORITIES.

7 (2) IF A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT OPERATES A
8 CORRECTIONAL FACILITY VIOLATES THIS SUBSECTION BY RELEASING AN
9 INDIVIDUAL AND THE INDIVIDUAL IS LATER DETAINED OR ARRESTED BY ANOTHER
10 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OF THE STATE, ANOTHER STATE, OR THE FEDERAL
11 GOVERNMENT WITHIN 5 YEARS OF BEING RELEASED BY THE LOCAL LAW
12 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, THE LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT RELEASED
13 THE INDIVIDUAL IN VIOLATION OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR:

14 (I) ANY HOUSING COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH DETAINING THE
15 INDIVIDUAL; AND

16 (II) ANY COURT COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH ANY CRIMINAL
17 PROCEEDING INVOLVING THE INDIVIDUAL.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
19 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3