START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 661

P1 6lr0986
HB 899/25 – HGO CF SB 308

By: Delegates Wolek and Solomon
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 General Provisions – Commemorative Months – Muslim American Heritage and
3 Jewish American Heritage Months

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor annually to proclaim certain months as Muslim
5 American Heritage and Jewish American Heritage months; requiring the
6 proclamations to urge certain organizations to observe the months with certain
7 programs and activities; and generally relating to Muslim American Heritage and
8 Jewish American Heritage months.

9 BY renumbering
10 Article – General Provisions
11 Section 7–501 through 7–503 and 7–504 through 7–507
12 to be Section 7–502 through 7–504 and 7–506 through 7–509, respectively
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY adding to
16 Article – General Provisions
17 Section 7–501 and 7–505
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 Preamble

21 WHEREAS, There are over 350,000 Muslim Marylanders who currently reside in
22 the State and, for generations, have contributed to enriching the artistic, business,
23 academic, and public service communities thereby significantly increasing the vibrancy of
24 Maryland; and

25 WHEREAS, There are over 250,000 Jewish Marylanders who currently reside in the
26 State and, for generations, have contributed to enriching the artistic, business, academic,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0661*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 661

1 and public service communities thereby significantly increasing the vibrancy of Maryland;
2 now, therefore,

3 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
4 That Section(s) 7–501 through 7–503 and 7–504 through 7–507 of Article – General
5 Provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–502
6 through 7–504 and 7–506 through 7–509, respectively.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
8 as follows:

9 Article – General Provisions

10 7–501.

11 (A) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF JANUARY
12 AS MUSLIM AMERICAN HERITAGE MONTH IN RECOGNITION OF THE
13 CONTRIBUTIONS THAT MUSLIM AMERICANS HAVE MADE TO THE STATE.

14 (B) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL URGE EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL
15 ORGANIZATIONS TO OBSERVE MUSLIM AMERICAN HERITAGE MONTH PROPERLY
16 WITH APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS, CEREMONIES, AND ACTIVITIES.

17 7–505.

18 (A) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM THE MONTH OF MAY AS
19 JEWISH AMERICAN HERITAGE MONTH IN RECOGNITION OF THE CONTRIBUTIONS
20 THAT JEWISH AMERICANS HAVE MADE TO THE STATE.

21 (B) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL URGE EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL
22 ORGANIZATIONS TO OBSERVE JEWISH AMERICAN HERITAGE MONTH PROPERLY
23 WITH APPROPRIATE PROGRAMS, CEREMONIES, AND ACTIVITIES.

24 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
25 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2