START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 614

F1 6lr2151
HB 66/25 – APP CF SB 381

By: Delegates Wu, Forbes, Hill, Kaufman, J. Long, Moreno, Patterson, Simmons,
and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – School Building Energy Usage – Monthly Report

3 FOR the purpose of requiring each county board of education to collect data on energy usage
4 and report the data collected to the Interagency Commission on School Construction;
5 requiring the Commission to adopt regulations specifying the data to be collected
6 and the means and frequency of reporting; requiring the Commission to analyze the
7 data collected and provide recommendations for improving school building energy
8 efficiency and usage; and generally relating to school building energy usage.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 5–331
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 5–331.

18 (A) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL:

19 (1) COLLECT DATA ON SCHOOL BUILDING ENERGY USAGE; AND

20 (2) REPORT THE DATA COLLECTED TO THE INTERAGENCY
21 COMMISSION.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0614*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 614

1 (B) THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT
2 SPECIFY:

3 (1) THE DATA TO BE COLLECTED; AND

4 (2) THE MEANS AND FREQUENCY OF REPORTING.

5 (C) THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION SHALL ANALYZE THE DATA
6 COLLECTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND PROVIDE
7 RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COUNTY BOARD FOR IMPROVING SCHOOL BUILDING
8 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND USAGE.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
10 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2