START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 678 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 678 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Membership - Clarifications 
 
 
This bill makes specified employees of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
members of the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a condition of their 
employment. It also requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension 
System (SRPS) to transfer service credit earned by affected employees in the 
Employees’ Retirement System (ERS) or the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) to CORS, 
unless an affected employee opts not to have service credit transferred. However, members 
who transfer into CORS with no creditable service in EPS from before July 1, 2008, are 
not eligible to opt out of the transfer of service. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, some 
provisions related to transfer of service credit terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, there is 
no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates, as discussed below. 
No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual who is employed in two specified job classifications at any 
of seven specified facilities on or after July 1, 2026, is a member of CORS as a condition 
of employment. Also, an individual who is employed in any of those positions on or before 
June 30, 2026, is eligible to retire from CORS if vested in CORS with a combined total of 
at least 20 years of eligibility credit in CORS and either EPS or ERS. 
Facilities:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 678/ Page 2 
 
 
Eastern Shore Hospital Center; 
 
Thomas B. Finan Center; 
 
Potomac Center/Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment Program; 
 
Spring Grove Hospital Center; 
 
Springfield Hospital Center; 
 
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents-Baltimore; and  
 
John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents. 
 
Job Classifications:   
 
 
CAMH Specialist I 
 
CAMH Specialist II 
 
Any individual who retires under this provision is entitled to a normal service retirement 
benefit based on creditable service in CORS. 
 
If any of the affected employees is granted an ordinary disability benefit, the SRPS Board 
must calculate and pay the ordinary disability benefit that is greater under either CORS or 
EPS. 
 
Current Law:  Eligibility for CORS membership has been expanded in recent years from 
just correctional officers in specified job classifications and security attendants at the 
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center to now also include:   
 
 
correctional dietary, maintenance, and supply workers (Chapter 340 of 2006); 
 
correctional laundry workers and designated employees of Maryland Correctional 
Enterprises (Chapters 408 and 409 of 2008); 
 
correctional case management specialists, supervisors, and managers (Chapters 218 
and 219 of 2016); 
 
parole and probation agents, supervisors, and regional administrators (Chapters 688 
and 689 of 2017); 
 
specified counselors, social workers, psychologists, and recreation officers within 
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) (Chapter 690 
of 2017); 
 
specified detention center employees of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 
and specified supervisory positions within DPSCS (that had been inadvertently 
omitted from earlier legislation) (Chapter 579 of 2018); 
 
specified case management workers and group life managers in DJS (Chapter 147 
of 2022); and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 678/ Page 3 
 
specified hospital employees in MDH and correctional maintenance employees in 
DPSCS (Chapters 135 and 136 of 2024 and Chapters 776 and 777 of 2025). 
 
Exhibit 1 delineates key provisions for CORS and EPS. As the exhibit shows, 
Chapter 110 of 2006 phased in a higher EPS employee contribution rate, from 2.0% in 
fiscal 2006 to 5.0% in fiscal 2009. Chapter 397 of 2011 made additional changes, raising 
the member contribution rate to 7.0% and reducing the benefit multiplier to 1.5% for 
members hired after June 30, 2011. Prior to July 1, 1998, EPS was noncontributory for 
most members. 
 
“Eligibility service” means service credit that is recognized for determining eligibility for 
a retirement benefit. In general, a member of EPS receives one year of eligibility service 
credit for completing at least 500 hours of employment in a fiscal year. “Creditable service” 
is service credit that is recognized for computing a retirement benefit. In general, it equals 
eligibility service credit plus credit for unused sick leave. 
 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs transfers from EPS to another 
contributory pension system (like CORS). Under Title 37, a “new system” means the 
system into which the member is transferring service credit, and “previous system” means 
the system from which the individual is transferring. Members transferring creditable 
service from EPS to another contributory system must pay the member contribution rates 
in effect for the period of service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. 
They are also refunded any accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in 
excess of the member contributions required by the new system. 
 
Under the terms of Title 37, therefore, EPS members transferring creditable service to 
CORS have to pay the difference between the contribution rate paid to EPS, if any, and the 
5.0% CORS contribution rate, plus interest, for any service credit earned prior to 
fiscal 2009, when the EPS member contribution rate was less than the 5.0% CORS 
contribution. For service credit earned prior to 1998, they likely must pay the full CORS 
contribution of 5.0% (plus interest) since EPS was noncontributory for most members. 
However, they will also receive credit for the higher member contributions (7.0%) paid in EPS 
since June 30, 2011, because those contributions are also transferred to CORS and credited 
to their account. Any net deficiency in their member contributions results in an actuarial 
reduction to their benefit at the time of retirement. The Department of Legislative Services 
notes that there is no actual transfer of assets between plans because CORS and EPS/ERS 
are considered a single plan for the purpose of valuing their assets and liabilities. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 678/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Provisions 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System 
 
 
Hired Before July 1, 2011 Hired After June 30, 2011 
CORS 
Normal Retirement 
Age 
621 
652 
553 
Years of Service for 
Normal Retirement 
30 
Age and service add to 90 
20 
Employee 
Contribution 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006) 
3.0% in 2007 
4.0% in 2008 
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% 
5.0% 
Benefit Multiplier 
1.8% (after 1998) 
1.2% (before 1998) 
1.5% 
1.818% 
 
CORS:  Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
1 Retiree must have at least 5 years of service. 
2 Retiree must have at least 10 years of service. 
3 Retiree must have 5 years of service if hired before July 1, 2011; otherwise, retiree must have 10 years of 
service if hired on or after July 1, 2011. 
 
Source:  Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 
 
Normal retirement age for most CORS members is age 55 if they have vested; they can 
also retire with 20 years of service regardless of age. 
 
State Expenditures:  SRA advises that there are 14 positions in the MDH facilities with 
the classifications named in the bill. However, MDH advises that there are currently no 
individuals employed at the facilities in those classifications. Therefore, this analysis 
assumes that the maximum number of positions affected is 14, and that there are potentially 
no individuals affected now or in the future. As a result, the bill has no material effect on 
State pension liabilities or contribution rates. To the extent that more individuals are 
affected in the future, the effect on liabilities and contribution rates may be greater.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 678/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 337 (Senator Lewis Young)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
sj/mcr    
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5