START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 618

I4 6lr2398
CF SB 438

By: Delegate A. Johnson
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Commercial Law – Self–Service Storage Facilities – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of providing for the use of an electronic rental agreement in the rental of
4 self–service storage facilities; prohibiting an occupant from using the occupant’s
5 self–service storage facility beyond the term of a rental agreement after delivery of
6 a notice of nonrenewal; requiring an operator to give an occupant a certain number
7 of days after delivery of a notice of nonrenewal to remove the occupant’s personal
8 property from the self–service storage facility; authorizing an operator to dispose of
9 an occupant’s remaining personal property after a certain amount of time has
10 elapsed; requiring an operator to give an occupant notice of intent to dispose of the
11 occupant’s personal property a certain number of days before the operator disposes
12 of that personal property; and generally relating to self–service storage facilities.

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Commercial Law
15 Section 18–501 and 18–502
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Commercial Law

21 18–501.

22 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

23 (b) “Default” means the failure to perform on time any obligation or duty set forth
24 in the rental agreement.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0618*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 618

1 (c) “Last known address” means that address or electronic mail address provided
2 by the occupant in the rental agreement or the address or electronic mail address provided
3 by the occupant in a subsequent written notice of a change of address.

4 (d) “Leased space” means the individual storage space at the self–service facility
5 which is rented to an occupant pursuant to a rental agreement.

6 (e) “Occupant” means a person, a sublessee, successor, or assign, entitled to the
7 use of a leased space at a self–service storage facility under a rental agreement.

8 (f) (1) “Operator” means the owner, operator, lessor, or sublessor of a
9 self–service storage facility, an agent, or any other person authorized to manage the facility.

10 (2) “Operator” does not include a warehouseman, unless the operator
11 issues a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title for the personal
12 property stored.

13 (g) (1) “Personal property” means movable property, not affixed to land.

14 (2) “Personal property” includes goods, wares, merchandise, motor
15 vehicles, watercraft, and household items and furnishings.

16 (h) “Rental agreement” means any written OR ELECTRONIC agreement that
17 establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, or rules concerning the use and occupancy of
18 a self–service storage facility.

19 (i) “Self–service storage facility” means any real property used for renting or
20 leasing individual storage spaces in which the occupants themselves customarily store and
21 remove their own personal property on a “self–service” basis.

22 (j) “Verified mail” means any method of mailing that is offered by the United
23 States Postal Service or private delivery service that provides evidence of mailing.

24 18–502.

25 (a) An operator may not knowingly permit a leased space at a self–service storage
26 facility to be used for residential purposes.

27 (b) An occupant may not use a leased space for residential purposes.

28 (C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, AN
29 OCCUPANT MAY NOT USE A SELF–SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY BEYOND THE TERM
30 OF A RENTAL AGREEMENT AFTER THE OPERATOR OR OCCUPANT HAS DELIVERED IN
31 PERSON, BY E–MAIL, OR BY VERIFIED MAIL WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE NONRENEWAL
32 OF THE RENTAL AGREEMENT.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 618 3

1 (D) THE OPERATOR SHALL PROVIDE THE OCCUPANT WITH NOT LESS THAN
2 30 DAYS AFTER DELIVERY OF THE NOTICE OF THE NONRENEWAL OF THE RENTAL
3 AGREEMENT AND AT LEAST UNTIL THE END OF THE TERM OF THE RENTAL
4 AGREEMENT TO REMOVE ALL PERSONAL PROPERTY FROM THE SELF–SERVICE
5 STORAGE FACILITY.

6 (E) (1) THE OPERATOR MAY DISPOSE OF ANY PERSONAL PROPERTY
7 REMAINING AT THE SELF–SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY AFTER THE TIME ALLOTTED
8 UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION HAS ELAPSED.

9 (2) AT LEAST 10 DAYS BEFORE DISPOSING OF THE PERSONAL
10 PROPERTY REMAINING AT THE SELF–SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY, THE OPERATOR
11 SHALL DELIVER IN PERSON, BY E–MAIL, OR BY VERIFIED MAIL A NOTICE OF INTENT
12 TO DISPOSE OF THE OCCUPANT’S PROPERTY.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3