START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 695

M5, P1 6lr1129
HB 145/25 – ECM & APP CF SB 23

By: Delegates A. Johnson, Acevero, Behler, Cardin, Embry, Feldmark, Kaufman,
J. Long, Simmons, Spiegel, Stinnett, and Wu
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation and Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Green and Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits (GREEN) Loan Program
3 and Fund – Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Green and Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits
5 Loan Program in the Maryland Clean Energy Center to provide financial assistance
6 to nonprofit organizations for the planning, purchase, and installation of qualifying
7 energy systems and for actions that improve energy efficiency; establishing the
8 Green and Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Fund as a special,
9 nonlapsing fund; requiring interest earnings of the Green and Renewable Energy
10 Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Fund to be paid into the Green and Renewable Energy
11 Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Fund; altering the uses of the Maryland Strategic
12 Energy Investment Fund to include providing funds to the Green and Renewable
13 Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Fund; and generally relating to the Green and
14 Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Program and Fund.

15 BY renumbering
16 Article – Economic Development
17 Section 10–862 and the part “Part VII. Short Title”
18 to be Section 10–871 and the part “Part VIII. Short Title”
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Economic Development
23 Section 10–862 through 10–868 to be under the new part “Part VII. Green and
24 Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Program”
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

27 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0695*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 695

1 Article – State Finance and Procurement
2 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)
3 Annotated Code of Maryland
4 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

5 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
6 Article – State Finance and Procurement
7 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 BY adding to
11 Article – State Finance and Procurement
12 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 Article – State Government
17 Section 9–20B–05(a)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
21 Article – State Government
22 Section 9–20B–05(f)(13) and (14)
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

25 BY adding to
26 Article – State Government
27 Section 9–20B–05(f)(14)
28 Annotated Code of Maryland
29 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

30 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
31 That Section(s) 10–862 and the part “Part VII. Short Title” of Article – Economic
32 Development of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 10–871
33 and the part “Part VIII. Short Title”.

34 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
35 as follows:

36 Article – Economic Development

37 PART VII. GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY FOR NONPROFITS LOAN
38 PROGRAM.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 695 3

1 10–862.

2 (A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (B) “BORROWER” MEANS A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT APPLIES AND
5 QUALIFIES FOR A LOAN UNDER THE PROGRAM.

6 (C) “FUND” MEANS THE GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
7 FOR NONPROFITS LOAN FUND.

8 (D) “NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION THAT IS
9 EXEMPT FROM FEDERAL INCOME TAX UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL
10 REVENUE CODE.

11 (E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
12 EFFICIENCY FOR NONPROFITS LOAN PROGRAM.

13 (F) “QUALIFYING ENERGY SYSTEM” MEANS A SYSTEM THAT:

14 (1) GENERATES ELECTRICITY OR USABLE THERMAL ENERGY THAT IS
15 USED TO MEET ON–SITE DEMAND; AND

16 (2) ASSISTS THE STATE IN MEETING THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND
17 GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION GOALS UNDER TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE
18 ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

19 10–863.

20 THERE IS A GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY FOR NONPROFITS
21 LOAN PROGRAM IN THE CENTER.

22 10–864.

23 THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN
24 THE FORM OF NO–INTEREST LOANS TO NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR:

25 (1) THE PLANNING, PURCHASE, AND INSTALLATION OF QUALIFYING
26 ENERGY SYSTEMS IN THE STATE; AND

27 (2) ACTIONS THAT IMPROVE ENERGY EFFICIENCY, SUCH AS
28 REPAIRING OR REPLACING WINDOWS, DOORS, AND HEATING, VENTILATION, AND
29 AIR–CONDITIONING SYSTEMS AND OTHER SIMILAR IMPROVEMENTS.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 695

1 10–865.

2 THE CENTER SHALL:

3 (1) MANAGE, SUPERVISE, AND ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM;

4 (2) ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT LOANS PROVIDED TO
5 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM; AND

6 (3) ATTACH TO ANY LOAN SPECIFIC TERMS THAT ARE CONSIDERED
7 NECESSARY TO ENSURE THAT THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS FULFILLED.

8 10–866.

9 (A) (1) A BORROWER MUST FILE AN APPLICATION WITH THE CENTER TO
10 RECEIVE A LOAN UNDER THE PROGRAM.

11 (2) THE APPLICATION MUST BE SIGNED BY THE CHIEF OPERATING
12 OFFICER OR AN AUTHORIZED OFFICER OF THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

13 (B) THE APPLICATION MUST CONTAIN ANY INFORMATION THE CENTER
14 DETERMINES IS NECESSARY, INCLUDING:

15 (1) THE PROJECTED COST OF THE QUALIFYING ENERGY SYSTEM,
16 ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION, OR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE BEING FINANCED
17 THROUGH THE LOAN;

18 (2) THE LOCATION OF THE PROPERTY WHERE THE QUALIFYING
19 ENERGY SYSTEM WILL BE INSTALLED OR AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION WILL
20 OCCUR AND WHETHER THE PROPERTY IS OWNED OR LEASED BY THE APPLICANT;
21 AND

22 (3) ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RELATING TO THE BORROWER OR
23 THE PROPOSED QUALIFYING ENERGY SYSTEM OR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION
24 BEING FINANCED THROUGH THE LOAN THAT MAY BE REQUIRED BY THE CENTER TO
25 ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

26 (C) THE CENTER MAY APPROVE AN APPLICATION FOR A LOAN SPECIFIED IN
27 § 10–867(A)(1) OF THIS SUBTITLE ONLY IF THE APPLICATION DEMONSTRATES THAT
28 THE PROPOSED QUALIFYING ENERGY SYSTEM OR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION IS
29 ESTIMATED, BASED ON PROJECTED ENERGY COSTS, TO GENERATE ENERGY COST
30 SAVINGS OVER THE USEFUL LIFE OF THE SYSTEM OR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION
31 THAT EQUAL OR EXCEED THE TOTAL AMORTIZED COST OF THE LOAN.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 695 5

1 (D) IN APPROVING AN APPLICATION, THE CENTER SHALL CONSIDER AND
2 GIVE PRIORITY TO AN APPLICANT THAT HAS AN ANNUAL BUDGET OF $1,000,000 OR
3 LESS.

4 10–867.

5 (A) LOANS FROM THE FUND MAY BE USED FOR:

6 (1) THE PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF A QUALIFYING ENERGY
7 SYSTEM, INCLUDING ANY NECESSARY ANCILLARY MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, OR
8 FURNISHINGS;

9 (2) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE PLANNING AND INSTALLATION
10 OF A QUALIFYING ENERGY SYSTEM; AND

11 (3) ACTIONS THAT IMPROVE ENERGY EFFICIENCY, SUCH AS
12 REPAIRING OR REPLACING WINDOWS, DOORS, AND HEATING, VENTILATION, AND
13 AIR–CONDITIONING SYSTEMS AND OTHER SIMILAR IMPROVEMENTS.

14 (B) EACH BORROWER FOR A LOAN UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS
15 SECTION SHALL CONTRIBUTE AT LEAST 10% OF THE COST OF THE QUALIFYING
16 ENERGY SYSTEM OR ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION.

17 (C) (1) LOANS MADE UNDER THE PROGRAM SHALL BE REPAYABLE BY
18 THE BORROWER IN ACCORDANCE WITH A SCHEDULE SET BY THE CENTER.

19 (2) THE SCHEDULE SET BY THE CENTER MAY BE ON A DEFERRED
20 PAYMENT BASIS.

21 (D) (1) A BORROWER SHALL PROVIDE ASSURANCES FOR THE
22 REPAYMENT OF A LOAN.

23 (2) THE ASSURANCES:

24 (I) SHALL INCLUDE A PROMISSORY NOTE; AND

25 (II) MAY INCLUDE A PLAN FOR REPAYMENT.

26 (E) LOANS MAY BE MADE IN CONJUNCTION WITH OR IN ADDITION TO
27 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROVIDED THROUGH OTHER STATE OR FEDERAL
28 PROGRAMS.

29 10–868.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 695

1 (A) THERE IS A GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY FOR
2 NONPROFITS LOAN FUND.

3 (B) THE CENTER SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

4 (C) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
5 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

6 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
7 AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

8 (D) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

9 (1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE PROGRAM;

10 (2) MONEY TRANSFERRED FROM THE STRATEGIC ENERGY
11 INVESTMENT FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–20B–05 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
12 ARTICLE;

13 (3) MONEY RECEIVED FROM ANY PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SOURCE;

14 (4) INTEREST AND INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

15 (5) REPAYMENTS AND PREPAYMENTS ON LOANS MADE FROM THE
16 FUND.

17 (E) (1) IN FISCAL YEAR 2028, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE
18 ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $5,000,000 FOR THE FUND.

19 (2) IN FISCAL YEAR 2029, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE
20 ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION EQUAL TO AT LEAST $5,000,000 MINUS
21 THE AMOUNT IN THE FUND AS OF JUNE 30 OF THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
22 FISCAL YEAR.

23 (F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY:

24 (1) TO PAY THE EXPENSES OF THE PROGRAM; AND

25 (2) TO PROVIDE LOANS TO ELIGIBLE BORROWERS UNDER THE
26 PROGRAM.

27 (G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST AND REINVEST THE
28 MONEY OF THE FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE
29 INVESTED.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 695 7

1 (2) ANY INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE PAID INTO
2 THE FUND.

3 (3) ANY REPAYMENT ON LOANS MADE FROM THE FUND SHALL BE
4 PAID INTO THE FUND.

5 10–869. RESERVED.

6 10–870. RESERVED.

7 Article – State Finance and Procurement

8 6–226.

9 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.

10 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
11 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
12 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
13 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
14 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
15 Fund of the State.

16 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
17 apply to the following funds:

18 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
19 Fund; [and]

20 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

21 214. THE GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
22 FOR NONPROFITS LOAN FUND.

23 Article – State Government

24 9–20B–05.

25 (a) There is a Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund.

26 (f) The Administration shall use the Fund:

27 (13) notwithstanding subsection (g) of this section, to pay costs associated
28 with the Air and Radiation Administration within the Department of the Environment;
29 [and]
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 695

1 (14) TO PROVIDE FUNDS TO THE GREEN AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
2 EFFICIENCY FOR NONPROFITS LOAN FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–868 OF THE
3 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE; AND

4 [(14)] (15) to pay the expenses of the Program.

5 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, 2027, the
6 Maryland Clean Energy Center shall:

7 (1) establish an application process for loans made under the Green and
8 Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Program in Title 10, Subtitle 8 of the
9 Economic Development Article, as enacted by Section 2 of this Act;

10 (2) set guidelines and considerations for application, selection, and
11 repayment that include:

12 (i) nonprofit organizations that own, rather than rent, their
13 buildings;

14 (ii) property size and kilowatt–hours of energy used;

15 (iii) geographic diversity;

16 (iv) ethnic and racial diversity;

17 (v) economic diversity;

18 (vi) nonprofit organization mission diversity;

19 (vii) access to the borrower’s portion of the cost of the qualifying
20 energy system; and

21 (viii) process and frequency of loan repayment; and

22 (3) develop and implement an advertising campaign for the Green and
23 Renewable Energy Efficiency for Nonprofits Loan Program.

24 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Sections 1 and 2 of this Act
25 shall take effect July 1, 2027.

26 SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
27 4 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 8