START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 680

O1, O4 6lr2654

By: Delegates Shetty, Addison, Amprey, Boafo, Chang, Charkoudian, Feldmark,
Ivey, A. Johnson, D. Jones, Kaufman, Lehman, McCaskill, Moreno, Roberts,
Sample–Hughes, Simmons, Smith, Stinnett, and Toles
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Children’s Cabinet Fund – Renaming and Funding for Grants to Local
3 Management Boards

4 FOR the purpose of renaming the Children’s Cabinet Fund to be the Children’s Cabinet
5 Interagency Fund; requiring the Governor, in certain fiscal years, to include an
6 appropriation in the annual budget bill to the Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund
7 to be used for grants to local management boards; and generally relating to the
8 renaming of the Children’s Cabinet Fund and funding for grants to local
9 management boards.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Education
12 Section 8–417(b)(1)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Health – General
17 Section 15–139(c)(1)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
21 Article – Human Services
22 Section 8–501 through 8–503 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 5.
23 Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund”
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0680*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 680

1 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
2 Article – Human Services
3 Section 8–504 through 8–506 and 8–508
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

6 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
7 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

8 Article – Education

9 8–417.

10 (b) (1) The Department, in collaboration with the fiscal agent of the Children’s
11 Cabinet INTERAGENCY Fund under Title 8, Subtitle 5 of the Human Services Article, shall
12 administer and implement a redesigned rate setting process for nonpublic general
13 education schools, residential child care programs, and nonresidential child care programs.

14 Article – Health – General

15 15–139.

16 (c) (1) For each fiscal year, the Governor may provide funds in the budget for
17 the Children’s Cabinet INTERAGENCY Fund established under Title 8, Subtitle 5 of the
18 Human Services Article, to be used by the Children’s Cabinet to create an interagency pool
19 of funds to provide services to children with disabilities.

20 Article – Human Services

21 Subtitle 5. Children’s Cabinet INTERAGENCY Fund.

22 8–501.

23 In this subtitle, “Fund” means the Children’s Cabinet INTERAGENCY Fund.

24 8–502.

25 There is a Children’s Cabinet INTERAGENCY Fund.

26 8–503.

27 (a) The Fund:

28 (1) consists of money appropriated, transferred, credited, or paid into the
29 Fund from any source; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 680 3

1 (2) includes money for out–of–home care and services to prevent
2 out–of–home placements.

3 (b) At the end of each fiscal year any unspent money in the Fund shall revert to
4 the General Fund.

5 (C) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL
6 THE FOLLOWING APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FUND TO BE USED FOR GRANTS TO
7 ELIGIBLE LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARDS:

8 (I) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028, $3,000,000 ABOVE THE
9 APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2027;

10 (II) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2029, $2,000,000 ABOVE THE
11 APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2028;

12 (III) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2030, $2,000,000 ABOVE THE
13 APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2029; AND

14 (IV) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2031, $2,000,000 ABOVE THE
15 APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2030.

16 (2) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE
17 LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARDS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS
18 SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT
19 OTHERWISE WOULD BE EXPENDED FOR GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE LOCAL MANAGEMENT
20 BOARDS.

21 8–504.

22 Expenditures from the Fund shall be made:

23 (1) in accordance with the State Finance and Procurement Article; and

24 (2) to reflect the priorities, policies, and procedures that the Children’s
25 Cabinet adopts.

26 8–505.

27 (a) A local management board shall apply for money from the Fund in accordance
28 with procedures established by the Children’s Cabinet.

29 (b) In connection with an application for money under subsection (a) of this
30 section, a local management board shall develop and submit a community partnership
31 agreement that:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 680

1 (1) reflects coordination with:

2 (i) the State’s 3–year plan for children, youth, and families; and

3 (ii) any local government plan for services for children, youth, and
4 families, including the local substance abuse plan developed in accordance with Title 8,
5 Subtitle 10 of the Health – General Article; and

6 (2) addresses the priorities and strategies of the county for meeting the
7 identified needs of children and families as articulated in the local management board’s
8 5–year strategic plan regarding:

9 (i) youth development;

10 (ii) prevention services;

11 (iii) crisis and early intervention;

12 (iv) services for children at risk of out–of–home placement or
13 returning from out–of–home placement; and

14 (v) out–of–home placement and treatment.

15 (c) The Children’s Cabinet may disburse money to a local management board
16 subject to the terms, conditions, performance measures, or outcome evaluations that the
17 Children’s Cabinet considers necessary.

18 (d) The local management board shall use the money to implement:

19 (1) a local interagency services delivery system for children, youth, and
20 families in accordance with the community partnership agreement; and

21 (2) any terms, conditions, and performance measures that the Children’s
22 Cabinet requires.

23 8–506.

24 (a) The State shall fund only evidence–based and promising home visiting
25 programs for improving parent and child outcomes, as provided in the State budget.

26 (b) Not less than 75% of the State funding for home visiting programs shall be
27 made available to evidence–based home visiting programs.

28 8–508.

29 The Governor’s Office for Children is the fiscal agent for the Fund.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 680 5

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5