START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 619

J2 6lr3277
CF SB 333

By: Delegate Cullison
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact

3 FOR the purpose of entering into the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact;
4 authorizing a podiatrist to practice in a participating state under certain scope of
5 practice rules; establishing the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact
6 Commission to oversee the Compact and its duties and powers; and generally
7 relating to the Interstate Podiatric Medical Licensure Compact.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Health Occupations
10 Section 16–3A–01 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 3A. Interstate Podiatric
11 Medical Licensure Compact”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health Occupations

17 SUBTITLE 3A. INTERSTATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSURE COMPACT.

18 16–3A–01.

19 SECTION 1. PURPOSE

20 IN ORDER TO STRENGTHEN ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE, AND IN RECOGNITION
21 OF THE ADVANCES IN THE DELIVERY IN HEALTH CARE, THE MEMBER STATES OF THE
22 INTERSTATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSURE COMPACT HAVE ALLIED IN COMMON
23 PURPOSE TO DEVELOP A COMPREHENSIVE PROCESS THAT COMPLEMENTS THE

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0619*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 619

1 EXISTING LICENSING AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF STATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL
2 BOARDS AND PROVIDES A STREAMLINED PROCESS THAT ALLOWS PODIATRISTS TO
3 BECOME LICENSED IN MULTIPLE STATES, THEREBY ENHANCING THE PORTABILITY
4 OF A PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSE AND ENSURING THE SAFETY OF PATIENTS. THE
5 COMPACT CREATES ANOTHER PATHWAY FOR LICENSURE AND DOES NOT
6 OTHERWISE CHANGE A STATE’S EXISTING PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT.
7 THE COMPACT ALSO ADOPTS THE PREVAILING STANDARD FOR LICENSURE AND
8 AFFIRMS THAT THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE OCCURS WHERE THE
9 PATIENT IS LOCATED AT THE TIME OF THE PODIATRIST–PATIENT ENCOUNTER, AND
10 THEREFORE, REQUIRES THE PODIATRIST TO BE UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE
11 STATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL BOARD WHERE THE PATIENT IS LOCATED. STATE
12 PODIATRIC MEDICAL BOARDS THAT PARTICIPATE IN THE COMPACT RETAIN THE
13 JURISDICTION TO IMPOSE AN ADVERSE ACTION AGAINST A LICENSE TO PRACTICE
14 PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN THAT STATE ISSUED TO A PODIATRIST THROUGH THE
15 PROCEDURES IN THE COMPACT.

16 SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS

17 IN THIS COMPACT:

18 (A) “BYLAWS” MEANS THOSE BYLAWS ESTABLISHED BY THE INTERSTATE
19 COMMISSION PURSUANT TO SECTION 11.

20 (B) “COMMISSIONER” MEANS THE VOTING REPRESENTATIVE APPOINTED
21 BY EACH MEMBER BOARD PURSUANT TO SECTION 11.

22 (C) “CONVICTION” MEANS A FINDING BY A COURT THAT AN INDIVIDUAL IS
23 GUILTY OF A CRIMINAL OFFENSE THROUGH ADJUDICATION, OR ENTRY OF A PLEA
24 OF GUILT OR NO CONTEST TO THE CHARGE BY THE OFFENDER. EVIDENCE OF AN
25 ENTRY OF CONVICTION OF A CRIMINAL OFFENSE BY THE COURT SHALL BE
26 CONSIDERED FINAL FOR PURPOSES OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION BY A MEMBER BOARD.

27 (D) “EXPEDITED LICENSE” MEANS A FULL UNRESTRICTED PODIATRIC
28 MEDICAL LICENSE GRANTED BY A MEMBER STATE TO AN ELIGIBLE PODIATRIST
29 THROUGH THE PROCESS SET FORTH IN THE COMPACT.

30 (E) “CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK” MEANS THAT THE MEMBER BOARD IS
31 AUTHORIZED TO OBTAIN A FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION BIOMETRIC
32 BASED FEDERAL CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK INFORMATION REPORT FROM THE
33 AUTHORIZED STATE AGENCY FOR THE EXCLUSIVE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING
34 ELIGIBILITY FOR CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFICATION THAT WOULD ALLOW FOR AN
35 EXPEDITED LICENSE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 619 3

1 (F) “FEDERAL CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK INFORMATION” MEANS ANY
2 INFORMATION OBTAINED BY A MEMBER BOARD FROM THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
3 INVESTIGATION RELATING TO A FEDERAL CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK PERFORMED
4 BY A MEMBER BOARD UNDER PUBLIC LAW 92–544.

5 (G) “INTERSTATE COMMISSION” MEANS THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION
6 CREATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 11.

7 (H) “LICENSE” MEANS AUTHORIZATION BY A MEMBER STATE FOR A
8 PODIATRIST TO ENGAGE IN THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE, WHICH WOULD
9 BE UNLAWFUL WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION.

10 (I) “PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT” MEANS LAWS AND
11 REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE WITHIN A
12 MEMBER STATE.

13 (J) “MEMBER BOARD” MEANS A STATE AGENCY IN A MEMBER STATE THAT
14 ACTS IN THE SOVEREIGN INTEREST OF THE STATE BY PROTECTING THE PUBLIC
15 THROUGH LICENSURE, REGULATION, AND EDUCATION OF PODIATRISTS AS
16 DIRECTED BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT.

17 (K) “MEMBER STATE” MEANS A STATE WHICH HAS ENACTED THE COMPACT.

18 (L) “PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE” MEANS THAT CLINICAL
19 PREVENTION, DIAGNOSIS, OR TREATMENT OF HUMAN DISEASE, INJURY, OR
20 CONDITION REQUIRING A PODIATRIST TO OBTAIN AND MAINTAIN A LICENSE IN
21 COMPLIANCE WITH THE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OF A MEMBER STATE.

22 (M) “PODIATRIST” MEANS ANY PERSON WHO:

23 (1) IS A GRADUATE OF A PODIATRIC MEDICAL SCHOOL ACCREDITED
24 BY THE COUNCIL OF PODIATRIC MEDICAL EDUCATION;

25 (2) PASSED PARTS I, II, AND III (PMLEXIS) OF THE NATIONAL
26 BOARD OF PODIATRIC MEDICAL EXAMINERS’ (NBPME) / AMERICAN PODIATRIC
27 MEDICAL LICENSING EXAMINATION (APMLE), OR THEIR NBPME/APMLE
28 RECOGNIZED REPLACEMENT EXAMINATIONS;

29 (3) SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETES A PODIATRIC RESIDENCY PROGRAM
30 APPROVED BY THE COUNCIL ON PODIATRIC MEDICAL EDUCATION;

31 (4) HOLDS SPECIALTY CERTIFICATION FROM A SPECIALTY BOARD
32 RECOGNIZED BY THE COUNCIL ON PODIATRIC MEDICAL EDUCATION;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (5) POSSESSES A FULL AND UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO ENGAGE IN
2 THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE ISSUED BY A MEMBER BOARD;

3 (6) HAS NEVER BEEN CONVICTED, RECEIVED ADJUDICATION,
4 DEFERRED ADJUDICATION, COMMUNITY SUPERVISION, OR DEFERRED DISPOSITION
5 FOR ANY OFFENSE BY A COURT OF APPROPRIATE JURISDICTION;

6 (7) HAS NEVER HELD A LICENSE AUTHORIZING THE PRACTICE OF
7 PODIATRIC MEDICINE SUBJECTED TO DISCIPLINE BY A LICENSING AGENCY IN ANY
8 STATE, FEDERAL, OR FOREIGN JURISDICTION, EXCLUDING ANY ACTION RELATED TO
9 THE NON–PAYMENT OF FEES RELATED TO A LICENSE;

10 (8) HAS NEVER HAD A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE LICENSE OR PERMIT
11 SUSPENDED OR REVOKED BY A STATE OR THE UNITED STATES DRUG
12 ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION OR VOLUNTARILY SURRENDERED SUCH LICENSE
13 AFTER NOTIFICATION OF INVESTIGATION; AND

14 (9) IS NOT UNDER ACTIVE INVESTIGATION BY A LICENSING AGENCY
15 OR LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY IN ANY STATE, FEDERAL OR FOREIGN
16 JURISDICTION.

17 (N) “OFFENSE” MEANS A FELONY, GROSS MISDEMEANOR, OR A
18 MISDEMEANOR RELATED TO THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRY.

19 (O) “RULE” MEANS A WRITTEN STATEMENT BY THE INTERSTATE
20 COMMISSION PROMULGATED PURSUANT TO SECTION 12 OF THE COMPACT THAT IS
21 OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY, IMPLEMENTS, INTERPRETS, OR PRESCRIBES A POLICY
22 OR PROVISION OF THE COMPACT, OR AN ORGANIZATIONAL, PROCEDURAL, OR
23 PRACTICE REQUIREMENT OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, AND HAS THE FORCE
24 AND EFFECT OF STATUTORY LAW IN A MEMBER STATE, AND INCLUDES THE
25 AMENDMENT, REPEAL, OR SUSPENSION OF AN EXISTING RULE.

26 (P) “STATE” MEANS ANY STATE, COMMONWEALTH, DISTRICT, OR
27 TERRITORY OF THE UNITED STATES.

28 (Q) “STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE” MEANS A MEMBER STATE WHERE A
29 PODIATRIST HOLDS A LICENSE TO PRACTICE PODIATRIC MEDICINE AND THAT HAS
30 BEEN DESIGNATED BY SUCH A PODIATRIST FOR PURPOSES OF REGISTRATION AND
31 PARTICIPATION IN THE COMPACT.

32 SECTION 3. ELIGIBILITY
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 619 5

1 (A) A PODIATRIST MUST MEET THE ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AS
2 DEFINED IN SECTION 2(M) TO RECEIVE AN EXPEDITED LICENSURE UNDER THE
3 TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT.

4 (B) A PODIATRIST WHO DOES NOT MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF SECTION
5 2(M) MAY OBTAIN A LICENSE TO PRACTICE PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN A MEMBER
6 STATE IF THE INDIVIDUAL COMPLIES WITH ALL LAWS AND REQUIREMENTS, OTHER
7 THAN THE COMPACT, RELATING TO THE ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE TO PRACTICE
8 PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN THAT STATE.

9 SECTION 4. DESIGNATION OF STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE

10 (A) A PODIATRIST SHALL DESIGNATE A MEMBER STATE AS THE STATE OF
11 PRINCIPAL LICENSE FOR PURPOSES OF REGISTRATION FOR EXPEDITED LICENSURE
12 THROUGH THE COMPACT IF THE PODIATRIST POSSESSES A FULL AND
13 UNRESTRICTED LICENSE TO PRACTICE PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN THAT STATE, AND
14 THE STATE IS:

15 (1) THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE FOR THE PODIATRIST;

16 (2) THE STATE WHERE AT LEAST 25% OF THE PRACTICE OF
17 PODIATRIC MEDICINE OCCURS;

18 (3) THE LOCATION OF THE PODIATRIST’S EMPLOYER; OR

19 (4) IF NO STATE QUALIFIES UNDER SUBSECTION (1), SUBSECTION (2),
20 OR SUBSECTION (3), THE STATE DESIGNATED AS STATE OF RESIDENCE FOR
21 PURPOSE OF FEDERAL INCOME TAX.

22 (B) A PODIATRIST MAY REDESIGNATE A MEMBER STATE AS STATE OF
23 PRINCIPAL LICENSE AT ANY TIME, AS LONG AS THE STATE MEETS THE
24 REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A).

25 (C) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES TO
26 FACILITATE REDESIGNATION OF ANOTHER MEMBER STATE AS THE STATE OF
27 PRINCIPAL LICENSE.

28 SECTION 5. APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF EXPEDITED
29 LICENSURE

30 (A) A PODIATRIST SEEKING LICENSURE THROUGH THE COMPACT SHALL
31 FILE AN APPLICATION FOR AN EXPEDITED LICENSE WITH THE MEMBER BOARD OF
32 THE STATE SELECTED BY THE PODIATRIST AS THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (B) UPON RECEIPT OF AN APPLICATION FOR AN EXPEDITED LICENSE, THE
2 MEMBER BOARD WITHIN THE STATE SELECTED AS THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL
3 LICENSE SHALL EVALUATE WHETHER THE PODIATRIST IS ELIGIBLE FOR EXPEDITED
4 LICENSURE AND ISSUE A LETTER OF QUALIFICATION, VERIFYING OR DENYING THE
5 PODIATRIST’S ELIGIBILITY TO, AND IN THE MANNER ESTABLISHED THROUGH RULE
6 BY, THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

7 (1) STATIC QUALIFICATION, WHICH INCLUDES VERIFICATION OF
8 PODIATRIC MEDICAL EDUCATION, PODIATRIC GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION,
9 RESULTS OF ANY PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSING EXAMINATION, AND OTHER
10 QUALIFICATIONS AS DETERMINED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION THROUGH
11 RULE, MAY NOT BE SUBJECT TO ADDITIONAL PRIMARY SOURCE VERIFICATION
12 WHERE THE PRIMARY SOURCE WAS ALREADY VERIFIED BY THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL
13 LICENSE.

14 (2) THE MEMBER BOARD WITHIN THE STATE SELECTED AS THE STATE
15 OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE SHALL, IN THE COURSE OF VERIFYING ELIGIBILITY,
16 PERFORM A CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK OF AN APPLICANT, INCLUDING THE
17 USE OF RESULTS OF FINGERPRINT OR OTHER BIOMETRIC DATA CHECKS COMPLIANT
18 WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION WITH THE
19 EXCEPTION OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE A SUITABILITY DETERMINATION IN
20 ACCORDANCE WITH 5 C.F.R. § 731.202.

21 (I) COMMUNICATION BETWEEN A MEMBER BOARD AND THE
22 INTERSTATE COMMISSION AND COMMUNICATION BETWEEN MEMBER BOARDS
23 REGARDING THE VERIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY IN SECTION (3) THROUGH THE
24 COMPACT MAY NOT INCLUDE ANY INFORMATION RECEIVED FROM THE FEDERAL
25 BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION RELATING TO A FEDERAL CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK
26 PERFORMED BY A MEMBER BOARD UNDER PUBLIC LAW 92–544, INCLUDING
27 FEDERAL CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK INFORMATION.

28 (II) FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION INFORMATION
29 OBTAINED BY A MEMBER BOARD MAY NOT BE SHARED WITH THE INTERSTATE
30 COMMISSION.

31 (3) APPEAL OF THE DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY SHALL BE MADE
32 TO THE MEMBER STATE WHERE THE APPLICATION WAS FILED AND SHALL BE
33 SUBJECT TO THE LAW OF THAT STATE.

34 (C) UPON VERIFICATION IN SUBSECTION (B), A PODIATRIST ELIGIBLE FOR
35 AN EXPEDITED LICENSE SHALL COMPLETE THE REGISTRATION PROCESS
36 ESTABLISHED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION TO RECEIVE A LICENSE IN A
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 619 7

1 MEMBER STATE SELECTED PURSUANT TO SUBSECTION (A), INCLUDING THE
2 PAYMENT OF ANY APPLICABLE FEES.

3 (D) AFTER RECEIVING VERIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY UNDER SUBSECTION
4 (B) AND ANY FEES UNDER SUBSECTION (C), A MEMBER BOARD SHALL ISSUE AN
5 EXPEDITED LICENSE TO THE PODIATRIST. THIS LICENSE SHALL AUTHORIZE THE
6 PODIATRIST TO PRACTICE PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN THE ISSUING STATE
7 CONSISTENT WITH THE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT AND ALL APPLIABLE
8 LAWS AND REGULATIONS OF THE ISSUING MEMBER BOARD AND MEMBER STATE.

9 (E) AN EXPEDITED LICENSE SHALL BE VALID FOR A PERIOD CONSISTENT
10 WITH THE LICENSURE PERIOD IN THE MEMBER STATE AND IN THE SAME MANNER AS
11 REQUIRED FOR OTHER PODIATRISTS HOLDING A FULL AND UNRESTRICTED LICENSE
12 WITHIN THE MEMBER STATE.

13 (F) AN EXPEDITED LICENSE OBTAINED THROUGH THE COMPACT SHALL BE
14 TERMINATED IF A PODIATRIST FAILS TO MAINTAIN A LICENSE IN THE STATE OF
15 PRINCIPAL LICENSURE FOR A NON–DISCIPLINARY REASON, WITHOUT
16 REDESIGNATION OF A NEW STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSURE.

17 (G) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES
18 REGARDING THE APPLICATION PROCESS, INCLUDING PAYMENT OF ANY APPLICABLE
19 FEES, AND THE REPORTING OF THE ISSUANCE OF AN EXPEDITED LICENSE BY A
20 MEMBER BOARD TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

21 SECTION 6. FEES FOR EXPEDITED LICENSURE

22 (A) A MEMBER STATE ISSUING AN EXPEDITED LICENSE AUTHORIZING THE
23 PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE IN THAT STATE MAY IMPOSE A FEE FOR A
24 LICENSE ISSUED OR RENEWED THROUGH THE COMPACT.

25 (B) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES
26 REGARDING FEES FOR EXPEDITED LICENSES.

27 SECTION 7. RENEWAL AND CONTINUED PARTICIPATION

28 (A) A PODIATRIST SEEKING TO RENEW AN EXPEDITED LICENSE GRANTED IN
29 A MEMBER STATE SHALL COMPLETE A RENEWAL PROCESS WITH THE INTERSTATE
30 COMMISSION IF THE PODIATRIST:

31 (1) MAINTAINS A FULL AND UNRESTRICTED LICENSE IN A STATE OF
32 PRINCIPAL LICENSE;
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (2) HAS NOT BEEN CONVICTED, RECEIVED ADJUDICATION,
2 DEFERRED ADJUDICATION, COMMUNITY SUPERVISION, OR DEFERRED DISPOSITION
3 FOR ANY OFFENSE BY A COURT OF APPROPRIATE JURISDICTION;

4 (3) HAS NOT HAD A LICENSE AUTHORIZING THE PRACTICE OF
5 PODIATRIC MEDICINE SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY A LICENSING AGENCY IN ANY
6 STATE, FEDERAL, OR FOREIGN JURISDICTION, OR VOLUNTARILY SURRENDERED
7 SUCH LICENSE IN LIEU OF DISCIPLINE, EXCLUDING ANY ACTION RELATED TO
8 NON–PAYMENT OF FEES RELATED TO A LICENSE; AND

9 (4) HAS NOT HAD A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE LICENSE OR PERMIT
10 SUSPENDED OR REVOKED BY A STATE OR THE UNITED STATES DRUG
11 ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION OR VOLUNTARILY SURRENDERED SUCH LICENSE
12 OR PERMIT AFTER NOTIFICATION OF INVESTIGATION.

13 (B) PODIATRISTS SHALL COMPLY WITH ALL CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL
14 DEVELOPMENT OR CONTINUING MEDICAL EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
15 RENEWAL OF A LICENSE ISSUED BY A MEMBER STATE.

16 (C) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL COLLECT ANY RENEWAL FEES
17 CHARGED FOR THE RENEWAL OF A LICENSE AND DISTRIBUTE THE FEES TO THE
18 APPLICABLE MEMBER BOARD.

19 (D) UPON RECEIPT OF ANY RENEWAL FEES COLLECTED IN SUBSECTION (C),
20 A MEMBER BOARD SHALL RENEW THE PODIATRIST’S LICENSE.

21 (E) PODIATRIST INFORMATION COLLECTED BY THE INTERSTATE
22 COMMISSION DURING THE RENEWAL PROCESS WILL BE DISTRIBUTED TO ALL
23 MEMBER BOARDS.

24 (F) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES TO
25 ADDRESS RENEWAL OF LICENSES OBTAINED THROUGH THE COMPACT.

26 SECTION 8. COORDINATED INFORMATION SYSTEM

27 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH A DATABASE OF ALL
28 PODIATRISTS LICENSED, OR WHO HAVE APPLIED FOR LICENSURE, UNDER SECTION
29 5.

30 (B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, MEMBER BOARDS
31 SHALL REPORT TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION ANY PUBLIC ACTION OR PUBLIC
32 COMPLAINTS AGAINST A LICENSED PODIATRIST WHO HAS APPLIED OR RECEIVED AN
33 EXPEDITED LICENSE THROUGH THE COMPACT.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 619 9

1 (C) MEMBER BOARDS SHALL REPORT DISCIPLINARY OR INVESTIGATORY
2 INFORMATION DETERMINED AS NECESSARY AND PROPER BY RULE OF THE
3 INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

4 (D) MEMBER BOARDS MAY REPORT ANY NON–PUBLIC COMPLAINT,
5 DISCIPLINARY, OR INVESTIGATORY INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION
6 (C) TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

7 (E) MEMBER BOARDS SHALL SHARE COMPLAINT OR DISCIPLINARY
8 INFORMATION ABOUT A PODIATRIST UPON REQUEST OF ANOTHER MEMBER BOARD.

9 (F) ALL INFORMATION PROVIDED TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION OR
10 DISTRIBUTED BY MEMBER BOARDS SHALL BE CONFIDENTIAL, FILED UNDER SEAL,
11 AND USED ONLY FOR INVESTIGATORY OR DISCIPLINARY MATTERS.

12 (G) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES
13 FOR MANDATED OR DISCRETIONARY SHARING OF INFORMATION BY MEMBER
14 BOARDS.

15 SECTION 9. JOINT INVESTIGATIONS

16 (A) LICENSURE AND DISCIPLINARY RECORDS OF PODIATRISTS ARE
17 DEEMED INVESTIGATIVE.

18 (B) IN ADDITION TO THE AUTHORITY GRANTED TO A MEMBER BOARD BY ITS
19 RESPECTIVE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OR OTHER APPLICABLE STATE
20 LAW, A MEMBER BOARD MAY PARTICIPATE WITH OTHER MEMBER BOARDS IN JOINT
21 INVESTIGATIONS OF PODIATRISTS LICENSED BY THE MEMBER BOARDS.

22 (C) A SUBPOENA ISSUED BY A MEMBER STATE AS PART OF A JOINT
23 INVESTIGATION SHALL BE ENFORCEABLE IN OTHER MEMBER STATES.

24 (D) MEMBER BOARDS MAY SHARE ANY INVESTIGATIVE, LITIGATION, OR
25 COMPLIANCE MATERIALS IN FURTHERANCE OF ANY JOINT OR INDIVIDUAL
26 INVESTIGATION INITIATED UNDER THE COMPACT.

27 (E) ANY MEMBER STATE MAY INVESTIGATE ACTUAL OR ALLEGED
28 VIOLATIONS OF THE STATUTES AUTHORIZING THE PRACTICE OF PODIATRIC
29 MEDICINE IN ANY OTHER MEMBER STATE IN WHICH A PODIATRIST HOLDS A LICENSE
30 TO PRACTICE PODIATRIC MEDICINE.

31 SECTION 10. DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (A) ANY DISCIPLINARY ACTION TAKEN BY ANY MEMBER BOARD AGAINST A
2 PODIATRIST LICENSED THROUGH THE COMPACT SHALL BE DEEMED
3 UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT WHICH MAY BE SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE BY OTHER
4 MEMBER BOARDS, IN ADDITION TO ANY VIOLATION OF THE PODIATRIC MEDICAL
5 PRACTICE ACT OR REGULATIONS IN THAT STATE.

6 (B) IF A LICENSE GRANTED TO A PODIATRIST BY A MEMBER BOARD IN THE
7 STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE IS REVOKED, SURRENDERED OR RELINQUISHED IN
8 LIEU OF DISCIPLINE, OR SUSPENDED, THEN ALL LICENSES ISSUED TO THE
9 PODIATRIST BY MEMBER BOARDS SHALL AUTOMATICALLY BE PLACED, WITHOUT
10 FURTHER ACTION NECESSARY BY ANY MEMBER BOARD, ON THE SAME STATUS. IF
11 THE MEMBER BOARD OF THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE SUBSEQUENTLY
12 REINSTATES THE PODIATRIST’S LICENSE, A LICENSE ISSUED TO THE PODIATRIST BY
13 ANY OTHER MEMBER BOARD SHALL REMAIN ENCUMBERED UNTIL THAT RESPECTIVE
14 MEMBER BOARD TAKES ACTION TO REINSTATE THE LICENSE IN A MANNER
15 CONSISTENT WITH THE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OF THAT STATE.

16 (C) IF DISCIPLINARY ACTION IS TAKEN AGAINST A PODIATRIST BY A
17 MEMBER BOARD NOT IN A STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE, ANY OTHER MEMBER
18 BOARD MAY DEEM THE ACTION CONCLUSIVE AS TO MATTER OF LAW AND FACT
19 DECIDED, AND:

20 (1) IMPOSE THE SAME OR LESSER SANCTION AGAINST THE
21 PODIATRIST SO LONG AS SUCH SANCTIONS ARE CONSISTENT WITH THE PODIATRIC
22 MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OF THAT STATE; OR

23 (2) PURSUE SEPARATE DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST THE
24 PODIATRIST UNDER ITS RESPECTIVE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT,
25 REGARDLESS OF THE ACTION TAKEN IN OTHER MEMBER STATES.

26 (D) IF A LICENSE GRANTED TO A PODIATRIST BY A MEMBER BOARD IS
27 REVOKED, SURRENDERED OR RELINQUISHED IN LIEU OF DISCIPLINE, OR
28 SUSPENDED, THEN ANY LICENSE ISSUED TO A PODIATRIST BY ANY OTHER MEMBER
29 BOARD SHALL BE SUSPENDED, AUTOMATICALLY AND IMMEDIATELY WITHOUT
30 FURTHER ACTION NECESSARY BY THE OTHER MEMBER BOARD, FOR NINETY DAYS
31 UPON ENTRY OF THE ORDER BY THE DISCIPLINING BOARD, TO PERMIT THE MEMBER
32 BOARD TO INVESTIGATE THE BASIS FOR THE ACTION UNDER THE PODIATRIC
33 MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OF THAT STATE.

34 (E) A MEMBER BOARD MAY TERMINATE THE AUTOMATIC PROVISION UNDER
35 SUBSECTION (B) OR (D) OF A LICENSE IT ISSUED, IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH
36 THE PODIATRIC MEDICAL PRACTICE ACT OF THAT STATE.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 619 11

1 SECTION 11. INTERSTATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSURE
2 COMPACT COMMISSION

3 (A) THE MEMBER STATES HEREBY CREATE THE “INTERSTATE PODIATRIC
4 MEDICAL LICENSURE COMPACT COMMISSION”.

5 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS THE
6 ADMINISTRATION OF THE INTERSTATE PODIATRIC MEDICAL LICENSURE
7 COMPACT, WHICH IS A DISCRETIONARY STATE FUNCTION.

8 (C) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE A BODY CORPORATE AND
9 JOINT AGENCY OF THE MEMBER STATES AND SHALL HAVE ALL THE
10 RESPONSIBILITIES, POWERS, AND DUTIES SET FORTH IN THE COMPACT, AND SUCH
11 ADDITIONAL POWERS AS MAY BE CONFERRED UPON IT BY A SUBSEQUENT
12 CONCURRENT ACTION OF THE RESPECTIVE LEGISLATURES OF THE MEMBER STATES
13 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS OF THE COMPACT.

14 (D) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIST OF ONE VOTING
15 REPRESENTATIVE APPOINTED BY EACH MEMBER STATE WHO SHALL SERVE AS A
16 COMMISSIONER. A COMMISSIONER SHALL BE:

17 (1) A PODIATRIST APPOINTED TO A MEMBER BOARD;

18 (2) AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, OR SIMILAR
19 EXECUTIVE OF A MEMBER BOARD; OR

20 (3) A MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC APPOINTED TO A MEMBER BOARD.

21 (E) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST ONCE EACH
22 CALENDAR YEAR. A PORTION OF THIS MEETING SHALL BE A BUSINESS MEETING TO
23 ADDRESS SUCH MATTERS AS MAY PROPERLY COME BEFORE THE COMMISSION,
24 INCLUDING THE ELECTION OF OFFICERS. THE CHAIRPERSON MAY CALL
25 ADDITIONAL MEETINGS AND SHALL CALL FOR A MEETING UPON THE REQUEST OF A
26 MAJORITY OF THE MEMBER STATES.

27 (F) THE BYLAWS MAY PROVIDE FOR MEETINGS OF THE INTERSTATE
28 COMMISSION TO BE CONDUCTED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, VIA TELECONFERENCE,
29 VIDEO CONFERENCE, OR OTHER ELECTRONIC MEANS BY WHICH ALL PARTICIPANTS
30 CAN HEAR EACH OTHER SIMULTANEOUSLY AND PARTICIPATE EFFECTIVELY.
31 ATTENDANCE BY SUCH ELECTRONIC MEANS SHALL CONSTITUTE PRESENCE IN
32 PERSON AT THE MEETING.
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (G) EACH COMMISSIONER PARTICIPATING AT A MEETING OF THE
2 INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS ENTITLED TO ONE VOTE. A MAJORITY OF
3 COMMISSIONERS SHALL CONSTITUTE A QUORUM FOR THE TRANSACTION OF
4 BUSINESS, UNLESS A LARGER QUORUM IS REQUIRED BY THE BYLAWS OF THE
5 INTERSTATE COMMISSION. A COMMISSIONER MAY NOT DELEGATE A VOTE TO
6 ANOTHER COMMISSIONER. IN THE ABSENCE OF ITS COMMISSIONER, A MEMBER
7 STATE MAY DELEGATE VOTING AUTHORITY FOR A SPECIFIED MEETING TO ANOTHER
8 PERSON FROM THAT STATE WHO SHALL MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION
9 (D).

10 (H) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE PUBLIC NOTICE OF ALL
11 MEETINGS AND ALL MEETINGS SHALL BE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. THE INTERSTATE
12 COMMISSION MAY CLOSE A MEETING, IN FULL OR IN PORTION, WHERE IT
13 DETERMINES BY A TWO–THIRDS VOTE OF THE COMMISSIONERS PRESENT THAT ANY
14 OPEN MEETING WOULD BE LIKELY TO:

15 (1) RELATE SOLELY TO THE INTERNAL PERSONNEL PRACTICE AND
16 PROCEDURES OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION;

17 (2) DISCUSS MATTERS SPECIFICALLY EXEMPTED FROM DISCLOSURE
18 BY FEDERAL STATUTE;

19 (3) DISCUSS TRADE SECRETS, COMMERCIAL, OR FINANCIAL
20 INFORMATION THAT IS PRIVILEGED OR CONFIDENTIAL;

21 (4) INVOLVE ACCUSING A PERSON OF A CRIME, OR FORMALLY
22 CENSURING A PERSON;

23 (5) DISCUSS INFORMATION OF A PERSONAL NATURE WHERE
24 DISCLOSURE WOULD CONSTITUTE A CLEARLY UNWARRANTED INVASION OF
25 PERSONAL PRIVACY;

26 (6) DISCUSS INVESTIGATIVE RECORDS COMPILED FOR LAW
27 ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES; OR

28 (7) SPECIFICALLY RELATE TO THE PARTICIPATION IN A CIVIL ACTION
29 OR OTHER LEGAL PROCEEDING.

30 (I) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL KEEP MINUTES WHICH SHALL
31 FULLY DESCRIBE ALL MATTERS DISCUSSED IN A MEETING AND SHALL PROVIDE A
32 FULL AND ACCURATE SUMMARY OF ACTIONS TAKEN, INCLUDING A RECORD OF ANY
33 ROLL CALL VOTES.
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 619 13

1 (J) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL MAKE ITS INFORMATION AND
2 OFFICIAL RECORDS, TO THE EXTENT NOT OTHERWISE DESIGNATED IN THE
3 COMPACT OR BY ITS RULES, AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC FOR INSPECTION.

4 (K) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH AN EXECUTIVE
5 COMMITTEE, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE OFFICERS, MEMBERS, AND OTHERS AS
6 DETERMINED BY THE BYLAWS. THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL HAVE THE
7 POWER TO ACT ON BEHALF OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, WITH THE
8 EXCEPTION OF RULEMAKING, DURING PERIODS WHEN THE INTERSTATE
9 COMMISSION IS NOT IN SESSION. WHEN ACTING ON BEHALF OF THE INTERSTATE
10 COMMISSION, THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE SHALL OVERSEE THE ADMINISTRATION
11 OF THE COMPACT INCLUDING ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE
12 PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT, ITS BYLAWS AND RULES, AND OTHER SUCH DUTIES
13 AS NECESSARY.

14 (L) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH OTHER COMMITTEES
15 FOR GOVERNANCE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMPACT.

16 SECTION 12. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE INTERSTATE
17 COMMISSION

18 THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION ARE TO:

19 (A) OVERSEE AND MAINTAIN THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMPACT;

20 (B) PROMULGATE RULES WHICH SHALL BE BINDING TO THE EXTENT AND IN
21 THE MANNER PROVIDED FOR IN THE COMPACT;

22 (C) ISSUE, UPON THE REQUEST OF A MEMBER STATE OR MEMBER BOARD,
23 ADVISORY OPINIONS CONCERNING THE MEETING OR INTERPRETATION OF THE
24 COMPACT, ITS BYLAWS, RULES, AND ACTIONS;

25 (D) ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH COMPACT PROVISIONS, THE RULES
26 PROMULGATED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, AND THE BYLAWS, USING ALL
27 NECESSARY AND PROPER MEANS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE USE OF
28 JUDICIAL PROCESS;

29 (E) ESTABLISH AND APPOINT COMMITTEES INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
30 TO, AN EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 11, WHICH SHALL HAVE
31 THE POWER TO ACT ON BEHALF OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IN CARRYING
32 OUT ITS POWERS AND DUTIES;

33 (F) PAY, OR PROVIDE FOR THE PAYMENT OF THE EXPENSES RELATED TO
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 619

1 THE ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANIZATION, AND ONGOING ACTIVITIES OF THE
2 INTERSTATE COMMISSION;

3 (G) ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN ONE OR MORE OFFICES;

4 (H) BORROW, ACCEPT, HIRE, OR CONTRACT FOR SERVICES OF PERSONNEL;

5 (I) PURCHASE AND MAINTAIN INSURANCE AND BONDS;

6 (J) EMPLOY AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR WHO SHALL HAVE THE POWER TO
7 EMPLOY, SELECT, OR APPOINT EMPLOYEES, AGENTS, AND CONSULTANTS, AND TO
8 DETERMINE THEIR QUALIFICATIONS, DEFINE THEIR DUTIES, AND FIX THEIR
9 COMPENSATION;

10 (K) ESTABLISH PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROGRAMS RELATING TO
11 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, RATES OF COMPENSATION, AND QUALIFICATION OF
12 PERSONNEL;

13 (L) ACCEPT DONATIONS AND GRANTS OF MONEY, EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES,
14 MATERIALS, AND SERVICES AND TO RECEIVE, UTILIZE, AND DISPOSE OF IT IN A
15 MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICIES ESTABLISHED BY
16 THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION;

17 (M) LEASE, PURCHASE, ACCEPT CONTRIBUTIONS OR DONATIONS OF, OR
18 OTHERWISE TO OWN, HOLD, IMPROVE, OR USE ANY PROPERTY, REAL, PERSONAL, OR
19 MIXED;

20 (N) SELL, CONVEY, MORTGAGE, PLEDGE, LEASE, EXCHANGE, ABANDON, OR
21 OTHERWISE DISPOSE OF ANY PROPERTY, REAL, PERSONAL, OR MIXED;

22 (O) ESTABLISH A BUDGET AND MAKE EXPENDITURES;

23 (P) ADOPT A SEAL AND BYLAWS GOVERNING THE MANAGEMENT AND
24 OPERATION OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION;

25 (Q) REPORT ANNUALLY TO THE LEGISLATURES AND GOVERNORS OF THE
26 MEMBER STATES CONCERNING THE ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION
27 DURING THE PRECEDING YEAR. SUCH REPORTS SHALL ALSO INCLUDE REPORTS OF
28 FINANCIAL AUDITS, AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, AND ANY RECOMMENDATIONS
29 THAT MAY HAVE BEEN ADOPTED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION;

30 (R) COORDINATE EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
31 REGARDING THE COMPACT, ITS IMPLEMENTATION, AND ITS OPERATION;
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 619 15

1 (S) MAINTAIN RECORDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BYLAWS;

2 (T) SEEK AND OBTAIN TRADEMARKS, COPYRIGHTS, AND PATENTS; AND

3 (U) PERFORM SUCH FUNCTIONS AS MAY BE NECESSARY OR APPROPRIATE
4 TO ACHIEVE THE PURPOSE OF THE COMPACT.

5 SECTION 13. FINANCE POWERS

6 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY LEVY ON AND COLLECT AN ANNUAL
7 ASSESSMENT FROM EACH MEMBER STATE TO COVER THE COST OF THE OPERATIONS
8 AND ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION AND ITS STAFF. THE TOTAL
9 ASSESSMENT MUST BE SUFFICIENT TO COVER THE ANNUAL BUDGET APPROVED
10 EACH YEAR FOR WHICH REVENUE IS NOT PROVIDED BY OTHER SOURCES. THE
11 AGGREGATE ANNUAL ASSESSMENT AMOUNT SHALL BE ALLOCATED UPON A
12 FORMULA TO BE DETERMINED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, WHICH SHALL
13 PROMULGATE A RULE BINDING UPON ALL MEMBER STATES.

14 (B) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY NOT INCUR OBLIGATIONS OF ANY
15 KIND PRIOR TO SECURING THE FUNDS ADEQUATE TO MEET THE SAME.

16 (C) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY NOT PLEDGE THE CREDIT OF ANY
17 OF THE MEMBER STATES, EXCEPT BY, AND WITH THE AUTHORITY OF, THE MEMBER
18 STATE.

19 (D) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL MAINTAIN FINANCIAL RECORDS
20 IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BYLAWS, INCLUDING PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENTS
21 AND BALANCE SHEET REPORTS WHICH SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT
22 OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

23 SECTION 14. ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION OF THE
24 INTERSTATE COMMISSION

25 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL, BY A MAJORITY OF
26 COMMISSIONERS PRESENT AND VOTING, ADOPT BYLAWS TO GOVERN ITS CONDUCT
27 AS MAY BE NECESSARY OR APPROPRIATE TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THE
28 COMPACT WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS OF THE FIRST INTERSTATE COMMISSION
29 MEETING.

30 (B) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ELECT OR APPOINT ANNUALLY
31 FROM AMONG ITS COMMISSIONERS, A CHAIRPERSON, A VICE–CHAIRPERSON, AND A
32 TREASURER, EACH OF WHOM SHALL HAVE SUCH AUTHORITY AND DUTIES AS MAY BE
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 619

1 SPECIFIED IN THE BYLAWS. THE CHAIRPERSON, OR IN THE CHAIRPERSON’S
2 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY, THE VICE–CHAIRPERSON, SHALL PRESIDE AT ALL
3 MEETINGS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

4 (C) OFFICERS SELECTED IN SUBSECTION (B) SHALL SERVE WITHOUT
5 REMUNERATION FOR THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

6 (D) THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION
7 SHALL BE IMMUNE FROM SUIT AND LIABILITY, EITHER PERSONALLY OR IN THEIR
8 OFFICIAL CAPACITY, FOR A CLAIM FOR DAMAGE TO OR LOSS OF PROPERTY OR
9 PERSONAL INJURY OR OTHER CIVIL LIABILITY CAUSED OR ARISING OUT OF, OR
10 RELATING TO, AN ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR OMISSION THAT OCCURRED,
11 OR THAT SUCH PERSON HAD A REASONABLE BASIS FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED,
12 WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR
13 RESPONSIBILITIES; PROVIDED THAT SUCH PERSON MAY NOT BE PROTECTED FROM
14 SUIT OR LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE, LOSS, INJURY, OR LIABILITY CAUSED BY THE
15 INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL AND WANTON MISCONDUCT OF SUCH PERSON.

16 (E) THE LIABILITY OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
17 INTERSTATE COMMISSION OR REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INTERSTATE
18 COMMISSION, ACTING WITHIN THE SCOPE OF SUCH PERSON’S EMPLOYMENT OR
19 DUTIES FOR ACTS, ERRORS, OR OMISSIONS OCCURRING WITHIN SUCH PERSON’S
20 STATE, MAY NOT EXCEED THE LIMITS OF LIABILITY SET FORTH UNDER THE
21 CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF THAT STATE FOR STATE OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND
22 AGENTS. THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS CONSIDERED TO BE AN
23 INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATES FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUCH ACTION. NOTHING
24 IN THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO PROTECT SUCH PERSON FROM SUIT
25 OR LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE, LOSS, INJURY, OR LIABILITY CAUSED BY THE
26 INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL AND WANTON MISCONDUCT OF SUCH PERSON.

27 (F) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL DEFEND THE EXECUTIVE
28 DIRECTOR, ITS EMPLOYEES, AND SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE ATTORNEY
29 GENERAL OR OTHER APPROPRIATE LEGAL COUNSEL OF THE MEMBER STATE
30 REPRESENTED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVE, SHALL
31 DEFEND SUCH INTERSTATE COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVE IN ANY CIVIL ACTION
32 SEEKING TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ARISING OUT OF AN ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT,
33 ERROR OR OMISSION THAT OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF INTERSTATE
34 COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES OR RESPONSIBILITIES, OR THAT THE
35 DEFENDANT HAD A REASONABLE BASIS FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED WITHIN THE
36 SCOPE OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR
37 RESPONSIBILITIES, PROVIDED THAT THE ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR
38 OMISSION DID NOT RESULT FROM INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL AND WANTON
39 MISCONDUCT ON THE PART OF SUCH PERSON.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 619 17

1 (G) TO THE EXTENT NOT COVERED BY THE STATE INVOLVED, MEMBER
2 STATE, OR THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, THE REPRESENTATIVES OR EMPLOYEES
3 OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE HELD HARMLESS IN THE AMOUNT OF A
4 SETTLEMENT OR JUDGEMENT, INCLUDING ATTORNEY’S FEES AND COSTS, OBTAINED
5 AGAINST SUCH PERSONS ARISING OUT OF AN ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR
6 OMISSION THAT OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION
7 EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, OR THAT SUCH PERSONS HAD A
8 REASONABLE BASIS FOR BELIEVING OCCURRED WITHIN THE SCOPE OF INTERSTATE
9 COMMISSION EMPLOYMENT, DUTIES, OR RESPONSIBILITIES, PROVIDED THAT THE
10 ACTUAL OR ALLEGED ACT, ERROR, OR OMISSION DID NOT RESULT FROM
11 INTENTIONAL OR WILLFUL AND WANTON MISCONDUCT ON THE PART OF SUCH
12 PERSON.

13 SECTION 15. RULEMAKING FUNCTIONS OF THE INTERSTATE
14 COMMISSION

15 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL PROMULGATE RULES IN ORDER
16 TO EFFECTIVELY AND EFFICIENTLY ACHIEVE THE PURPOSE OF THE COMPACT.
17 NOTWITHSTANDING THE FOREGOING, IN THE EVENT THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION
18 EXERCISES ITS RULEMAKING AUTHORITY IN A MANNER THAT IS BEYOND THE SCOPE
19 OF THE PURPOSES OF THE COMPACT, OR THE POWERS GRANTED HEREUNDER, THEN
20 SUCH AN ACTION BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE INVALID AND HAVE
21 NO FORCE OR EFFECT.

22 (B) RULES DEEMED APPROPRIATE FOR THE OPERATIONS OF THE
23 INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE MADE PURSUANT TO THE RULEMAKING
24 PROCESS THAT SUBSTANTIALLY CONFORMS TO THE “MODEL STATE
25 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT” OF 2010, AND SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS
26 THERETO.

27 (C) NOT LATER THAN THIRTY DAYS AFTER A RULE IS PROMULGATED, ANY
28 PERSON MAY FILE A PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE RULE IN THE UNITED
29 STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR THE FEDERAL
30 DISTRICT WHERE THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION HAS ITS PRINCIPAL OFFICES,
31 PROVIDED THAT THE FILING OF SUCH A PETITION MAY NOT STAY OR OTHERWISE
32 PREVENT THE RULE FROM BECOMING EFFECTIVE UNLESS THE COURT FINDS THAT
33 THE PETITIONER HAS A SUBSTANTIAL LIKELIHOOD OF SUCCESS. THE COURT SHALL
34 GIVE DEFERENCE TO THE ACTIONS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION CONSISTENT
35 WITH APPLICABLE LAW AND MAY NOT FIND THE RULE TO BE UNLAWFUL IF THE RULE
36 REPRESENTS A REASONABLE EXERCISE OF THE AUTHORITY GRANTED TO THE
37 INTERSTATE COMMISSION.
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 619

1 SECTION 16. OVERSIGHT OF INTERSTATE COMPACT

2 (A) THE EXECUTIVE, LEGISLATIVE, AND JUDICIAL BRANCHES OF STATE
3 GOVERNMENT IN EACH MEMBER STATE SHALL ENFORCE THE COMPACT AND SHALL
4 TAKE ALL ACTIONS NECESSARY AND APPROPRIATE TO EFFECTUATE THE
5 COMPACT’S PURPOSES AND INTENT. THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT AND THE
6 RULES PROMULGATED HEREUNDER SHALL HAVE STANDING AS STATUTORY LAW
7 BUT MAY NOT OVERRIDE EXISTING STATE AUTHORITY TO REGULATE THE PRACTICE
8 OF PODIATRIC MEDICINE.

9 (B) ALL COURTS SHALL TAKE JUDICIAL NOTICE OF THE COMPACT AND THE
10 RULES IN ANY JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDING IN A MEMBER STATE
11 PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE COMPACT WHICH MAY AFFECT THE
12 POWERS, RESPONSIBILITIES OR ACTIONS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

13 (C) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE ENTITLED TO RECEIVE ALL
14 SERVICES OF PROCESS IN ANY SUCH PROCEEDING, AND SHALL HAVE STANDING TO
15 INTERVENE IN THE PROCEEDING FOR ALL PURPOSES. FAILURE TO PROVIDE
16 SERVICE OF PROCESS TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL RENDER
17 JUDGEMENT OR ORDER VOID AS TO THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, THE COMPACT,
18 OR PROMULGATED RULES.

19 SECTION 17. ENFORCEMENT OF INTERSTATE COMPACT

20 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, IN THE REASONABLE EXERCISE OF ITS
21 DISCRETION, SHALL ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS AND RULES OF THE COMPACT.

22 (B) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY, BY MAJORITY VOTE OF THE
23 COMMISSIONERS PRESENT AND VOTING, INITIATE LEGAL ACTION IN THE UNITED
24 STATES COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, OR, AT THE DISCRETION OF THE
25 INTERSTATE COMMISSION, IN THE FEDERAL DISTRICT WHERE THE INTERSTATE
26 COMMISSION HAS ITS PRINCIPAL OFFICES, TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
27 PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT, AND ITS PROMULGATED RULES AND BYLAWS,
28 AGAINST A MEMBER STATE IN DEFAULT. THE RELIEF SOUGHT MAY INCLUDE BOTH
29 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND DAMAGES. IN THE EVENT JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT IS
30 NECESSARY, THE PREVAILING PARTY SHALL BE AWARDED ALL COSTS OF SUCH
31 LITIGATION INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

32 (C) THE REMEDIES HEREIN MAY NOT BE THE EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES OF THE
33 INTERSTATE COMMISSION. THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY AVAIL ITSELF OF
34 ANY OTHER REMEDIES AVAILABLE UNDER STATE LAW OR REGULATION OF A
35 PROFESSION.
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 619 19

1 SECTION 18. DEFAULT PROCEDURES

2 (A) THE GROUNDS FOR DEFAULT INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT LIMITED TO,
3 FAILURE OF A MEMBER BOARD TO PERFORM SUCH OBLIGATIONS OR
4 RESPONSIBILITIES IMPOSED UPON IT BY THE COMPACT, OR THE RULES AND
5 BYLAWS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION PROMULGATED UNDER THE COMPACT.

6 (B) IF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT A MEMBER STATE
7 HAS DEFAULTED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF ITS OBLIGATIONS OR RESPONSIBILITIES
8 UNDER THE COMPACT, OR THE BYLAWS OR PROMULGATED RULES, THE INTERSTATE
9 COMMISSION SHALL:

10 (1) PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE DEFAULTING STATE AND
11 OTHER MEMBER STATES, OF THE NATURE OF THE DEFAULT, THE MEANS OF CURING
12 THE DEFAULT, AND ANY ACTION TAKEN BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION. THE
13 INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL SPECIFY THE CONDITIONS BY WHICH THE
14 DEFAULTING STATE MUST CURE ITS DEFAULT; AND

15 (2) PROVIDE REMEDIAL TRAINING AND SPECIFIC TECHNICAL
16 ASSISTANCE REGARDING THE DEFAULT.

17 (C) IF THE DEFAULTING STATE FAILS TO CURE THE DEFAULT, THE
18 DEFAULTING STATE SHALL BE TERMINATED FROM THE COMPACT UPON AN
19 AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF THE MAJORITY OF THE COMMISSIONERS PRESENT AND
20 VOTING, AND ALL RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, AND BENEFITS CONFERRED BY THE
21 COMPACT SHALL TERMINATE ON THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION. A CURE
22 OF THE DEFAULT DOES NOT RELIEVE THE OFFENDING STATE OF OBLIGATIONS OR
23 LIABILITIES INCURRED DURING THE PERIOD OF DEFAULT.

24 (D) TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP IN THE COMPACT SHALL BE IMPOSED
25 ONLY AFTER ALL OTHER MEANS OF SECURING COMPLIANCE HAVE BEEN
26 EXHAUSTED. NOTICE OF INTENT TO TERMINATE SHALL BE GIVEN BY THE
27 INTERSTATE COMMISSION TO THE GOVERNOR, THE MAJORITY AND MINORITY
28 LEADERS OF THE DEFAULTING STATE’S LEGISLATURE, AND EACH OF THE MEMBER
29 STATES.

30 (E) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH RULES AND
31 PROCEDURES TO ADDRESS LICENSES AND PODIATRISTS THAT ARE MATERIALLY
32 IMPACTED BY THE TERMINATION OF A MEMBER STATE, OR THE WITHDRAWAL OF A
33 MEMBER STATE.

34 (F) THE MEMBER STATE WHICH HAS BEEN TERMINATED IS RESPONSIBLE
35 FOR ALL DUES, OBLIGATIONS, AND LIABILITIES INCURRED THROUGH THE
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 619

1 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION INCLUDING OBLIGATIONS, THE PERFORMANCE
2 OF WHICH EXTENDS BEYOND THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION.

3 (G) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY NOT BEAR ANY COSTS RELATING TO
4 ANY STATE THAT HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE IN DEFAULT OR WHICH HAS BEEN
5 TERMINATED FROM THE COMPACT, UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED UPON
6 IN WRITING BETWEEN THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION AND THE DEFAULTING STATE.

7 (H) THE DEFAULTING STATE MAY APPEAL THE ACTION OF THE INTERSTATE
8 COMMISSION BY PETITIONING THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
9 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR THE FEDERAL DISTRICT WHERE THE INTERSTATE
10 COMMISSION HAS ITS PRINCIPAL OFFICES. THE PREVAILING PARTY SHALL BE
11 AWARDED ALL COSTS OF LITIGATION INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

12 SECTION 19. DISPUTE RESOLUTION

13 (A) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL ATTEMPT, UPON THE REQUEST
14 OF A MEMBER STATE, TO RESOLVE DISPUTES WHICH ARE SUBJECT TO THE COMPACT
15 AND WHICH ARISE AMONG MEMBER STATES OR MEMBER BOARDS.

16 (B) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL PROMULGATE RULES
17 PROVIDING FOR BOTH MEDIATION AND BINDING DISPUTE RESOLUTION AS
18 APPROPRIATE.

19 SECTION 20. MEMBER STATES, EFFECTIVE DATE, AND
20 AMENDMENT

21 (A) ANY STATE IS ELIGIBLE TO BECOME A MEMBER OF THE COMPACT.

22 (B) THE COMPACT SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE AND BINDING UPON
23 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENT OF THE COMPACT INTO LAW BY NO LESS THAN FOUR
24 STATES. THEREAFTER, IT SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE AND BINDING ON A STATE
25 UPON ENACTMENT OF THE COMPACT INTO LAW BY THAT STATE.

26 (C) THE GOVERNORS OF NON–MEMBER STATES, OR THEIR DESIGNEES,
27 SHALL BE WELCOME TO PARTICIPATE IN THE ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERSTATE
28 COMMISSION ON A NON–VOTING BASIS PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE COMPACT BY
29 ALL STATES.

30 (D) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY PROPOSE AMENDMENTS TO THE
31 COMPACT FOR ENACTMENT BY THE MEMBER STATES. NO AMENDMENT SHALL
32 BECOME EFFECTIVE AND BINDING UPON THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION AND OTHER
33 MEMBER STATES UNLESS AND UNTIL IT IS ENACTED INTO LAW BY UNANIMOUS
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
HOUSE BILL 619 21

1 CONSENT OF THE MEMBER STATES.

2 SECTION 21. WITHDRAWAL

3 (A) ONCE EFFECTIVE, THE COMPACT SHALL CONTINUE IN FORCE AND
4 REMAIN BINDING UPON EACH AND EVERY MEMBER STATE; PROVIDED THAT A
5 MEMBER STATE MAY WITHDRAW FROM THE COMPACT BY SPECIFICALLY REPEALING
6 THE STATUTE WHICH ENACTED THE COMPACT INTO LAW.

7 (B) WITHDRAWAL FROM THE COMPACT SHALL BE BY THE ENACTMENT OF A
8 STATUTE REPEALING THE SAME, BUT MAY NOT TAKE EFFECT UNTIL ONE YEAR
9 AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH STATUTE AND UNTIL WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE
10 WITHDRAWAL HAS BEEN GIVEN BY THE WITHDRAWING STATE TO THE GOVERNOR OF
11 EACH OTHER MEMBER STATE.

12 (C) THE WITHDRAWING STATE SHALL IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY THE
13 CHAIRPERSON OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IN WRITING UPON THE
14 INTRODUCTION OF LEGISLATION REPEALING THE COMPACT IN THE WITHDRAWING
15 STATE.

16 (D) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION MAY NOTIFY THE OTHER MEMBER
17 STATES OF THE WITHDRAWING STATE’S INTENT TO WITHDRAW WITHIN SIXTY DAYS
18 OF ITS RECEIPT OF NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (C).

19 (E) THE WITHDRAWING STATE IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL DUES,
20 OBLIGATIONS AND LIABILITIES INCURRED THROUGHOUT THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF
21 WITHDRAWAL, INCLUDING OBLIGATIONS, THE PERFORMANCE OF WHICH EXTEND
22 BEYOND THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF WITHDRAWAL.

23 (F) REINSTATEMENT FOLLOWING WITHDRAWAL OF A MEMBER STATE
24 SHALL OCCUR UPON THE WITHDRAWING STATE REENACTING THE COMPACT OR
25 UPON SUCH LATER DATE AS DETERMINED BY THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION.

26 (G) THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION IS AUTHORIZED TO DEVELOP RULES TO
27 ADDRESS THE IMPACT OF THE WITHDRAWAL OF A MEMBER STATE ON LICENSES
28 GRANTED IN OTHER MEMBER STATES TO PODIATRISTS WHO DESIGNATED THE
29 WITHDRAWING MEMBER STATE AS THE STATE OF PRINCIPAL LICENSE.

30 SECTION 22. DISSOLUTION

31 (A) THE COMPACT SHALL BE DISSOLVED EFFECTIVE UPON THE DATE OF
32 THE WITHDRAWAL OR DEFAULT OF THE MEMBER STATE WHICH REDUCES THE
33 MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMPACT TO ONE MEMBER STATE.
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
22 HOUSE BILL 619

1 (B) UPON THE DISSOLUTION OF THE COMPACT, THE COMPACT BECOMES
2 NULL AND VOID AND SHALL BE OF NO FURTHER FORCE OR EFFECT, AND THE
3 BUSINESS AND AFFAIRS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION SHALL BE CONCLUDED,
4 AND SURPLUS FUNDS SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE BYLAWS.

5 SECTION 23. SEVERABILITY AND CONSTRUCTION

6 (A) THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT SHALL BE SEVERABLE, AND IF ANY
7 PHRASE, CLAUSE, SENTENCE, OR PROVISION IS DEEMED UNENFORCEABLE, THE
8 REMAINING PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT SHALL BE ENFORCEABLE.

9 (B) THE PROVISIONS OF THE COMPACT SHALL BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED
10 TO EFFECTUATE ITS PURPOSES.

11 (C) NOTHING IN THE COMPACT SHALL BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT THE
12 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER INTERSTATE COMPACTS TO WHICH THE MEMBER STATES
13 ARE MEMBERS.

14 SECTION 24. BINDING EFFECT OF COMPACT AND OTHER LAWS

15 (A) NOTHING HEREIN PREVENTS THE ENFORCEMENT OF ANY OTHER LAW
16 OF A MEMBER STATE THAT IS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THE COMPACT.

17 (B) ALL LAWS IN A MEMBER STATE IN CONFLICT WITH THE COMPACT ARE
18 SUPERSEDED TO THE EXTENT OF THE CONFLICT.

19 (C) ALL LAWFUL ACTIONS OF THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION, INCLUDING
20 ALL RULES AND BYLAWS PROMULGATED BY THE COMMISSION, ARE BINDING UPON
21 ALL MEMBER STATES.

22 (D) ALL AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE INTERSTATE COMMISSION AND THE
23 MEMBER STATES ARE BINDING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR TERMS.

24 (E) IN THE EVENT THAT ANY PROVISION OF THE COMPACT EXCEEDS THE
25 CONSTITUTIONAL LIMITS IMPOSED ON THE LEGISLATURE OF ANY MEMBER STATE,
26 SUCH PROVISION SHALL BE INEFFECTIVE TO THE EXTENT OF THE CONFLICT WITH
27 THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISION IN QUESTION IN THAT MEMBER STATE.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is contingent on the
29 enacting of substantially similar legislation in four other states. The Maryland Department
30 of Health shall notify the Department of Legislative Services within 10 days after four
31 states have enacted legislation that is substantially similar to this Act.
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
HOUSE BILL 619 23

1 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 23