START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 658

J1 6lr1619
CF SB 412

By: Delegate Charkoudian
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Department of Health – Community Forensic Aftercare Program –
3 Established

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Community Forensic Aftercare Program in the
5 Maryland Department of Health to monitor committed persons on conditional
6 release and individuals with mental illness or intellectual disability who are
7 required to be monitored under certain circumstances; requiring the Program to
8 establish a community monitoring board to make certain decisions and
9 recommendations related to conditional release and out–of–state travel; and
10 generally relating to the Community Forensic Aftercare Program.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Criminal Procedure
13 Section 3–101(a), (b), and (d) and 3–121(b)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Criminal Procedure
18 Section 3–122(a)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2025 Replacement Volume)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Health – General
23 Section 13–5901 through 13–5904 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 59.
24 Community Forensic Aftercare Program”
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0658*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 658

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Criminal Procedure

4 3–101.

5 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (b) “Committed person” means a person committed to the Health Department as
7 not criminally responsible under the test for criminal responsibility.

8 (d) “Health Department” means the Maryland Department of Health.

9 3–121.

10 (b) (1) If a court receives a report that alleges that a committed person has
11 violated a condition of a conditional release, the court promptly shall:

12 (i) notify:

13 1. the Health Department;

14 2. counsel of record for the committed person; and

15 3. the State’s Attorney; and

16 (ii) provide the State’s Attorney with the name, address, and
17 telephone number of the person who reported the violation and a copy of the order for
18 conditional release.

19 (2) If the Health Department receives a report that alleges that a
20 committed person has violated conditional release, the Department shall:

21 (i) notify:

22 1. the court;

23 2. counsel of record for the committed person; and

24 3. the State’s Attorney; and

25 (ii) provide the State’s Attorney with the name, address, and
26 telephone number of the person who reported the violation and a copy of the order for
27 conditional release.

28 3–122.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 658 3

1 (a) (1) An application to the court for a change in conditional release of a
2 committed person may be made by:

3 (i) the Health Department, THE COMMUNITY FORENSIC
4 AFTERCARE PROGRAM, or the State’s Attorney at any time; or

5 (ii) the committed person not earlier than 6 months after the court
6 ordered the conditional release, unless the court for good cause permits an earlier
7 application.

8 (2) The applicant for a change in conditional release shall notify the court
9 and other parties, in writing, of the application and the reasons for the requested change.

10 (3) On request by any party, the court shall hold a hearing after an
11 application is made under this subsection to determine whether the applicant has satisfied
12 the requirements for release under § 3–114 of this title.

13 Article – Health – General

14 SUBTITLE 59. COMMUNITY FORENSIC AFTERCARE PROGRAM.

15 13–5901.

16 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
17 INDICATED.

18 (B) “AUTHORIZED AGENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS NOT COUNSEL
19 FOR THE COMMITTED PERSON AND WHO IS SELECTED BY THE COMMITTED PERSON
20 TO REPRESENT THE INTERESTS OF THE COMMITTED PERSON IN ALL COMMUNITY
21 MONITORING BOARD MATTERS.

22 (C) “COMMITTED PERSON” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3–101 OF THE
23 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

24 (D) “MENTAL HEALTH TEAM” MEANS THE COMMITTED PERSON’S
25 INPATIENT BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDERS AND OUTPATIENT COMMUNITY
26 BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDERS.

27 (E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE COMMUNITY FORENSIC AFTERCARE
28 PROGRAM.

29 (F) “PROGRAM MONITOR” MEANS A LICENSED CERTIFIED SOCIAL
30 WORKER–CLINICAL EMPLOYED BY THE PROGRAM TO:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 658

1 (1) COLLECT AND REVIEW INFORMATION PERTAINING TO A
2 COMMITTED PERSON’S COMPLIANCE WITH A CONDITIONAL RELEASE ORDER; AND

3 (2) MAKE BEHAVIORAL HEALTH RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
4 COMMITTED PERSON’S BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDERS AND THE COURT.

5 13–5902.

6 (A) THERE IS A COMMUNITY FORENSIC AFTERCARE PROGRAM IN THE
7 DEPARTMENT.

8 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO MONITOR:

9 (1) COMMITTED PERSONS ON CONDITIONAL RELEASE; AND

10 (2) INDIVIDUALS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS OR INTELLECTUAL
11 DISABILITY WHO ARE REQUIRED TO BE MONITORED UNDER TITLE 3 OF THE
12 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

13 (C) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL:

14 (I) MONITOR COMMITTED PERSONS ON CONDITIONAL
15 RELEASE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ORDER OF THE COURT AND THE
16 RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTED PERSON’S MENTAL HEALTH TEAM;

17 (II) MONITOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE BEEN:

18 1. FOUND INCOMPETENT TO STAND TRIAL BUT NOT A
19 DANGER TO SELF OR THE PERSON OR PROPERTY OF OTHERS UNDER § 3–106 OF THE
20 CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE; AND

21 2. DISCHARGED FROM A DEPARTMENT FACILITY WITH A
22 RECOMMENDATION FOR COMMUNITY FORENSIC AFTERCARE MONITORING;

23 (III) MONITOR COMMITTED PERSONS ORDERED BY A COURT TO
24 BE CONDITIONALLY RELEASED UNDER § 3–114(C) OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
25 ARTICLE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH COURT ORDERED CONDITIONS OF RELEASE;

26 (IV) RECEIVE AND REPORT VIOLATIONS OF A CONDITION OF
27 CONDITIONAL RELEASE UNDER § 3–121 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 658 5

1 (V) FILE APPLICATIONS FOR CHANGE IN CONDITIONAL
2 RELEASE ON BEHALF OF THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 3–122 OF THE CRIMINAL
3 PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

4 (2) THE PROGRAM:

5 (I) MAY NOT MAKE CLINICAL DECISIONS REGARDING THE
6 TREATMENT OF COMMITTED PERSONS; BUT

7 (II) MAY MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING THE
8 TREATMENT OF THE COMMITTED PERSON.

9 (3) A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER–PATIENT RELATIONSHIP MAY
10 NOT BE DETERMINED TO EXIST BETWEEN A COMMITTED PERSON AND AN
11 INDIVIDUAL WHO MONITORS INDIVIDUALS OR PROVIDES OTHER SERVICES UNDER
12 THE PROGRAM.

13 (D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AT LEAST
14 ONCE EVERY 90 DAYS, A PROGRAM MONITOR SHALL HOLD A MEETING WITH:

15 (I) EACH COMMITTED PERSON MONITORED BY THE PROGRAM;
16 AND

17 (II) THE MENTAL HEALTH TEAM OF THE COMMITTED PERSON.

18 (2) BEGINNING 1 YEAR AFTER THE DATE THE COMMITTED PERSON
19 WAS RELEASED FROM A FACILITY, MEETINGS SHALL BE HELD AS DETERMINED
20 NECESSARY BY:

21 (I) THE MENTAL HEALTH TEAM OF THE COMMITTED PERSON;
22 OR

23 (II) AT THE REQUEST OF THE PROGRAM.

24 (3) A COMMITTED PERSON MAY APPOINT AN ADVOCATE, INCLUDING
25 A DESIGNEE OF COUNSEL OF THE COMMITTED PERSON, TO ATTEND A MEETING HELD
26 UNDER PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

27 (4) IF A MEETING UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OR (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
28 CONCERNS THE COMMITTED PERSON’S COMPLIANCE WITH A CONDITIONAL
29 RELEASE, THE PROGRAM SHALL NOTIFY THE ADVOCATE OF THE COMMITTED
30 PERSON AND, IF APPLICABLE, THE DESIGNEE OF COUNSEL OF THE COMMITTED
31 PERSON OF THE MEETING.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 658

1 (E) IF THE PROGRAM RECEIVES A REPORT ALLEGING THAT A COMMITTED
2 PERSON HAS VIOLATED CONDITIONAL RELEASE, THE PROGRAM SHALL:

3 (1) MAKE THE NOTIFICATIONS REQUIRED UNDER § 3–121(B)(2)(I) OF
4 THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE;

5 (2) PROVIDE THE STATE’S ATTORNEY WITH THE INFORMATION
6 REQUIRED UNDER § 3–121(B)(2)(II) OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE; AND

7 (3) IF APPLICABLE, PROVIDE TO THE COUNSEL OF RECORD FOR THE
8 COMMITTED PERSON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED UNDER ITEM (2) OF THIS
9 SUBSECTION.

10 (F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF THE
11 PROGRAM RECEIVES A REQUEST FOR RECORDS FOR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS
12 VIOLATED A CONDITION OF CONDITIONAL RELEASE AND A HEARING UNDER §
13 3–121(F) OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE HAS BEEN SCHEDULED WITHIN
14 10 DAYS, THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE THE RECORDS WITHIN 4 BUSINESS DAYS
15 AFTER THE REQUEST IS RECEIVED UNLESS THE PROGRAM IS PROHIBITED UNDER
16 APPLICABLE FEDERAL OR STATE LAW FROM DISCLOSING THE RECORDS TO THE
17 REQUESTING PERSON.

18 (2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPHS (II) THROUGH (IV) OF THIS
19 PARAGRAPH, THE PROGRAM SHALL DISCLOSE ANY RECORDS WITHOUT THE
20 AUTHORIZATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE RECORD TO A
21 PUBLIC DEFENDER WHO STATES IN WRITING THAT THE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC
22 DEFENDER REPRESENTS THE INDIVIDUAL.

23 (II) LEGAL RECORDS REQUIRED TO BE DISCLOSED UNDER
24 SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH INCLUDE AN EMERGENCY PETITION.

25 (III) THE RECORDS DISCLOSED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
26 THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE LIMITED TO THOSE RECORDS NEEDED BY THE PUBLIC
27 DEFENDER TO REPRESENT THE INDIVIDUAL.

28 (IV) RECORDS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
29 SUBSECTION SHALL BE PROVIDED:

30 1. WITHIN 24 HOURS AFTER THE PROGRAM RECEIVES A
31 WRITTEN REQUEST FOR THE RECORDS FROM THE PUBLIC DEFENDER; AND
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 658 7

1 2. ONLY IF THE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF
2 THE RECORD HAS NOT YET RETAINED PRIVATE COUNSEL.

3 13–5903.

4 (A) THE PROGRAM SHALL ESTABLISH A COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD
5 TO MAKE:

6 (1) RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO THE EARLY TERMINATION OF
7 CONDITIONAL RELEASE;

8 (2) RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO MODIFICATION OF THE
9 CONDITIONS OF RELEASE;

10 (3) RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO THE EXTENSION OF
11 CONDITIONAL RELEASE;

12 (4) DECISIONS RELATING TO THE ELIGIBILITY OF A COMMITTED
13 PERSON TO REMAIN ON CONDITIONAL RELEASE; AND

14 (5) DECISIONS RELATING TO ANY OUT–OF–STATE TRAVEL REQUEST.

15 (B) (1) EACH VOTING MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD
16 SHALL BE A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER LICENSED UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS
17 ARTICLE.

18 (2) DECISIONS OF THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL BE
19 DETERMINED BY A MAJORITY VOTE.

20 (3) THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL HAVE AN ODD
21 NUMBER OF MEMBERS.

22 (4) EACH MEMBER OF THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL
23 HAVE ONE VOTE.

24 (5) A COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD MAY NOT ISSUE A
25 RECOMMENDATION OR RENDER A DECISION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
26 SECTION UNLESS A QUORUM IS PRESENT.

27 (6) A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE COMMUNITY MONITORING
28 BOARD IS A QUORUM.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 658

1 (C) (1) A COMMITTED PERSON MAY APPOINT AN AUTHORIZED AGENT TO
2 ATTEND THE ENTIRETY OF A COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD MEETING
3 CONCERNING THE COMMITTED PERSON, EXCEPT FOR THE VOTING PORTION OF A
4 MEETING.

5 (2) AN AUTHORIZED AGENT MAY BE A SOCIAL WORKER OR AN
6 INVESTIGATOR EMPLOYED BY THE COUNSEL REPRESENTING THE COMMITTED
7 PERSON.

8 (3) AN AUTHORIZED AGENT MAY ONLY GIVE AND HEAR ARGUMENTS.

9 (4) AN AUTHORIZED AGENT MAY ATTEND A COMMUNITY MONITORING
10 BOARD MEETING VIRTUALLY.

11 (D) (1) THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL MAINTAIN A
12 WRITTEN RECORD CONTAINING ITS FINDINGS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND
13 DECISIONS.

14 (2) THE WRITTEN RECORD SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE MEDICAL
15 RECORD OF THE COMMITTED PERSON.

16 (3) THE FINDINGS SHALL INCLUDE THE REASONS FOR THE
17 COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD’S RECOMMENDATION OR DECISION.

18 (E) (1) WHEN MAKING A RECOMMENDATION OR DECISION UNDER THIS
19 SECTION, THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL CONSIDER A WRITTEN
20 STATEMENT OFFERED BY THE COMMITTED PERSON TO THE FORENSIC REVIEW
21 BOARD.

22 (2) THE COMMUNITY MONITORING BOARD SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE
23 TO A COMMITTED PERSON AND THE COUNSEL OF RECORD FOR THE COMMITTED
24 PERSON AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE BUT NO LATER THAN 10 DAYS BEFORE THE
25 FORENSIC REVIEW BOARD HOLDS A MEETING CONCERNING THE COMMITTED
26 PERSON.

27 (3) A COPY OF THIS NOTICE SHALL BE MAINTAINED IN THE
28 PROGRAM’S RECORDS.

29 (F) THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY PROVIDE LEGAL
30 COUNSEL TO THE DEPARTMENT AT THE PROGRAM’S COMMUNITY MONITORING
31 BOARD MEETINGS.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 658 9

1 (G) A COPY OF A DOCUMENT OR RECORD PRODUCED BY THE COMMUNITY
2 MONITORING BOARD UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL, ON REQUEST, BE PROVIDED TO:

3 (1) THE COMMITTED PERSON;

4 (2) COUNSEL FOR THE COMMITTED PERSON;

5 (3) THE COURT;

6 (4) THE STATE’S ATTORNEY; OR

7 (5) THE DEPARTMENT.

8 13–5904.

9 THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
10 SUBTITLE.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
12 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9