START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 600

L2 6lr0800

By: St. Mary’s County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 St. Mary’s County – Metropolitan Commission

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the amount of a certain required bond that the Treasurer
4 and any Deputy Treasurer gives to the State of Maryland, the St. Mary’s County
5 Metropolitan Commission, and the Commissioners of St. Mary’s County;
6 authorizing, instead of requiring, the Metropolitan Commission to conduct certain
7 studies, plans, and estimates and altering the scope of those studies, plans, and
8 estimates; altering certain civil and criminal penalties for certain violations; and
9 generally relating to the St. Mary’s County Metropolitan Commission.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 The Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County
12 Section 113–2E.(2), 113–5A.(1), and 113–21A. and B.
13 Article 19 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
14 (2007 Edition and April 2025 Supplement, as amended)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
16 The Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County
17 Section 113–21C.(1)
18 Article 19 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
19 (2007 Edition and April 2025 Supplement, as amended)
20 (As enacted by Chapter 599 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 The Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County
23 Section 113–21C.(2)
24 Article 19 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
25 (2007 Edition and April 2025 Supplement, as amended)
26 (As enacted by Chapter 599 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025)

27 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0600*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 600

1 The Public Local Laws of St. Mary’s County
2 Section 113–21C.(3)
3 Article 19 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
4 (2007 Edition and April 2025 Supplement, as amended)

5 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
6 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

7 Article 19 – St. Mary’s County

8 113–2.

9 E. (2) All moneys deposited shall be protected by a depository bond or by other
10 securities approved by the Metropolitan Commission. The Treasurer and any Deputy
11 Treasurer appointed by the Metropolitan Commission shall give bond to the State of
12 Maryland, the Metropolitan Commission, and the Commissioners of St. Mary’s County to
13 the amount of [twenty–five] TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY thousand dollars [($25,000)]
14 ($250,000) or a greater amount that the Commissioners of St. Mary’s County prescribe,
15 with a good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the Commissioners of St. Mary’s
16 County. The bond shall provide, in a form approved by the Maryland Insurance
17 Administration and the County Attorney, that if the individual giving the bond shall well
18 and faithfully execute that individual’s office and account to the Metropolitan Commission
19 for all moneys received on behalf of the Metropolitan Commission without fraud or delay,
20 the required bond obligation shall be null and void, but shall otherwise remain in full force
21 and effect. The bond, when approved, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the
22 Circuit Court for St. Mary’s County.

23 113–5.

24 A. (1) The Metropolitan Commission [shall] MAY cause studies, plans and
25 estimates to be made for new facilities in those portions of St. Mary’s County DESIGNATED
26 AS NOT PLANNED FOR SERVICE BY THE ST. MARY’S COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE
27 WATER AND SEWERAGE PLAN, in which the Metropolitan Commission determines that
28 the facilities are necessary and [may divide each sanitary district into water and sewerage
29 districts in such a way as shall], in its judgment, best serve the needs of the various
30 communities and shall promote convenience and economy of installation and operation.

31 113–21.

32 A. CRIMINAL PENALTIES.

33 (1) [Unless otherwise provided, any act or omission designated as a] A
34 PERSON WHO VIOLATES ANY OF THE PROVISIONS LISTED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
35 SUBSECTION IS GUILTY OF A misdemeanor [in the chapter is punishable by] AND, ON
36 CONVICTION, IS SUBJECT TO a fine of not more than one [hundred] THOUSAND dollars
37 [($100.00) or confinement] ($1,000.00) OR IMPRISONMENT for not more than thirty (30)
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 600 3

1 days [in the county jail,] or both.

2 (2) A PERSON IS SUBJECT TO THE PENALTIES PROVIDED IN
3 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE PERSON VIOLATES:

4 (A) SECTION 113–7 OF THIS CHAPTER (LEVY OF TAXES);

5 (B) SECTION 113–11 OF THIS CHAPTER (PERMITS AND
6 REGULATIONS OF USE);

7 (C) SECTION 113–17 OF THIS CHAPTER (PRIVATELY
8 CONSTRUCTED SYSTEMS);

9 (D) SECTION 113–19 OF THIS CHAPTER (ENTRY INTO
10 BUILDINGS); OR

11 (E) SECTION 113–20 OF THIS CHAPTER (OBSTRUCTIONS).

12 (3) Where [this] THE act or omission is of a continuing nature and persists
13 in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated under
14 this chapter, a conviction for one (1) offense is not a bar to a conviction for a continuation
15 of the offense subsequent to the first or any succeeding conviction.

16 B. (1) The Metropolitan Commission may designate any violation of this
17 chapter as a civil infraction, which shall be enforced as provided in this subsection.

18 (2) A Metropolitan Commission employee with the duty of enforcing this
19 chapter may deliver a citation to a person believed to be committing a violation. A copy of
20 the citation shall be retained by the Metropolitan Commission employee and shall bear a
21 certification attesting to the truth of the matters set forth. The citation shall contain:

22 (A) The name and address of the person charged;

23 (B) The nature of the violation;

24 (C) The place and time of the violation;

25 (D) The amount of the fine assessed;

26 (E) The manner, location, and time in which the fine may be paid;
27 and

28 (F) The person’s right to elect to stand trial for the violation.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 600

1 (3) (A) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, [a preset
2 fine, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), may be imposed for each violation] ON
3 DELIVERY OF A CITATION, THE METROPOLITAN COMMISSION MAY IMPOSE A FINE
4 OF:

5 (I) FOR A FIRST VIOLATION, TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
6 DOLLARS ($250.00);

7 (II) FOR A SECOND VIOLATION, FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
8 ($500.00);

9 (III) FOR A THIRD VIOLATION, SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY
10 DOLLARS ($750.00); AND

11 (IV) FOR A FOURTH OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, ONE
12 THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000.00).

13 (B) EACH DAY THAT A VIOLATION CONTINUES IS A SEPARATE
14 CIVIL INFRACTION SUBJECT TO AN ADDITIONAL CITATION AND A FINE IN THE
15 AMOUNT OF TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS ($250.00).

16 (C) The Metropolitan Commission may establish a schedule of fines
17 for each violation and may adopt procedures for collection of these fines.

18 (4) (A) A person may not remove water from a public system under the
19 jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Commission without the prior authorization of the
20 Metropolitan Commission.

21 (B) The Metropolitan Commission may impose a fine [not
22 exceeding]:

23 (I) FOR A FIRST VIOLATION, NOT MORE THAN one
24 thousand dollars ($1,000.00) [for each violation of this paragraph]; AND

25 (II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, NOT
26 MORE THAN TWO THOUSAND DOLLARS ($2,000.00).

27 (C) The Metropolitan Commission may establish a schedule of fines
28 for each violation of this paragraph based on the amount of water removed and the number
29 of prior violations by a person.

30 (5) A person who receives a citation may elect to stand trial for the offense
31 by filing with the Metropolitan Commission a notice of intention to stand trial. The notice
32 shall be given at least five (5) days before the date of payment as set forth in the citation.
33 On receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, the Metropolitan Commission shall
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 600 5

1 forward to the district court having venue a copy of the citation and the notice of intention
2 to stand trial. On receipt of the citation, the district court shall schedule the case for trial
3 and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the
4 district court for violation shall be remitted to the Metropolitan Commission.

5 C. (1) The Metropolitan Commission may utilize administrative enforcement
6 remedies or seek judicial enforcement remedies for a violation of any rules and regulations
7 the Metropolitan Commission may adopt under this chapter concerning public water and
8 sewer use, including lines, and mains, all appurtenances, connections, and discharges into
9 the public sewer systems. The Metropolitan Commission shall establish procedures for
10 implementing the enforcement remedies authorized under this subsection.

11 (2) The Metropolitan Commission may utilize administrative enforcement
12 remedies that may include:

13 (A) A notification of a violation;

14 (B) A consent order;

15 (C) A show cause hearing;

16 (D) A compliance order;

17 (E) A cease and desist order;

18 (F) An administrative fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
19 ($1,000.00) per violation, per day;

20 (G) An assessment for the reimbursement of actual costs incurred by
21 the Metropolitan Commission, including, but not limited to, time and materials; [or] AND

22 (H) An emergency suspension.

23 (3) The Metropolitan Commission may seek the following judicial
24 enforcement remedies:

25 (A) Petitioning the District Court of St. Mary’s County for injunctive
26 relief;

27 (B) For a conviction of a violation, requesting civil penalties up to one
28 thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day; or

29 (C) For a conviction of a violation, requesting criminal penalties of
30 not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, or imprisonment for not more
31 than one (1) year per violation, or both.

32 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 600

1 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6