START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 628

O1 6lr0928
HB 849/24 – APP

By: Delegates Acevero, Addison, Alston, Bhandari, Chang, Fennell, Foley, Forbes,
Griffith, Hornberger, Ivey, S. Johnson, Martinez, Mireku–North, Roberson,
Ruff, Spiegel, Terrasa, Turner, Williams, Wilson, Woods, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Human Services – Universal Basic Income for Transition–Age Youth Program –
3 Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Universal Basic Income for Transition–Age Youth
5 Program in the Department of Human Services; providing that payments made
6 under the Program may not be considered income or resources for purposes of
7 determining eligibility for certain benefits; requiring the Department to report
8 annually on the Program to the General Assembly; and generally relating to the
9 Universal Basic Income for Transition–Age Youth Program.

10 BY adding to
11 Article – Human Services
12 Section 5–5C–01 through 5–5C–04 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 5C.
13 Universal Basic Income for Transition–Age Youth Program”
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Human Services

19 SUBTITLE 5C. UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME FOR TRANSITION–AGE YOUTH
20 PROGRAM.

21 5–5C–01.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0628*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 628

1 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (B) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME FOR
4 TRANSITION–AGE YOUTH PROGRAM.

5 (C) “UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME” MEANS UNCONDITIONAL CASH PAYMENTS
6 OF EQUAL AMOUNTS DISTRIBUTED MONTHLY TO ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS.

7 5–5C–02.

8 (A) THERE IS A UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME FOR TRANSITION–AGE YOUTH
9 PROGRAM WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT.

10 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE FOR THE ECONOMIC
11 SECURITY OF INDIVIDUALS AGING OUT OF THE OUT–OF–HOME PLACEMENT
12 PROGRAM.

13 5–5C–03.

14 (A) AN INDIVIDUAL SHALL BE ELIGIBLE FOR A UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME
15 OF $1,000 PER MONTH FOR A PERIOD OF 3 YEARS IF:

16 (1) THE INDIVIDUAL RESIDED IN AN OUT–OF–HOME PLACEMENT ON
17 THE INDIVIDUAL’S 18TH BIRTHDAY, REGARDLESS OF THE AGE AT WHICH THE
18 INDIVIDUAL ENTERED OUT–OF–HOME PLACEMENT; AND

19 (2) THE INDIVIDUAL’S 18TH BIRTHDAY IS ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1,
20 2026.

21 (B) PAYMENTS ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED
22 INCOME OR RESOURCES FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY TO RECEIVE
23 BENEFITS OR THE AMOUNTS OF BENEFITS RECEIVED FOR THE FOLLOWING, AS
24 PERMITTED BY FEDERAL LAW:

25 (1) THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

26 (2) THE MARYLAND EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT; OR

27 (3) STATE AND FEDERAL FINANCIAL AID AND COLLEGE SUPPORT
28 PROGRAMS.

29 5–5C–04.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 628 3

1 ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, AND EACH OCTOBER 1 THEREAFTER, THE
2 DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
3 ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT
4 CONTAINS DESCRIPTIVE INFORMATION AND OUTCOME MEASURES OF PROGRAM
5 RECIPIENTS DURING THE PREVIOUS YEAR, INCLUDING, AT A MINIMUM:

6 (1) THE STARTING INCOME OF EACH RECIPIENT, EXCLUSIVE OF
7 UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME PAYMENTS;

8 (2) GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ABOUT EACH RECIPIENT, INCLUDING
9 COUNTY, CITY, AND ZIP CODE OF RESIDENCE;

10 (3) THE EMPLOYMENT STATUS OF EACH RECIPIENT BEFORE
11 RECEIVING UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME PAYMENTS; AND

12 (4) THE HOUSING STATUS OF EACH RECIPIENT BEFORE RECEIVING
13 UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME PAYMENTS.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
15 October 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of September
16 30, 2031, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
17 abrogated and of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 3