START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 622

A3 6lr0090
CF 6lr0089

By: Chair, Economic Matters Committee (By Request – Maryland Cannabis
Administration)
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Cannabis – Licensees – Micro Dispensary Employees and Cannabis Agent
3 Training Programs

4 FOR the purpose of increasing the number of individuals a micro dispensary is permitted
5 to employ; altering certain provisions relating to training requirements for certain
6 cannabis agents; and generally relating to cannabis licensees.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
9 Section 36–101(a) and (d)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
14 Section 36–401(c)(2), 36–407(h), 36–501(f), 36–1001, and 36–1002
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20 36–101.

21 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (d) “Cannabis agent” means an employee, a volunteer, or any other authorized
23 person who acts for or at the direction of a cannabis licensee or cannabis registrant.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0622*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 622

1 36–401.

2 (c) (2) A micro license authorizes the holder of the license:

3 (i) for growers, to operate not more than 10,000 square feet of indoor
4 canopy or its equivalent, as calculated by the Administration;

5 (ii) for processors, to process not more than 2,000 pounds of cannabis
6 per year, as calculated by the Administration; and

7 (iii) for dispensaries, to operate a delivery service that sells cannabis
8 or cannabis products without a physical storefront, provided that the licensee employs not
9 more than [10] 20 employees.

10 36–407.

11 (h) An on–site consumption establishment shall:

12 (1) require all employees to successfully complete an annual [responsible
13 vendor] CANNABIS AGENT training program authorized under this title; and

14 (2) ensure that the display and consumption of cannabis or cannabis
15 products are not visible from outside of the licensed premises.

16 36–501.

17 (f) A cannabis licensee shall require each registered cannabis agent to complete
18 an annual [responsible vendor] CANNABIS AGENT training program authorized under this
19 title.

20 36–1001.

21 (a) To offer a responsible medical or adult–use cannabis [vendor, server, and
22 seller] AGENT training program, a person shall submit an application to the
23 Administration.

24 (b) The Administration shall approve the application if the proposed training
25 program meets the minimum educational standards established under subsection (c) of this
26 section.

27 (c) At a minimum, a training program must:

28 (1) be taught in a classroom or virtual setting for at least a 2–hour period;

29 (2) establish program standards, including certification and recertification
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 622 3

1 requirements, record keeping, testing and assessment protocols, and effectiveness
2 evaluations; and

3 (3) provide a core curriculum of relevant statutory and regulatory
4 provisions AS REQUIRED BY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE ADMINISTRATION,
5 which shall include:

6 (i) [information on required licenses, age requirements, patient
7 registry cards issued by the Administration, maintenance of records, privacy issues, and
8 unlawful acts;

9 (ii)] administrative and criminal liability and license and court
10 sanctions;

11 [(iii)] (II) statutory and regulatory requirements for employees and
12 owners;

13 [(iv) statutory and regulatory requirements related to cannabis sale,
14 transfer, and delivery;

15 (v) acceptable forms of identification, including patient and
16 caregiver identification cards;]

17 [(vi)] (III) State and local licensing and enforcement; and

18 [(vii) information on serving size, THC and cannabinoid potency, and
19 impairment]

20 (IV) PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS RELEVANT TO
21 EACH LICENSE TYPE.

22 36–1002.

23 The Administration shall adopt regulations establishing the [responsible vendor]
24 CANNABIS AGENT training program and the minimum standards for the program.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
26 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3