START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 666

M4 6lr2437
CF SB 423

By: Delegate Cullison
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Research Facilities and Testing Facilities That Use Animals – Prohibitions and
3 Adoption Requirements
4 (Animal Research Modernization and Best Practices Act of 2026)

5 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a research facility or testing facility from using certain dogs
6 and cats for research or testing purposes; prohibiting a research facility or testing
7 facility from performing certain procedures on dogs or cats; prohibiting a testing
8 facility from using traditional animal test methods under certain circumstances;
9 applying certain provisions of law regarding the adoption of dogs and cats used for
10 scientific research purposes to testing facilities; and generally relating to research
11 facilities and testing facilities that use animals in research, education, or testing.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Agriculture
14 Section 15–101 to be under the amended title “Title 15. Research Facilities and
15 Testing Facilities That Use Animals”
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Agriculture
20 Section 15–101 through 15–103, 15–105, and 15–106
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 Preamble

24 WHEREAS, Scientific research and medical innovation are essential to protecting
25 public health and advancing knowledge; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0666*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 666

1 WHEREAS, The State has a compelling interest in ensuring that scientific research
2 and medical innovation are conducted in a manner that is ethical, responsible, and
3 consistent with evolving scientific standards; and

4 WHEREAS, Advances in technology and methodology have increasingly made
5 reducing, refining, or replacing the use of live animals in laboratory testing a possibility;
6 and

7 WHEREAS, The unnecessary or excessive use of animals in research undermines
8 public confidence and fails to reflect best practices in modern science; and

9 WHEREAS, It is the policy of the State to require that animal testing be employed
10 only when scientifically justified and when no reasonably available alternative methods
11 exist; and

12 WHEREAS, When animal testing is necessary, it should be conducted using the
13 minimum number of animals required and adhere to standards that prioritize humane
14 treatment and oversight; and

15 WHEREAS, Establishing clear statutory standards for the necessity, minimization,
16 and review of animal laboratory testing will promote scientific integrity, ethical
17 responsibility, and public trust; now, therefore,

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Agriculture

21 Title 15. Research Facilities [that] AND TESTING FACILITIES THAT Use [Dogs or Cats]
22 ANIMALS.

23 15–101.

24 (A) IN THIS TITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
25 INDICATED.

26 (B) (1) “ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD” MEANS A TEST METHOD,
27 INCLUDING A NEW OR REVISED METHOD, THAT:

28 (I) DOES NOT USE LIVE VERTEBRATE ANIMALS;

29 (II) PRODUCES INFORMATION OF EQUIVALENT OR BETTER
30 SCIENTIFIC QUALITY AND RELEVANCE COMPARED TO TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST
31 METHODS; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 666 3

1 (III) HAS BEEN IDENTIFIED AND ACCEPTED FOR USE BY THE
2 FEDERAL AGENCY OR PROGRAM WITHIN THE FEDERAL AGENCY RESPONSIBLE FOR
3 REGULATING THE SPECIFIC PRODUCT OR ACTIVITY FOR WHICH THE TEST IS BEING
4 CONDUCTED.

5 (2) “ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD” INCLUDES:

6 (I) COMPUTATIONAL TOXICOLOGY AND BIOINFORMATICS;

7 (II) HIGH–THROUGHPUT SCREENING METHODS;

8 (III) TESTING CATEGORIES OF CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES;

9 (IV) TIERED TESTING METHODS;

10 (V) IN VITRO STUDIES; AND

11 (VI) SYSTEMS BIOLOGY.

12 (C) (1) “BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH” MEANS:

13 (I) THE INVESTIGATION OF THE BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES AND
14 CAUSES OF DISEASE; OR

15 (II) RESEARCH CONDUCTED TO INCREASE FUNDAMENTAL
16 SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE AND EXPAND THE UNDERSTANDING OF HOW PROCESSES IN
17 LIVING ORGANISMS DEVELOP AND FUNCTION.

18 (2) “BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH” DOES NOT INCLUDE TESTING DONE TO
19 ASSESS THE SAFETY OR EFFICACY OF:

20 (I) CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES;

21 (II) INGREDIENTS;

22 (III) DRUGS;

23 (IV) VACCINES;

24 (V) PRODUCTS; OR

25 (VI) PRODUCT FORMULATIONS.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 666

1 (D) “CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE” MEANS ANY ORGANIC OR INORGANIC
2 SUBSTANCE INCLUDING:

3 (1) A DRUG, AS DEFINED IN 21 U.S.C. § 321(G);

4 (2) A PESTICIDE, AS DEFINED IN 7 U.S.C. § 136(U);

5 (3) A CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE, AS DEFINED IN 15 U.S.C. § 2602(2);
6 AND

7 (4) A FOOD ADDITIVE, AS DEFINED IN 21 U.S.C. § 321(S).

8 (E) (1) “RESEARCH FACILITY” MEANS ANY FACILITY IN THE STATE THAT
9 USES LIVE VERTEBRATE ANIMALS FOR RESEARCH, EDUCATION, OR
10 EXPERIMENTATION.

11 (2) “RESEARCH FACILITY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PARTNERSHIP, A
12 CORPORATION, AN ASSOCIATION, AN INSTITUTION, AN ORGANIZATION, OR ANY
13 OTHER ENTITY IN THE STATE THAT PROVIDES ONLY BENEFICIAL SERVICES TO AN
14 ANIMAL SUCH AS SPAYING AND NEUTERING.

15 (F) (1) “TESTING FACILITY” MEANS A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
16 PARTNERSHIP, CORPORATION, ASSOCIATION, ORGANIZATION, OR ANY OTHER
17 ENTITY IN THE STATE THAT USES LIVE VERTEBRATE ANIMALS FOR THE TESTING OF:

18 (I) CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES;

19 (II) INGREDIENTS;

20 (III) DRUGS;

21 (IV) VACCINES;

22 (V) PRODUCTS; OR

23 (VI) PRODUCT FORMULATIONS.

24 (2) “TESTING FACILITY” INCLUDES A PARTNERSHIP, A
25 CORPORATION, AN ASSOCIATION, AN ORGANIZATION, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY IN THE
26 STATE THAT IS OWNED, LEASED, OR OPERATED BY A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ENTITY.

27 (3) “TESTING FACILITY” DOES NOT INCLUDE:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 666 5

1 (I) A PARTNERSHIP, A CORPORATION, AN ASSOCIATION, AN
2 INSTITUTION, AN ORGANIZATION, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY IN THE STATE THAT
3 PROVIDES ONLY BENEFICIAL SERVICES TO AN ANIMAL SUCH AS SPAYING AND
4 NEUTERING; OR

5 (II) A SCHOOL OR AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION.

6 (G) “TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD” MEANS A PROCESS, AN
7 EXPERIMENT, OR A PROCEDURE THAT:

8 (1) USES LIVE VERTEBRATE ANIMALS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION ON
9 THE CHARACTERISTICS OF A CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE, AN INGREDIENT, A DRUG, A
10 VACCINE, A PRODUCT FORMULATION, OR A PRODUCT; AND

11 (2) GENERATES INFORMATION REGARDING THE ABILITY OF THE
12 CHEMICAL SUBSTANCE, INGREDIENT, DRUG, VACCINE, PRODUCT FORMULATION, OR
13 PRODUCT TO PRODUCE A SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL EFFECT UNDER SPECIFIED
14 CONDITIONS.

15 15–102.

16 (A) A RESEARCH FACILITY OR TESTING FACILITY MAY NOT USE A DOG OR
17 CAT THAT HAS UNDERGONE A DEVOCALIZATION SURGERY FOR RESEARCH OR
18 TESTING PURPOSES.

19 (B) A RESEARCH FACILITY OR TESTING FACILITY MAY NOT PERFORM A
20 DEVOCALIZATION SURGERY ON A DOG OR CAT.

21 (C) A DOG OR CAT AT A RESEARCH FACILITY OR TESTING FACILITY MAY BE
22 EUTHANIZED ONLY BY A LETHAL INJECTION OF SODIUM PENTOBARBITAL
23 ADMINISTERED:

24 (1) BY A VETERINARIAN LICENSED IN THE STATE; OR

25 (2) UNDER THE DIRECT SUPERVISION OF A VETERINARIAN LICENSED
26 IN THE STATE.

27 15–103.

28 (A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH.

29 (B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A TESTING
30 FACILITY MAY NOT USE A TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD IF THE AGENCY
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 666

1 RESPONSIBLE FOR REGULATING THE SPECIFIC PRODUCT OR ACTIVITY FOR WHICH
2 A TEST METHOD IS BEING USED HAS:

3 (I) APPROVED AN ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD; OR

4 (II) MADE AVAILABLE TO OR GRANTED THE TESTING FACILITY
5 A WAIVER FROM USING A TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD.

6 (2) IF THERE IS NO ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD AVAILABLE OR
7 WAIVER MADE AVAILABLE OR GRANTED, A TESTING FACILITY MAY USE A
8 TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD IF THE TESTING FACILITY USES THE FEWEST
9 NUMBER OF ANIMALS POSSIBLE AND MINIMIZES THE LEVEL OF PAIN, SUFFERING,
10 AND STRESS OF AN ANIMAL USED FOR TESTING.

11 (3) NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT:

12 (I) THE USE OF A TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD TO
13 COMPLY WITH FEDERAL OR STATE REQUIREMENTS IF THE APPROPRIATE FEDERAL
14 OR STATE AGENCY HAS APPROVED THE USE OF AN ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD BUT
15 DETERMINED THAT THE ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD DOES NOT ENSURE THE
16 HEALTH OR SAFETY OF THE PUBLIC OR THE ENVIRONMENT; OR

17 (II) THE CONTINUED USE OF A TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST
18 METHOD THAT:

19 1. WAS INITIATED:

20 A. BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2026; OR

21 B. WITHIN 180 DAYS AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2026,
22 FOLLOWING AGENCY APPROVAL OF AN ALTERNATIVE TEST METHOD OR STRATEGY;
23 AND

24 2. IS USED ONLY TO COMPLETE THE TEST FOR WHICH IT
25 WAS STARTED.

26 [15–101.] 15–104.

27 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

28 (2) “Animal rescue organization” includes:

29 (i) A nonprofit organization incorporated for the purpose of rescuing
30 animals in need and finding permanent adoptive homes for the animals; and
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 666 7

1 (ii) A government–operated animal control unit that provides
2 animals for adoption.

3 (3) [“Research facility” includes:

4 (i) A higher education research facility;

5 (ii) A scientific research facility;

6 (iii) A medical research facility; and

7 (iv) A product testing facility.

8 (4)] “Scientific research purposes” includes:

9 (i) Investigation;

10 (ii) Experimentation;

11 (iii) Instruction; and

12 (iv) Testing.

13 (b) This section applies to a dog or cat that, in the determination of an attending
14 veterinarian, is suitable for adoption.

15 (c) A research facility OR TESTING FACILITY located in the State in which dogs
16 or cats are used for scientific research purposes shall take reasonable steps to provide for
17 the adoption of a dog or cat that, in the determination of the research facility OR TESTING
18 FACILITY, is no longer needed for scientific research purposes by:

19 (1) Establishing a private placement process to provide for the adoption of
20 a dog or cat;

21 (2) Establishing a list of animal rescue organizations that are approved by
22 the research facility OR TESTING FACILITY and are willing to take a dog or cat from the
23 research facility OR TESTING FACILITY; and

24 (3) Offering the dog or cat to the animal rescue organizations identified in
25 the list established under item (2) of this subsection if the research facility OR TESTING
26 FACILITY is unable to place the dog or cat through its private placement process.

27 (d) A research facility OR TESTING FACILITY may enter into a collaborative
28 agreement with an animal rescue organization for the purpose of carrying out the
29 provisions of this section.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 666

1 15–105.

2 (A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31, 2028, AND EACH JANUARY 31
3 THEREAFTER, EACH TESTING FACILITY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE SECRETARY THE
4 FOLLOWING INFORMATION REGARDING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12–MONTH
5 PERIOD:

6 (1) THE NUMBER OF EACH SPECIES OF ANIMALS OWNED AND USED BY
7 THE TESTING FACILITY;

8 (2) THE NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS RELEASED TO ANIMAL RESCUE
9 ORGANIZATIONS UNDER § 15–104 OF THIS TITLE AND THE NAMES OF THE ANIMAL
10 RESCUE ORGANIZATIONS TO WHICH THE DOGS OR CATS WERE RELEASED;

11 (3) THE TYPE AND NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVE TEST METHODS AND
12 TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHODS USED;

13 (4) THE NUMBER OF TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHOD WAIVERS
14 USED; AND

15 (5) THE PURPOSE OF ANY TESTS CONDUCTED USING ALTERNATIVE
16 TEST METHODS OR TRADITIONAL ANIMAL TEST METHODS.

17 (B) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 31, 2028, AND EACH JANUARY 31
18 THEREAFTER, EACH RESEARCH FACILITY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE SECRETARY, FOR
19 THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12–MONTH PERIOD, THE NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS
20 RELEASED TO ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATIONS UNDER § 15–104 OF THIS TITLE AND
21 THE NAMES OF THE ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATIONS TO WHICH THE DOGS OR CATS
22 WERE RELEASED.

23 (C) THE SECRETARY SHALL:

24 (1) PREPARE AN ANNUAL REPORT AGGREGATING THE INFORMATION
25 SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

26 (2) POST THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

27 15–106.

28 A RESEARCH FACILITY OR TESTING FACILITY THAT VIOLATES THIS TITLE IS
29 SUBJECT TO:
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 666 9

1 (1) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000; AND

2 (2) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, A FINE NOT
3 EXCEEDING $5,000.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9