START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 682

A2 6lr2171
CF SB 441

By: Delegate Pruski
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages – Golf Course License and Sports
3 Activity Venue Licenses

4 FOR the purpose of establishing in Anne Arundel County a Class C (golf course) license
5 that authorizes the holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on–premises consumption
6 at a certain golf course; establishing in Anne Arundel County sports activity venue
7 licenses that authorize the holder to sell beer and wine or beer, wine, and liquor for
8 on–premises consumption at a certain sports activity venue; and generally relating
9 to alcoholic beverages licenses in Anne Arundel County.

10 BY renumbering
11 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
12 Section 11–1006.2
13 to be Section 11–1006.3
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
18 Section 11–102
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
23 Section 11–1006.2 and 11–1008.2
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0682*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 682

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That Section(s) 11–1006.2 of Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis of the Annotated
3 Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 11–1006.3.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
5 as follows:

6 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

7 11–102.

8 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

9 11–1006.2.

10 (A) THERE IS A CLASS C (GOLF COURSE) LICENSE.

11 (B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE AT A GOLF COURSE WITH
12 AT LEAST NINE HOLES.

13 (C) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO SELL BEER, WINE,
14 AND LIQUOR AT RETAIL AT THE PLACE DESCRIBED IN THE LICENSE FOR
15 ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

16 (D) THE BOARD MAY PLACE CONDITIONS ON THE LOCATION OF SALES AND
17 CONSUMPTION, INCLUDING PROHIBITING THE SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF BEER,
18 WINE, AND LIQUOR IN SPECIFIC AREAS OF THE PREMISES.

19 (E) (1) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
20 SUBSECTION, THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR ON
21 MONDAY THROUGH SUNDAY FROM 6 A.M. TO 2 A.M. THE FOLLOWING DAY.

22 (II) THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE NEED NOT OBTAIN A SUNDAY
23 PERMIT UNDER § 11–2004 OF THIS TITLE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON
24 SUNDAY.

25 (2) THE BOARD MAY REDUCE THE HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE FOR ALL
26 OR PART OF THE LICENSED PREMISES.

27 (F) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $1,200.

28 11–1008.2.

29 (A) THERE IS:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 682 3

1 (1) A SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER AND WINE LICENSE; AND

2 (2) A SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

3 (B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE A LICENSE TO THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A
4 COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL FACILITY THAT OFFERS:

5 (1) BOWLING;

6 (2) GOLF SIMULATORS;

7 (3) MULTISPORT SIMULATORS;

8 (4) INDOOR OR OUTDOOR PICKLEBALL COURTS;

9 (5) INDOOR GYMNASIUMS OR TRAINING CENTERS; OR

10 (6) ANY SIMILAR SPORT ACTIVITY OR VENUE.

11 (C) (1) THE SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER AND WINE LICENSE
12 AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL BEER AND WINE AT RETAIL AT THE PLACE
13 DESCRIBED IN THE LICENSE FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

14 (2) THE SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE
15 AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR AT RETAIL AT THE
16 PLACE DESCRIBED IN THE LICENSE FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

17 (D) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL OR SERVE ALCOHOL ONLY IN
18 AREAS WITHIN THE PREMISES DESIGNATED FOR ACTIVITY, SEATING, BAR SERVICE,
19 AND DINING, INCLUDING PRIVATE PARTY ROOMS, AS DELINEATED IN THE LICENSE
20 APPLICATION AND SITE PLAN APPROVED BY THE BOARD.

21 (2) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES SALES TO A CUSTOMER, AT LEAST 21
22 YEARS OLD, WHO IS:

23 (I) ACTIVELY UTILIZING OR PARTICIPATING IN THE VENUE’S
24 RECREATIONAL SERVICES OR DINING; OR

25 (II) ON THE LICENSED PREMISES AS A GUEST OF A PARTICIPANT
26 IN AN ACTIVITY OFFERED BY THE VENUE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 682

1 (E) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL MAINTAIN AND OFFER FOR SALE TO
2 CUSTOMERS A VARIETY OF PREPARED, CONSUMABLE FOOD ITEMS AVAILABLE
3 DURING ALL HOURS THAT ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE FOR SALE, AS APPROVED BY
4 THE BOARD BASED ON THE NATURE OF THE FACILITY.

5 (F) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL:

6 (1) REQUIRE ALL EMPLOYEES SERVING ALCOHOL TO BE CERTIFIED
7 BY AN APPROVED ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING PROGRAM;

8 (2) IMPLEMENT A WRITTEN POLICY FOR EMPLOYEES TO MONITOR
9 AND LIMIT SERVICE TO CUSTOMERS WHO ARE ACTIVELY PARTICIPATING IN
10 PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES TO ENSURE SAFETY AND PREVENT INTOXICATION; AND

11 (3) OBTAIN A CROWD CONTROL TRAINING CERTIFICATE WHERE THE
12 OCCUPANT LOAD EXCEEDS 50 PERSONS.

13 (G) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
14 MONDAY THROUGH SUNDAY FROM 6 A.M. TO 2 A.M. THE FOLLOWING DAY.

15 (2) THE LICENSE HOLDER NEED NOT OBTAIN A SUNDAY LICENSE
16 UNDER § 11–2004 OF THIS TITLE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON SUNDAY.

17 (H) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEES ARE:

18 (1) $740 FOR A SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER AND WINE LICENSE;
19 AND

20 (2) $1,200 FOR A SPORTS ACTIVITY VENUE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
21 LICENSE.

22 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4