START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 686

R5 6lr1268
CF SB 349

By: Delegates Williams, Alston, Coley, Hill, Martinez, Roberson, Roberts, and
Taveras
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Eluding Police – Penalties
3 (Zoey’s Law)

4 FOR the purpose of altering certain penalties for attempting to elude a police officer when
5 that attempt results in the death of another person; and generally relating to
6 penalties for eluding a police officer.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 21–904
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 21–904.

16 (a) In this section, “visual or audible signal” includes a signal by hand, voice,
17 emergency light or siren.

18 (b) If a police officer gives a visual or audible signal to stop and the police officer
19 is in uniform, prominently displaying the police officer’s badge or other insignia of office, a
20 driver of a vehicle may not attempt to elude the police officer by:

21 (1) Willfully failing to stop the driver’s vehicle;

22 (2) Fleeing on foot; or

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0686*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 686

1 (3) Any other means.

2 (c) If a police officer gives a visual or audible signal to stop and the police officer,
3 whether or not in uniform, is in a vehicle appropriately marked as an official police vehicle,
4 a driver of a vehicle may not attempt to elude the police officer by:

5 (1) Willfully failing to stop the driver’s vehicle;

6 (2) Fleeing on foot; or

7 (3) Any other means.

8 (d) (1) A driver may not commit a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1) of this
9 section that results in bodily injury to another person.

10 (2) A driver may not commit a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1) of this
11 section that results in death of another person.

12 (e) (1) In this subsection, “crime of violence” has the meaning stated in §
13 14–101 of the Criminal Law Article.

14 (2) A driver may not commit a violation of subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1) of this
15 section while the driver is attempting to elude a police officer who is signaling for the driver
16 to stop for the purpose of apprehending the driver for the commission of a crime of violence
17 for which the driver is subsequently convicted.

18 (f) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, a person
19 convicted of a violation of this section is subject to:

20 (i) For a first offense, imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or a fine
21 not exceeding $1,000 or both; and

22 (ii) For a second or subsequent offense, imprisonment not exceeding
23 2 years or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both.

24 (2) A person convicted of a violation of subsection (d)(1) or (e) of this section
25 is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 3 years or a fine not exceeding $5,000 or both.

26 (3) A person [convicted of a violation of] WHO VIOLATES subsection (d)(2)
27 of this section is GUILTY OF A FELONY AND ON CONVICTION IS subject to:

28 (I) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, imprisonment not exceeding [10] 5
29 years or a fine not exceeding $5,000 or both; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 686 3

1 (II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, IMPRISONMENT
2 NOT EXCEEDING 10 YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 OR BOTH.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3