START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 699

E4, E1 6lr0925

By: Delegates Acevero, Addison, Amprey, Hornberger, Ivey, Lewis, Martinez,
Patterson, Ruff, Sample–Hughes, Stinnett, and Young
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Use of Force Statute – Failure to Prevent Excessive Force or Render
3 First Aid – Misdemeanor

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a police officer from intentionally violating the requirement
5 that a police officer intervene to prevent or terminate the use of certain force by
6 another police officer; prohibiting a police officer from intentionally violating the
7 requirement to render certain first aid to a person injured as a result of police action
8 and request certain assistance at a certain time; and generally relating to use of force
9 by police officers.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Public Safety
12 Section 3–524
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Public Safety

18 3–524.

19 (a) This section shall be known as the Maryland Use of Force Statute.

20 (b) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (2) “Law enforcement agency” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of this
22 title.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0699*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 699

1 (3) “Police officer” means:

2 (i) a police officer as defined in § 3–201 of this title; or

3 (ii) a special police officer as defined in § 3–301 of this title.

4 (4) “Serious physical injury” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the
5 Criminal Law Article.

6 (c) Each police officer shall sign an affirmative written sanctity of life pledge to
7 respect every human life and act with compassion toward others.

8 (d) (1) A police officer may not use force against a person unless, under the
9 totality of the circumstances, the force is necessary and proportional to:

10 (i) prevent an imminent threat of physical injury to a person; or

11 (ii) effectuate a legitimate law enforcement objective.

12 (2) A police officer shall cease the use of force as soon as:

13 (i) the person on whom the force is used:

14 1. is under the police officer’s control; or

15 2. no longer poses an imminent threat of physical injury or
16 death to the police officer or to another person; or

17 (ii) the police officer determines that force will no longer accomplish
18 a legitimate law enforcement objective.

19 (e) A police officer shall:

20 (1) when time, circumstances, and safety allow, take steps to gain
21 compliance and de–escalate conflict without using physical force;

22 (2) intervene to prevent or terminate the use of force by another police
23 officer beyond what is authorized under subsection (d) of this section;

24 (3) render basic first aid to a person injured as a result of police action and
25 promptly request appropriate medical assistance; and

26 (4) fully document all use of force incidents that the officer observed or was
27 involved in.

28 (f) A police supervisor shall:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 699 3

1 (1) respond to the scene of any incident during which a police officer used
2 physical force and caused serious physical injury; and

3 (2) gather and review all known video recordings of a use of force incident.

4 (g) A law enforcement agency shall:

5 (1) have a written de–escalation of force policy; and

6 (2) adopt a written policy requiring supervisory and command–level review
7 of all use of force incidents.

8 (h) A police officer shall:

9 (1) undergo training on when a police officer may or may not draw a
10 firearm or point a firearm at a person and enforcement options that are less likely to cause
11 death or serious physical injury, including scenario–based training, de–escalation tactics
12 and techniques, and reasonable alternatives to decrease physical injury; and

13 (2) sign a training completion document stating that the officer
14 understands and shall comply with the Maryland Use of Force Statute.

15 (i) (1) A police officer may not intentionally violate subsection (d) of this
16 section, resulting in serious physical injury or death to a person.

17 (2) A police officer who violates paragraph (1) of this subsection is guilty of
18 a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 10 years.

19 (3) A sentence imposed under this subsection may be separate from and
20 consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing a
21 violation of this subsection.

22 (J) (1) A POLICE OFFICER MAY NOT INTENTIONALLY VIOLATE
23 SUBSECTION (E)(2) OR (3) OF THIS SECTION.

24 (2) A POLICE OFFICER WHO VIOLATES PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
25 SUBSECTION IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO
26 IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS.

27 (3) A SENTENCE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE
28 SEPARATE FROM AND CONSECUTIVE TO OR CONCURRENT WITH A SENTENCE FOR
29 ANY CRIME BASED ON THE ACT ESTABLISHING A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBSECTION.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3