START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 660

F5 6lr2307
HB 597/25 – APP CF SB 410

By: Delegates D. Jones, Bagnall, Behler, Chang, Guzzone, Lehman, Moreno,
Pruski, and Terrasa
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Libraries – State Library Resource Center – Funding

3 FOR the purpose of altering the calculation of certain funding for the State Library
4 Resource Center for certain fiscal years; and generally relating to the State Library
5 Resource Center.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 23–201
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Education
13 Section 23–205(c) and (d)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 23–201.

20 (a) The Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library System is the State
21 Library Resource Center.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0660*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 660

1 (b) The State Library Resource Center shall provide and expand access to
2 specialized library materials and services that are necessary for coordinated, efficient, and
3 economical library services in this State.

4 23–205.

5 (c) (1) Subject to subsection (g) of this section, each year each participating
6 regional resource center shall receive a minimum amount of funding for each resident of
7 the area served, to be used for operating and capital expenses.

8 (2) The allocation shall be calculated as follows:

9 (i) [For each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015... $6.75 per each
10 resident of the area served;

11 (ii) For fiscal year 2016............................................ $6.95 per each
12 resident of the area served;

13 (iii) For fiscal year 2017............................................ $7.15 per each
14 resident of the area served;

15 (iv) For fiscal year 2018............................................ $7.55 per each
16 resident of the area served;

17 (v) For fiscal year 2019............................................ $7.95 per each
18 resident of the area served;

19 (vi)] For fiscal year 2020............................................ $8.35 per each
20 resident of the area served;

21 [(vii)] (II) For fiscal year 2021.................................. $8.55 per each
22 resident of the area served;

23 [(viii)] (III) For fiscal year 2022....................................$8.75 per each
24 resident of the area served;

25 [(ix)] (IV) For fiscal year 2023................................... $9.19 per each
26 resident of the area served;

27 [(x)] (V) For fiscal year 2024....................................... $9.39 per each
28 resident of the area served;

29 [(xi)] (VI) For fiscal year 2025....................................... $9.59 per each
30 resident of the area served;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 660 3

1 [(xii)] (VII) For fiscal year 2026........................................$9.79 per each
2 resident of the area served; and

3 [(xiii)] (VIII)For fiscal year 2027 and each fiscal year
4 thereafter............................................................................................................ $9.99 per each
5 resident of the area served.

6 (d) (1) Subject to subsection (g) of this section, each year the State Library
7 Resource Center shall receive a minimum amount of funding for each State resident in the
8 previous fiscal year, to be used for operating and capital expenses.

9 (2) The allocation shall be calculated as follows:

10 (i) [For each of fiscal years 2010 through
11 2016.....................................................................................................$1.67 per State resident;

12 (ii) For fiscal year 2017................................$1.69 per State resident;

13 (iii) For fiscal year 2018................................$1.73 per State resident;

14 (iv) For fiscal year 2019................................$1.77 per State resident;

15 (v) For fiscal year 2020................................$1.81 per State resident;

16 (vi) For fiscal year 2021................................$1.85 per State resident;

17 (vii) For fiscal year 2022................................$1.89 per State resident;

18 (viii) For fiscal year 2023................................$1.93 per State resident;

19 (ix)] For fiscal year 2024 …………..................$1.97 per State resident;
20 [and

21 (x)] (II) For fiscal [year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter]
22 YEARS 2025 THROUGH 2027.....................................................................$2.07 per State
23 resident;

24 (III) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028……....$2.17 PER STATE RESIDENT;

25 (IV) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2029 ...........$2.28 PER STATE RESIDENT;

26 (V) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2030 ...........$2.39 PER STATE RESIDENT;

27 (VI) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2031 ………$2.51 PER STATE RESIDENT;
28 AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 660

1 (VII) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2032 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
2 THEREAFTER…………………...........................................$2.64 PER STATE RESIDENT.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
4 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4