START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 663

M3, M5 6lr1042

By: Delegate Rosenberg
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Department of the Environment – Federal Policy on Greenhouse Gas Emissions
3 – Reporting

4 FOR the purpose of requiring, beginning on or before a certain date and with a certain
5 frequency thereafter, the Department of the Environment to report to the General
6 Assembly on certain changes in federal policy on greenhouse gas emissions; and
7 generally relating to greenhouse gas emissions.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Environment
10 Section 2–1213
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Environment

16 2–1213.

17 (A) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, AND EVERY 6 MONTHS THEREAFTER, THE
18 DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
19 § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

20 (1) ANY CHANGES IN FEDERAL POLICY ON GREENHOUSE GAS
21 EMISSIONS THAT HAVE BEEN DEEMED LEGALLY VALID BY A FINAL DECISION OF A
22 FEDERAL COURT, INCLUDING ANY CHANGE THAT:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0663*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 663

1 (I) RESCINDS A FINDING THAT THE GREENHOUSE GAS
2 EMISSIONS FROM NEW MOTOR VEHICLES AND ENGINES CAUSE AIR POLLUTION THAT
3 MAY ENDANGER PUBLIC HEALTH OR WELFARE;

4 (II) REPEALS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS STANDARDS FOR
5 MOTOR VEHICLES AND ENGINES; OR

6 (III) REPEALS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS STANDARDS FOR
7 STATIONARY SOURCES; AND

8 (2) IF THERE HAS BEEN A CHANGE IN FEDERAL POLICY ON
9 GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS THAT IS REQUIRED TO BE REPORTED UNDER
10 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SECTION, THE STEPS THE STATE IS TAKING IN RESPONSE
11 TO THE CHANGE.

12 (B) (1) THE INITIAL REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
13 THIS SECTION SHALL DESCRIBE ANY CHANGES IN FEDERAL POLICY ON
14 GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS THAT HAVE OCCURRED SINCE JANUARY 1, 2024.

15 (2) EACH REPORT SUBMITTED AFTER THE INITIAL REPORT SHALL
16 DESCRIBE ANY CHANGES IN FEDERAL POLICY ON GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
17 THAT HAVE OCCURRED DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 6 MONTH PERIOD.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
19 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of May 31, 2029,
20 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
21 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2