START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 613

M1, M3 6lr1569
CF SB 368

By: Delegates T. Morgan, Boyce, Crosby, Fisher, Foley, Ghrist, Hutchinson,
Jacobs, J. Long, M. Morgan, and Ziegler
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Calvert and St. Mary’s Counties – Living Shorelines and Nonstructural
3 Shoreline Stabilization Measures

4 FOR the purpose of establishing requirements for the use of living shorelines and
5 nonstructural stabilization measures in Calvert County and St. Mary’s County;
6 exempting property located in Calvert County and St. Mary’s County from certain
7 general requirements regarding the use of nonstructural shoreline stabilization
8 measures; and generally relating to shoreline erosion and stabilization.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Environment
11 Section 16–201
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2014 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing
15 Article – Natural Resources
16 Section 8–1808.11
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – Natural Resources
21 Section 8–1808.11
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0613*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 613

1 Article – Environment

2 16–201.

3 (a) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION
4 MEASURE” MEANS AN EROSION CONTROL MEASURE THAT IS:

5 (I) DOMINATED BY TIDAL WETLAND VEGETATION; AND

6 (II) DESIGNED TO PRESERVE THE NATURAL SHORELINE,
7 MINIMIZE EROSION, AND ESTABLISH AQUATIC HABITAT.

8 (2) “NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION MEASURE”
9 INCLUDES MARSH OR OTHER TIDAL WETLAND CONSTRUCTION.

10 (B) (1) A person who is the owner of land bounding on navigable water is
11 entitled to any natural accretion to the person’s land, to reclaim fast land lost by erosion or
12 avulsion during the person’s ownership of the land to the extent of provable existing
13 boundaries.

14 (2) The person may make improvements into the water in front of the land
15 to preserve that person’s access to the navigable water or, subject to [subsection (c)]
16 SUBSECTIONS (D) AND (E) OF THIS SECTION, protect the shore of that person against
17 erosion.

18 (3) After an improvement has been constructed, the improvement is the
19 property of the owner of the land to which the improvement is attached.

20 (4) A right covered in this subtitle does not preclude the owner from
21 developing any other use approved by the Board.

22 (5) The right to reclaim lost fast land relates only to fast land lost after
23 January 1, 1972, and the burden of proof that the loss occurred after this date is on the
24 owner of the land.

25 [(b)] (C) The rights of any person, as defined in this subtitle, which existed prior
26 to July 1, 1973 in relation to natural accretion of land are deemed to have continued to be
27 in existence subsequent to July 1, 1973 to July 1, 1978.

28 [(c)] (D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO PROPERTY
29 LOCATED IN:

30 (I) CALVERT COUNTY; OR

31 (II) ST. MARY’S COUNTY.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 613 3

1 [(1)] (2) Improvements to protect a person’s property against erosion
2 shall consist of nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures that preserve the natural
3 environment, such as marsh creation, except:

4 (i) In areas designated by Department mapping as appropriate for
5 structural shoreline stabilization measures; and

6 (ii) In areas where the person can demonstrate to the Department’s
7 satisfaction that such measures are not feasible, including areas of excessive erosion, areas
8 subject to heavy tides, and areas too narrow for effective use of nonstructural shoreline
9 stabilization measures.

10 [(2)] (3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, in
11 consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, the Department shall adopt
12 regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.

13 (ii) Regulations adopted by the Department under subparagraph (i)
14 of this paragraph shall include a waiver process that exempts a person from the
15 requirements of paragraph [(1)] (2) of this subsection on a demonstration to the
16 Department’s satisfaction that nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures are not
17 feasible for the person’s property.

18 (E) (1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
19 MEANINGS INDICATED.

20 (II) “HIGH–ENERGY ENVIRONMENT” MEANS AN AREA
21 CHARACTERIZED BY AT LEAST TWO OF THE FOLLOWING CRITERIA:

22 1. A FETCH OF GREATER THAN 2 MILES;

23 2. A STEEP NEARSHORE SLOPE EXCEEDING 5%, WHERE
24 WATER DEEPENS QUICKLY ALLOWING LARGE WAVES TO REACH THE SHORELINE
25 WITHOUT MUCH DISSIPATION; AND

26 3. GREATER THAN 2 FEET OF EROSION PER YEAR.

27 (III) 1. “LIVING SHORELINE” MEANS A PROJECT TO
28 MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF EROSION CAUSED BY SHORELINE FLOODING OR
29 INUNDATION, CURRENTS, AND WAVE ENERGY THROUGH PROJECT DESIGN THAT:

30 A. STABILIZES A SHORELINE BY USING NATURAL
31 MATERIALS TO CREATE BUFFERS TO ABSORB THE IMPACT OF COASTAL STORMS,
32 FLOODING, AND WAVE ENERGY AND TO PREVENT OR MINIMIZE SHORELINE
33 EROSION;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 613

1 B. INCORPORATES AS MANY NATURAL ELEMENTS AS
2 POSSIBLE, SUCH AS NATIVE WETLANDS, OYSTER REEFS, SUBMERGED AQUATIC
3 VEGETATION, NATIVE GRASSES, SHRUBS, OR TREES;

4 C. UTILIZES TECHNIQUES THAT INCORPORATE
5 ECOLOGICAL AND COASTAL ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES IN SHORELINE
6 STABILIZATION; AND

7 D. TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, MAINTAINS OR RESTORES
8 EXISTING NATURAL SLOPES AND CONNECTIONS BETWEEN UPLANDS AND ADJACENT
9 WETLANDS OR SURFACE WATERS.

10 2. “LIVING SHORELINE” INCLUDES THE USE OF:

11 A. NATURAL ELEMENTS SUCH AS SAND, WETLAND
12 PLANTS, LOGS, OYSTERS OR OTHER SHELLFISH, SUBMERGED AQUATIC
13 VEGETATION, NATIVE GRASSES, SHRUBS, TREES, OR COIR FIBER LOGS; AND

14 B. STRUCTURAL MATERIALS, SUCH AS STONE,
15 CONCRETE, OYSTER DOMES, OR OTHER APPROVED ENGINEERED STRUCTURES.

16 (IV) “MEDIUM–ENERGY ENVIRONMENT” MEANS AN AREA
17 CHARACTERIZED BY AT LEAST TWO OF THE FOLLOWING CRITERIA:

18 1. A FETCH OF 0.5 MILES TO 2 MILES;

19 2. A MODERATE NEARSHORE SLOPE OF 2% TO 5% WITH
20 ENOUGH DEPTH FOR SMALL TO MODERATE WAVES TO PERSIST; AND

21 3. FROM 0.5 FEET TO 2 FEET OF EROSION PER YEAR.

22 (2) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO PROPERTY LOCATED IN:

23 (I) CALVERT COUNTY; OR

24 (II) ST. MARY’S COUNTY.

25 (3) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (7) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
26 IMPROVEMENTS TO PROTECT A PERSON’S PROPERTY AGAINST EROSION SHALL
27 CONSIST OF A LIVING SHORELINE OR NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION
28 MEASURES, EXCEPT IN AREAS WHERE THE PERSON CAN DEMONSTRATE TO THE
29 LOCAL SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT’S SATISFACTION THAT THE PROJECTS AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 613 5

1 MEASURES ARE NOT FEASIBLE, INCLUDING AREAS OF EXCESSIVE EROSION, AREAS
2 SUBJECT TO HEAVY TIDES, AND AREAS TOO NARROW FOR EFFECTIVE USE OF A
3 LIVING SHORELINE OR NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION MEASURES.

4 (4) A SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT MAY WAIVE OR REDUCE
5 MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LIVING SHORELINES OR NONSTRUCTURAL
6 SHORELINE STABILIZATION MEASURES IN MEDIUM– AND HIGH–ENERGY
7 ENVIRONMENTS IF, TO THE SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT’S SATISFACTION, THE
8 LAND–WATER INTERFACE IS MAINTAINED.

9 (5) ONLY A SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT MAY IMPOSE
10 RESTRICTIONS ON THE TIME OF YEAR WHEN A LIVING SHORELINE OR
11 NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION MEASURE MAY BE CONSTRUCTED IN
12 CALVERT COUNTY OR ST. MARY’S COUNTY.

13 (6) (I) THE CALVERT SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT AND THE ST.
14 MARY’S SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
15 IMPLEMENT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBSECTION.

16 (II) THE REGULATIONS SHALL:

17 1. INCLUDE A WAIVER PROCESS THAT EXEMPTS A
18 PERSON FROM THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON A
19 DEMONSTRATION TO THE SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT’S SATISFACTION THAT THE
20 USE OF A LIVING SHORELINE OR NONSTRUCTURAL SHORELINE STABILIZATION
21 MEASURES IS NOT FEASIBLE FOR THE PERSON’S PROPERTY; AND

22 2. REQUIRE A LIVING SHORELINE OR NONSTRUCTURAL
23 SHORELINE STABILIZATION MEASURE TO BE DESIGNED TO WITHSTAND AT LEAST A
24 10–YEAR STORM EVENT.

25 (7) (I) A PERSON MAY NOT BEGIN CONSTRUCTION OF A SHORELINE
26 STABILIZATION PROJECT FOR WHICH THE CALVERT SOIL CONSERVATION
27 DISTRICT HAS PROVIDED DESIGN SERVICES UNLESS THE ST. MARY’S SOIL
28 CONSERVATION DISTRICT HAS REVIEWED THE PROJECT AND CERTIFIED THAT IT
29 COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION.

30 (II) A PERSON MAY NOT BEGIN CONSTRUCTION OF A SHORELINE
31 STABILIZATION PROJECT FOR WHICH THE ST. MARY’S SOIL CONSERVATION
32 DISTRICT HAS PROVIDED DESIGN SERVICES UNLESS THE CALVERT SOIL
33 CONSERVATION DISTRICT HAS REVIEWED THE PROJECT AND CERTIFIED THAT IT
34 COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBSECTION.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 613

1 Article – Natural Resources

2 [8–1808.11.

3 (a) Other than in areas designated by the Department of the Environment
4 mapping as appropriate for structural shoreline stabilization measures, improvements to
5 protect a person’s property against erosion shall consist of nonstructural shoreline
6 stabilization measures that preserve the natural environment, such as marsh creation,
7 except in areas where the person can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department of
8 the Environment that these measures are not feasible, including areas of excessive erosion,
9 areas subject to heavy tides, and areas too narrow for effective use of nonstructural
10 shoreline stabilization measures.

11 (b) (1) In consultation with the Department, the Department of the
12 Environment shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this subsection.

13 (2) The regulations shall include a waiver process that exempts a person
14 from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section on a demonstration to the satisfaction
15 of the Department of the Environment that nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures
16 are not feasible for the person’s property.]

17 8–1808.11.

18 IMPROVEMENTS TO PROTECT A PERSON’S PROPERTY AGAINST EROSION
19 SHALL BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF § 16–201 OF THE
20 ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6