START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 608

D1 6lr2396
CF SB 313

By: The Speaker (By Request – Judicial Compensation Commission)
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Courts – Administrative Judges – Annual Stipend

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland and a
4 judge who serves as an administrative judge for a circuit court or the District Court
5 to receive an annual stipend in addition to the judge’s annual salary; and generally
6 relating to the compensation of administrative judges.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
9 Section 1–702
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

15 1–702.

16 (a) (1) Subject to the provisions of § 1–701 of this subtitle, a justice or judge
17 shall have the salary provided in the State budget.

18 (2) THE CHIEF JUDGE OF THE APPELLATE COURT OF MARYLAND
19 AND A JUDGE WHO SERVES AS AN ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE FOR A CIRCUIT COURT
20 OR THE DISTRICT COURT MAY RECEIVE AN ANNUAL STIPEND IN ADDITION TO THE
21 JUDGE’S ANNUAL SALARY.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0608*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 608

1 (b) The Chief Judge of the District Court, during the period he serves as Chief
2 Judge, shall have a salary equivalent to the annual salary then payable to an associate
3 judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2