START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 664

A2 6lr1720
CF 6lr1722

By: Cecil County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Cecil County – Alcoholic Beverages – Alteration of License Quota

3 FOR the purpose of altering the quota on the number of alcoholic beverages licenses that
4 the Board of License Commissioners for Cecil County may issue to apply only to
5 Class A licenses based on a certain ratio; and generally relating to alcoholic
6 beverages in Cecil County.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
9 Section 17–102
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
14 Section 17–1601
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20 17–102.

21 This title applies only in Cecil County.

22 17–1601.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0664*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 664

1 (a) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board may not issue a
2 number of CLASS A licenses that, in the aggregate, exceeds 1 for every [400] 1,200
3 registered voters or major fraction in the county, as determined by the current registration
4 of voters.

5 (2) [A Class BLX beer, wine, and liquor restaurant license, Class C club
6 license, motel–restaurant complex license, hotel–restaurant complex license, or Class GC
7 (golf course) beer, wine, and liquor (on–sale) license] NO OTHER CLASS OF LICENSE may
8 [not] be counted in the computation of the aggregate number of licenses.

9 (b) The quota shall be computed and applied separately for each election district
10 of the county.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
12 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2