START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 602

Q6 6lr1595
HB 1295/25 – W&M

By: Delegates R. Long and Mangione
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore County – Transfer Tax – Exemption for First–Time Home Buyers

3 FOR the purpose of exempting instruments of writing that transfer improved residential
4 real property to certain first–time home buyers from the Baltimore County transfer
5 tax; and generally relating to the Baltimore County transfer tax.

6 BY adding to
7 Article – Tax – Property
8 Section 13–601 and 13–602 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 6. Baltimore
9 County Transfer Tax”
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Tax – Property

15 SUBTITLE 6. BALTIMORE COUNTY TRANSFER TAX.

16 13–601.

17 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “FIRST–TIME MARYLAND HOME BUYER” MEANS AN
18 INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS NEVER OWNED IN THE STATE RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY
19 THAT HAS BEEN THE INDIVIDUAL’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

20 13–602.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0602*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 602

1 (A) IF THERE ARE TWO OR MORE GRANTEES, THIS SECTION DOES NOT
2 APPLY UNLESS EACH GRANTEE IS A FIRST–TIME MARYLAND HOME BUYER OR A
3 CO–MAKER OR GUARANTOR OF A PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGE OR PURCHASE
4 MONEY DEED OF TRUST AS DEFINED IN § 12–108(I) OF THIS ARTICLE FOR THE
5 PROPERTY AND THE CO–MAKER OR GUARANTOR WILL NOT OCCUPY THE RESIDENCE
6 AS THE CO–MAKER’S OR GUARANTOR’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

7 (B) AN INSTRUMENT OF WRITING THAT TRANSFERS IMPROVED
8 RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY TO A FIRST–TIME MARYLAND HOME BUYER WHO
9 WILL OCCUPY THE PROPERTY AS A PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE IS NOT SUBJECT TO THE
10 BALTIMORE COUNTY TRANSFER TAX.

11 (C) TO QUALIFY FOR THE EXEMPTION UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
12 SECTION, EACH GRANTEE OR AGENT OF THE GRANTEE SHALL PROVIDE A
13 STATEMENT THAT IS SIGNED UNDER OATH BY THE GRANTEE OR AGENT OF THE
14 GRANTEE STATING THAT:

15 (1) (I) THE GRANTEE IS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS NEVER OWNED IN
16 THE STATE RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN THE INDIVIDUAL’S
17 PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE; AND

18 (II) THE RESIDENCE WILL BE OCCUPIED BY THE GRANTEE AS
19 THE GRANTEE’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE; OR

20 (2) (I) THE GRANTEE IS A CO–MAKER OR GUARANTOR OF A
21 PURCHASE MONEY MORTGAGE OR PURCHASE MONEY DEED OF TRUST AS DEFINED
22 IN § 12–108(I) OF THIS ARTICLE FOR THE PROPERTY; AND

23 (II) THE GRANTEE WILL NOT OCCUPY THE RESIDENCE AS THE
24 CO–MAKER’S OR GUARANTOR’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

25 (D) A STATEMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION BY AN AGENT
26 OF A GRANTEE SHALL STATE THAT THE STATEMENT:

27 (1) IS BASED ON A DILIGENT INQUIRY MADE BY THE AGENT WITH
28 RESPECT TO THE FACTS SET FORTH IN THE STATEMENT; AND

29 (2) IS TRUE TO THE BEST OF THE KNOWLEDGE, INFORMATION, AND
30 BELIEF OF THE AGENT.

31 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
32 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2