START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 615

J3, J1 6lr3002
CF 6lr3000

By: Delegate Cullison
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Facilities – Confidentiality of Medical Records – Crisis Pregnancy
3 Clinics

4 FOR the purpose of applying certain provisions of law governing the confidentiality of
5 medical records to crisis pregnancy clinics; and generally relating to confidentiality
6 of medical records.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Health – General
9 Section 4–301(a)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Health – General
14 Section 4–301(h)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Health – General

20 4–301.

21 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (h) (1) “Health care provider” means:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0615*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 615

1 (i) A person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized under
2 the Health Occupations Article or § 13–516 of the Education Article to provide health care
3 in the ordinary course of business or practice of a profession or in an approved education or
4 training program; or

5 (ii) A facility where health care is provided to patients or recipients,
6 including [a]:

7 1. A facility as defined in § 10–101(g) of this article[, a];

8 2. A hospital as defined in § 19–301 of this article[, a];

9 3. A related institution as defined in § 19–301 of this article[,
10 a];

11 4. A health maintenance organization as defined in §
12 19–701(g) of this article[, an];

13 5. AN outpatient clinic[, a];

14 6. A medical laboratory[, a];

15 7. A comprehensive crisis response center[, a]

16 8. A crisis stabilization center[, and a]

17 9. A crisis treatment center established under § 7.5–207 of
18 this article; AND

19 10. A CRISIS PREGNANCY CLINIC, INCLUDING A MOBILE
20 FACILITY THAT PROVIDES PREGNANCY–RELATED HEALTH CARE AND IS NOT A
21 COVERED ENTITY UNDER THE FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND
22 ACCOUNTABILITY ACT.

23 (2) “Health care provider” includes the agents, employees, officers, and
24 directors of a facility and the agents and employees of a health care provider.

25 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
26 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2