START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 656

Q3, Q4, Q1 6lr1593
HB 1192/25 – W&M

By: Delegates R. Long, Anderson, Arentz, Baker, Chisholm, Ciliberti, Griffith,
Hornberger, Tomlinson, and Valentine
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Income, Sales and Use, and Property Taxes – Revocation of Exempt Status for
3 Nonprofit Organizations for Supporting Terrorist Organizations

4 FOR the purpose of requiring, as practicable, the Comptroller and the Director of the State
5 Department of Assessments and Taxation to jointly determine on a regular basis
6 whether a certain nonprofit organization in the State has been found to be a certain
7 terrorist–supporting organization; requiring that the Comptroller and the Director
8 revoke a terrorist–supporting organization’s tax–exempt status with respect to
9 certain Maryland income tax, sales and use tax, and property tax exemptions;
10 establishing procedures for the revocation and reinstatement of a nonprofit
11 organization’s tax–exempt status under this Act; and generally relating to the
12 tax–exempt status of nonprofit organizations who support terrorist organizations.

13 BY adding to
14 Article – Tax – General
15 Section 2–121
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY adding to
19 Article – Tax – Property
20 Section 7–111
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Tax – General

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0656*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 656

1 2–121.

2 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
3 INDICATED.

4 (2) “DIRECTOR” MEANS THE DIRECTOR OF THE STATE DEPARTMENT
5 OF ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION.

6 (3) “MATERIAL SUPPORT OR RESOURCES” HAS THE MEANING
7 STATED IN 18 U.S.C. § 2339A.

8 (4) “NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” MEANS A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT:

9 (I) IS EXEMPT FROM FEDERAL INCOME TAXES UNDER § 501 OF
10 THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE; AND

11 (II) HAS BEEN GRANTED:

12 1. AN INCOME TAX EXEMPTION UNDER § 10–104 OF THIS
13 ARTICLE;

14 2. A SALES AND USE TAX EXEMPTION UNDER § 11–204 OF
15 THIS ARTICLE; OR

16 3. A PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION UNDER § 7–202 OR §
17 7–204 OF THE TAX – PROPERTY ARTICLE.

18 (5) “TERRORIST–SUPPORTING ORGANIZATION” MEANS A NONPROFIT
19 ORGANIZATION OR AN AGENT OF THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT HAS BEEN
20 FOUND BY A FEDERAL AGENCY TO BE IN VIOLATION OF 18 U.S.C. § 2339A OR §
21 2339B FOR PROVIDING MATERIAL SUPPORT OR RESOURCES TO AN ORGANIZATION
22 DESIGNATED AS A TERRORIST ORGANIZATION BY THE U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE
23 OR UNDER § 501(P) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

24 (B) THE COMPTROLLER AND THE DIRECTOR SHALL JOINTLY, AS
25 PRACTICABLE, DETERMINE ON A REGULAR BASIS WHETHER ANY NONPROFIT
26 ORGANIZATION IN THE STATE HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A TERRORIST–SUPPORTING
27 ORGANIZATION.

28 (C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (D) THROUGH (F) OF THIS SECTION, IF THE
29 COMPTROLLER AND THE DIRECTOR DETERMINE THAT A NONPROFIT
30 ORGANIZATION IN THE STATE HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A TERRORIST–SUPPORTING
31 ORGANIZATION IN ANY OF THE 3 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TAXABLE YEARS, THE
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 656 3

1 COMPTROLLER SHALL REVOKE THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT
2 STATUS WITH RESPECT TO THE INCOME TAX AND SALES AND USE TAX IMPOSED
3 UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

4 (D) (1) BEFORE REVOKING A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S
5 TAX–EXEMPT STATUS UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL SEND
6 NOTICE OF THE REVOCATION BY REGISTERED MAIL TO:

7 (I) THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S ADDRESS OF
8 REGISTRATION IN THE STATE; AND

9 (II) IF APPLICABLE, THE ADDRESS ON THE MOST RECENTLY
10 FILED INCOME TAX RETURN FOR THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

11 (2) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE
12 ANY INFORMATION ON WHICH THE COMPTROLLER RELIED WHEN DECIDING TO
13 REVOKE THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT STATUS.

14 (E) (1) A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT RECEIVES A NOTICE OF
15 REVOCATION UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION SHALL HAVE 90 CALENDAR
16 DAYS FROM THE DATE THE LAST NOTICE IS MAILED TO PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION
17 AS MAY BE REQUIRED BY THE COMPTROLLER TO PREVENT THE REVOCATION.

18 (2) THE COMPTROLLER MAY WITHDRAW THE DECISION TO REVOKE
19 BASED ON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED BY THE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION UNDER
20 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

21 (F) (1) AFTER THE 90 DAYS UNDER SUBSECTION (E)(1) OF THIS SECTION
22 LAPSE, THE REVOCATION SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE UNLESS THE COMPTROLLER
23 WITHDRAWS THE DECISION TO REVOKE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E)(2)
24 OF THIS SECTION.

25 (2) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE DIRECTOR
26 WHEN ANY REVOCATION AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION BECOMES EFFECTIVE.

27 (3) THE COMPTROLLER MAY REINSTATE A NONPROFIT
28 ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT STATUS THAT HAS BEEN REVOKED UNDER THIS
29 SECTION ONLY IF:

30 (I) THE COMPTROLLER DETERMINES THE REVOCATION WAS
31 ERRONEOUS;
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 656

1 (II) THE COMPTROLLER RECEIVES ATTESTATION FROM THE
2 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION UNDER PENALTY OF PERJURY THAT IT DID NOT
3 RECEIVE THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; OR

4 (III) BASED ON ANY OTHER NEWLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION
5 AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH PROCEDURES ADOPTED BY THE COMPTROLLER, THE
6 COMPTROLLER DETERMINES THE TAX–EXEMPT STATUS SHOULD BE REINSTATED.

7 (G) A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT HAS ITS TAX–EXEMPT STATUS
8 REVOKED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY APPEAL THE REVOCATION TO THE MARYLAND
9 TAX COURT.

10 (H) THE COMPTROLLER AND THE DIRECTOR SHALL JOINTLY ADOPT
11 REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

12 Article – Tax – Property

13 7–111.

14 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” HAS THE MEANING
15 STATED IN § 2–121 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

16 (B) IF THE DIRECTOR RECEIVES NOTICE THAT THE COMPTROLLER HAS
17 REVOKED A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT STATUS IN ACCORDANCE
18 WITH § 2–121 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE, THE DIRECTOR SHALL REVOKE THE
19 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT STATUS WITH RESPECT TO ANY
20 PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION UNDER § 7–202 OR § 7–204 OF THIS TITLE.

21 (C) THE DIRECTOR SHALL FOLLOW THE PROCEDURES SPECIFIED UNDER §
22 2–121 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE FOR IMPOSING AND WITHDRAWING A
23 REVOCATION AND REINSTATING A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION’S TAX–EXEMPT
24 STATUS UNDER THIS SECTION.

25 (D) A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT HAS ITS TAX–EXEMPT STATUS
26 REVOKED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY APPEAL THE REVOCATION TO THE MARYLAND
27 TAX COURT.

28 (E) THE DIRECTOR AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL JOINTLY ADOPT
29 REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4