START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 605

E4 6lr0773
HB 180/25 – JUD

By: Delegates Addison, Young, Embry, Guzzone, Kaufman, Mireku–North,
Stinnett, Taveras, and Wims
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program within the
4 Victim Services Unit of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy to
5 provide certain victims of gun violence certain services and assistance related to
6 relocating for the safety of the victim or the victim’s family; establishing the Gun
7 Violence Victim Relocation Program Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring
8 interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; requiring the Victim
9 Services Unit to establish a certain oversight commission; and generally relating to
10 the Gun Violence Victim Relocation Program.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Criminal Procedure
13 Section 11–1102
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Public Safety
18 Section 5–901 through 5–907 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Gun Violence
19 Victim Relocation Program”
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
23 Article – State Finance and Procurement
24 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0605*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 605

1 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
2 Article – State Finance and Procurement
3 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

6 BY adding to
7 Article – State Finance and Procurement
8 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214.
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Criminal Procedure

14 11–1102.

15 (a) There is a Victim Services Unit in the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention
16 and Policy.

17 (b) The Unit consists of:

18 (1) the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board under Subtitle 8 of this title;

19 (2) the program for sexual assault forensic examinations under § 11–1007
20 of this title;

21 (3) THE GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM UNDER
22 TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 9 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE;

23 [(3)] (4) a restitution section; and

24 [(4)] (5) any other program that provides victim services under the
25 Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy that the Executive Director determines
26 would benefit from inclusion under the Unit.

27 Article – Public Safety

28 SUBTITLE 9. GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM.

29 5–901.

30 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
31 INDICATED.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 605 3

1 (B) “FUND” MEANS THE GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM
2 FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–906 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

3 (C) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION
4 PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–902 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

5 (D) “VICTIM SERVICES UNIT” MEANS THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT WITHIN
6 THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION AND POLICY ESTABLISHED
7 UNDER § 11–1102 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

8 5–902.

9 (A) THERE IS A GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM WITHIN
10 THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT.

11 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST IN THE RELOCATION OF
12 VICTIMS OF GUN VIOLENCE IN THE STATE TO ENSURE THE SAFETY AND WELL–BEING
13 OF VICTIMS AND VICTIMS’ FAMILIES.

14 (C) THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED AND APPLIED TO
15 PROMOTE ITS UNDERLYING PURPOSE.

16 5–903.

17 (A) (1) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY REQUEST PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM
18 THROUGH THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT.

19 (2) AN INDIVIDUAL IS ELIGIBLE FOR ASSISTANCE THROUGH THE
20 PROGRAM IF:

21 (I) THE INDIVIDUAL IS A VICTIM OF GUN VIOLENCE IN THE
22 STATE;

23 (II) 1. THE INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCED THE VIOLENCE
24 WITHIN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO THE INDIVIDUAL’S HOME; OR

25 2. THE INDIVIDUAL LIVES IN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO A
26 PERSON WHO IS SUSPECTED TO HAVE CAUSED THE VIOLENCE; AND

27 (III) THE INDIVIDUAL DEMONSTRATES A NEED TO BE
28 RELOCATED FOR THE SAFETY OF THE INDIVIDUAL OR THE INDIVIDUAL’S FAMILY.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 605

1 (3) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
2 PARAGRAPH, THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ACCEPT ANY ELIGIBLE
3 INDIVIDUAL INTO THE PROGRAM.

4 (II) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT MAY NOT ACCEPT AN
5 INDIVIDUAL INTO THE PROGRAM IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS SUSPECTED TO HAVE
6 PERPETRATED THE VIOLENCE.

7 (B) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL KEEP THE PERSONAL
8 INFORMATION OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO APPLIES FOR THE PROGRAM UNDER
9 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION CONFIDENTIAL, INCLUDING THE ADDRESS AND
10 ANY OTHER IDENTIFYING INFORMATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

11 5–904.

12 (A) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ASSIST AN ELIGIBLE VICTIM
13 ACCEPTED INTO THE PROGRAM BY:

14 (1) RELOCATING THE VICTIM AND THE VICTIM’S FAMILY TO A SAFE
15 LOCATION;

16 (2) PROVIDING THE VICTIM WITH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR
17 MOVING EXPENSES, SECURITY DEPOSIT, AND RENT; AND

18 (3) PROVIDING OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES, INCLUDING
19 COUNSELING, LEGAL ASSISTANCE, JOB TRAINING, AND RESOURCES AND SERVICES
20 FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.

21 (B) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL:

22 (1) COLLABORATE WITH OTHER STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES,
23 INCLUDING LAW ENFORCEMENT, HOUSING AUTHORITIES, AND SOCIAL SERVICES, TO
24 PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES TO VICTIMS UNDER THE PROGRAM;

25 (2) CONDUCT COMMUNITY OUTREACH IN ORDER TO EDUCATE THE
26 PUBLIC ABOUT THE PROGRAM AND TO ENCOURAGE VICTIMS OF GUN VIOLENCE TO
27 SEEK ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM; AND

28 (3) WORK TO ENSURE THAT VICTIMS UNDER THE PROGRAM WHO ARE
29 RENTERS ARE PROTECTED FROM EVICTION OR FROM BEING DENIED RENTAL
30 HOUSING BASED ON THE VICTIM’S STATUS IN THE PROGRAM.

31 (C) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 605 5

1 NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

2 5–905.

3 THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ESTABLISH AN APPEAL PROCESS FOR AN
4 INDIVIDUAL DETERMINED TO BE INELIGIBLE AND DENIED ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
5 PROGRAM.

6 5–906.

7 (A) THERE IS A GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM FUND.

8 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
9 SUBTITLE.

10 (C) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

11 (D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
12 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

13 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
14 AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

15 (E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

16 (1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

17 (2) PRIVATE DONATIONS;

18 (3) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

19 (4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
20 THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

21 (F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR CARRYING OUT THE PURPOSE OF
22 THE FUND.

23 (G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
24 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

25 (2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
26 THE FUND.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 605

1 (H) NO PART OF THE FUND MAY REVERT OR BE CREDITED TO:

2 (1) THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE; OR

3 (2) ANY OTHER SPECIAL FUND OF THE STATE.

4 (I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
5 WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

6 (J) THE FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
7 AUDITS AS PROVIDED IN § 2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

8 5–907.

9 (A) THE VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL ESTABLISH AN OVERSIGHT
10 COMMISSION TO ENSURE THAT THE PROGRAM IS BEING ADMINISTERED PROPERLY
11 AND THAT THE FUND IS BEING USED APPROPRIATELY.

12 (B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2028, THE
13 VICTIM SERVICES UNIT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT ON THE STATUS OF THE PROGRAM
14 TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
15 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT INCLUDES:

16 (1) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS ACCEPTED INTO THE PROGRAM;

17 (2) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS WHO APPLIED FOR THE PROGRAM;

18 (3) THE TYPES OF SERVICES PROVIDED TO THE VICTIMS UNDER THE
19 PROGRAM;

20 (4) AN OUTLINE OF HOW THE FUND IS USED TO SUPPORT THE
21 PROGRAM;

22 (5) AN EVALUATION OF THE PROGRAM; AND

23 (6) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT MAY BE USEFUL IN
24 DETERMINING THE PROGRAM’S EFFECTIVENESS.

25 Article – State Finance and Procurement

26 6–226.

27 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 605 7

1 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
2 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
3 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
4 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
5 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
6 Fund of the State.

7 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
8 apply to the following funds:

9 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
10 Fund; [and]

11 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

12 214. THE GUN VIOLENCE VICTIM RELOCATION PROGRAM
13 FUND.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, for fiscal year 2028, the
15 Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $10,000,000 to the Gun
16 Violence Victim Relocation Program Fund established under Title 5, Subtitle 9 of the Public
17 Safety Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

18 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
19 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7