START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 672

J1 6lr2473

By: Delegates Shetty and Rosenberg
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Health – Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund – Entities Eligible for Grants

3 FOR the purpose of altering which entities are eligible to receive grants from the Maryland
4 Pediatric Cancer Fund; and generally relating to the Maryland Pediatric Cancer
5 Fund.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Health – General
8 Section 20–120
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Health – General

14 20–120.

15 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (2) “Fund” means the Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund established under
17 this section.

18 (3) “Pediatric cancer research” includes research to develop and advance
19 the understanding of pediatric cancer and the techniques and modalities effective in the
20 prevention, cure, screening, and treatment of pediatric cancer.

21 (b) (1) There is a Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund.

22 (2) The Fund consists of:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0672*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 672

1 (i) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

2 (ii) Any donations or other money from any other source accepted for
3 the benefit of the Fund.

4 (3) The Secretary shall administer the Fund.

5 (4) The Fund shall be used only for pediatric cancer research and
6 administrative expenses as provided in subsection (c) of this section.

7 (5) The Fund shall be maintained for the purposes stated in this section
8 and unspent portions of the Fund shall remain in the Fund and may not revert to the
9 General Fund of the State.

10 (6) Money expended from the Fund for pediatric cancer research is
11 supplemental and is not intended to take the place of funding that would otherwise be
12 appropriated to the Department for pediatric cancer research.

13 (7) All expenditures from the Fund shall be made only in accordance with
14 an appropriation approved by the General Assembly in the annual State budget or through
15 an approved budget amendment under §§ 7–209 and 7–210 of the State Finance and
16 Procurement Article.

17 (8) (i) For fiscal year 2023, the Governor shall include in the annual
18 budget bill an appropriation of $5,000,000 to the Fund.

19 (ii) If $5,000,000 is not included in the annual budget bill for fiscal
20 year 2023, then the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill for fiscal year 2024 an
21 appropriation of $5,000,000 to the Fund.

22 (c) (1) (i) Each year, the Secretary may:

23 1. Distribute funds from the Fund to a promotional account
24 to be allocated to a State–based childhood cancer organization to be used to promote further
25 donations to the Fund and to educate the State scientific community about the
26 opportunities for childhood cancer research through the Fund; and

27 2. Use funds from the Fund to administer the Fund,
28 including for staff and administrative costs associated with the Commission established
29 under § 20–121 of this title.

30 (ii) The amounts distributed and used under subparagraph (i) of this
31 paragraph may not exceed a total of 5% of the Fund.

32 (2) (i) After making the distribution allowed under paragraph (1) of
33 this subsection, the Secretary shall use the remainder of the Fund only to provide grants
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 672 3

1 to [eligible physicians,] NONPROFIT hospitals, [laboratories,] educational institutions,
2 and other NONPROFIT organizations [and persons] to conduct pediatric cancer research.

3 (ii) Money received from the grant program under this section may
4 not be used to pay for institutional overhead expenses, organizational expenses, or charges
5 that are not directly related to pediatric cancer research or expenses arising from
6 community–based support services.

7 (d) (1) On or before August 31 each year, the Secretary shall submit a report
8 to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on
9 the administration of the Fund.

10 (2) The report required under this subsection shall include:

11 (i) A description of promotional efforts undertaken with money from
12 the Fund; and

13 (ii) A detailed accounting of the use of the Fund.

14 (e) The Secretary shall adopt regulations to implement a pediatric cancer grant
15 program under this section.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3