START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 610

C7, E1 6lr2287
CF SB 357

By: Delegate T. Morgan
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 St. Mary’s County – Gaming by Qualified Organization – License Required

3 FOR the purpose of requiring a qualified organization to hold a gaming license whenever
4 the qualified organization conducts certain gaming in St. Mary’s County; authorizing
5 the County Commissioners of St. Mary’s County to adopt certain regulations;
6 requiring the Board to designate a person to administer the issuance of gaming
7 licenses in the county; and generally relating to gaming in St. Mary’s County.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Criminal Law
10 Section 13–2101 and 13–2111
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Criminal Law

16 13–2101.

17 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

18 (b) “County commissioners” means the [Board of] County Commissioners of St.
19 Mary’s County.

20 (c) “Designee” means a person designated by the county commissioners to
21 administer the issuance of bingo licenses OR GAMING LICENSES in the county.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0610*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 610

1 (d) (1) “Gaming device” includes a paddle wheel, wheel of fortune, chance book,
2 bingo, Nevada card, and a stamp machine.

3 (2) “Gaming device” does not include a slot machine, as defined in § 12–301
4 of this article.

5 (e) “Gaming event” means a carnival, bazaar, or raffle.

6 (f) “Qualified organization” means:

7 (1) a volunteer fire company; or

8 (2) a bona fide:

9 (i) religious organization;

10 (ii) fraternal organization;

11 (iii) civic organization;

12 (iv) war veterans’ organization; or

13 (v) charitable organization.

14 (g) “Sheriff” means the Sheriff of St. Mary’s County.

15 13–2111.

16 (A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A QUALIFIED
17 ORGANIZATION MUST HOLD A GAMING LICENSE WHENEVER THE QUALIFIED
18 ORGANIZATION CONDUCTS GAMING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

19 (B) A qualified organization may hold a gaming event and may operate a gaming
20 device if an individual or group of individuals does not:

21 (1) benefit financially from the operation of the gaming device; or

22 (2) receive from the operation of the gaming device any proceeds for
23 personal use or benefit.

24 (C) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS, IN
25 CONSULTATION WITH THE DESIGNEE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, TO
26 ADMINISTER AND ENFORCE GAMING ACTIVITIES AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SECTION
27 IN THE COUNTY.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 610 3

1 (D) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS SHALL DESIGNATE A PERSON TO
2 ADMINISTER THE ISSUANCE OF GAMING LICENSES UNDER THIS SECTION IN THE
3 COUNTY.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3