START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 698

J2, C2, J1 6lr3454
CF SB 413

By: Delegates Bhandari, Cullison, Hutchinson, Kipke, and M. Morgan
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors – Board Operations and
3 Regulation of Crematories and Reduction Facilities

4 FOR the purpose of transferring the authority to regulate certain crematories and
5 reduction facilities from the Office of Cemetery Oversight to the State Board of
6 Morticians and Funeral Directors; renaming the Board to be the State Board of
7 Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories; altering the circumstances under
8 which the Governor may remove an appointed member of the Board; altering the
9 quorum of the Board; specifying that the Board may take action with a simple
10 majority vote of the quorum; and generally relating to the State Board of Morticians
11 and Funeral Directors.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Business Regulation
14 Section 5–101, 5–102(b), 5–201, 5–204(a) and (b), 5–205(b), 5–301, 5–302, 5–303,
15 5–306, 5–308, 5–310(a) and (b), 5–311(c), 5–401 through 5–403, 5–701(e) and
16 (f), 5–702(a), 5–707(f), 5–804, and 5–901 through 5–903
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
20 Article – Business Regulation
21 Section 5–205(a) and 5–701(a)
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 BY repealing
25 Article – Business Regulation
26 Section 5–803
27 Annotated Code of Maryland
28 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0698*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 698

1 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
2 Article – Health Occupations
3 Section 7–101 and 7–102 to be under the amended title “Title 7. Morticians, Funeral
4 Directors, and Crematories”; 7–201, 7–202(i), 7–204(a), 7–205(c), and 7–206(a)
5 through (c) to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 2. State Board of
6 Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories”; and 7–320, 7–405(a), (b),
7 and (f), 7–409, 7–501, 7–502, and 7–701
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Health Occupations
12 Section 7–202(a)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Health Occupations
17 Section 7–204(e); 7–3A–01 through 7–3A–12 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle
18 3A. Registration”; 7–3B–01 through 7–3B–09 to be under the new subtitle
19 “Subtitle 3B. Permits and Statement Filings”; and 7–409.1, 7–412, and
20 7–501.1
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Business Regulation

26 5–101.

27 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

28 (b) [“Alkaline hydrolysis” means the process of reducing human remains using
29 water, alkaline chemicals, and heat inside a watertight vessel to accelerate decomposition.

30 (c)] “Authorizing agent” has the meaning stated in § 5–508 of the Health – General
31 Article.

32 [(d)] (C) (1) “Burial goods” means goods that are used in connection with
33 burial.

34 (2) “Burial goods” includes:

35 (i) a casket;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 698 3

1 (ii) a grave liner;

2 (iii) a memorial;

3 (iv) a monument;

4 (v) a scroll;

5 (vi) an urn;

6 (vii) a vase; and

7 (viii) a vault.

8 [(e)] (D) “Burial goods business” means a business that provides burial goods.

9 [(f)] (E) (1) “Cemetery” means land used or to be used for interment.

10 (2) “Cemetery” includes a structure used or to be used for interment.

11 [(g)] (F) “Cremation” means the disposition of a dead human body by means of
12 incineration.

13 [(h)] (G) “Crematory” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that
14 houses the necessary appliances and facilities for cremation or alkaline hydrolysis.

15 [(i)] (H) “Director” means the Director of the Office of Cemetery Oversight.

16 [(j)] (I) “Engage in the operation of a cemetery” means owning, controlling, or
17 managing a cemetery, including performing activities necessary for:

18 (1) the establishment, improvement, care, preservation, or embellishment
19 of a cemetery;

20 (2) interment; and

21 (3) the providing of burial space or burial goods.

22 [(k) (1) “Engage in the operation of a crematory” means controlling or
23 managing a crematory.

24 (2) “Engage in the operation of a crematory” does not include:

25 (i) the practice of funeral direction or the practice of mortuary
26 science; or
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (ii) 1. assistance in making decisions and filling out forms that
2 are not directly related to cremation;

3 2. obtaining vital statistics, signatures, and other
4 information necessary to complete a death certificate;

5 3. transportation of a body to the place of disposition; or

6 4. any other services regarding the disposition of a body that
7 are not directly related to cremation.

8 (l) (1) “Engage in the operation of a reduction facility” means controlling or
9 managing a reduction facility.

10 (2) “Engage in the operation of a reduction facility” does not include:

11 (i) the practice of funeral direction or the practice of mortuary
12 science; or

13 (ii) 1. assistance in making decisions and filling out forms that
14 are not directly related to natural organic reduction;

15 2. obtaining vital statistics, signatures, and other
16 information necessary to complete a death certificate;

17 3. transportation of a body to the place of disposition; or

18 4. any other services regarding the disposition of a body that
19 are not directly related to natural organic reduction.]

20 [(m)] (J) “Funeral establishment” means a building, structure, or premises from
21 which the business of funeral directing or embalming is conducted.

22 [(n)] (K) (1) “Human remains” means:

23 (i) the body of a deceased person; or

24 (ii) a part of a body or limb that has been removed from a living
25 person.

26 (2) “Human remains” includes the body or part of a body or limb in any
27 state of decomposition.

28 (3) “Human remains” does not include soil remains produced after the
29 completion of natural organic reduction.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 698 5

1 [(o) “Hydrolyzed remains” means the bone fragments produced by the completion
2 of alkaline hydrolysis.]

3 [(p)] (L) “Interment” means all final disposition of human remains or pet
4 remains, including:

5 (1) earth burial;

6 (2) mausoleum entombment; and

7 (3) niche or columbarium interment.

8 [(q)] (M) “Natural organic reduction” means the contained accelerated
9 conversion of human remains into soil.

10 [(r)] (N) “Office” means the Office of Cemetery Oversight.

11 [(s)] (O) “Permit” means a permit issued by the Director to allow a partnership,
12 limited liability company, or corporation to operate a business through which a registrant
13 may:

14 (1) engage in the operation of a cemetery [or crematory]; or

15 (2) provide burial goods.

16 [(t)] (P) (1) “Pet remains” means the body of a deceased animal that was kept
17 as a pet.

18 (2) “Pet remains” includes the body of a pet or a part of a pet’s body in any
19 state of decomposition or the body of a pet after having been cremated.

20 [(u)] (Q) (1) “Preneed goods” means burial goods that are sold before the
21 buyer’s death.

22 (2) “Preneed goods” does not include burial space.

23 [(v)] (R) “Provide burial goods” means a retail transaction:

24 (1) to erect, service, or inscribe burial memorials; or

25 (2) to sell burial goods.

26 [(w) “Reduction facility” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that
27 houses the necessary appliances, containers, and facilities for performing natural organic
28 reduction.]
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 698

1 [(x)] (S) “Registered cemeterian” means an individual registered to operate a
2 cemetery as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or of a permit holder.

3 [(y) “Registered crematory operator” means an individual registered to operate a
4 crematory as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or permit holder.

5 (z) “Registered reduction operator” means an individual registered to operate a
6 reduction facility as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or a permit holder.]

7 [(aa)] (T) “Registered seller” means an individual registered to provide burial
8 goods as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or of a permit holder.

9 [(bb)] (U) “Registration” means a registration issued by the Director authorizing
10 an individual to operate a cemetery[, to operate a crematory, to operate a reduction
11 facility,] or to provide burial goods.

12 [(cc)] (V) “Responsible party” means a sole proprietor or the individual
13 designated by a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation to be responsible for
14 the operations of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business.

15 [(dd) “Soil remains” means the soil produced at final disposition of a dead human
16 body at a reduction facility by completion of natural organic reduction.]

17 5–102.

18 (b) This title does not apply to:

19 (1) the operation of a funeral establishment, including the sale of burial
20 goods in the ordinary course of the funeral establishment’s business;

21 [(2) the operation or ownership of a crematory in which a person who is
22 licensed and regulated under Title 7 of the Health Occupations Article owns a greater
23 percentage of the crematory than a registered cemeterian, registered seller, or holder of a
24 permit for the operation of a cemetery or burial goods business;]

25 [(3)] (2) the operation or ownership of a crematory [or], incinerator [at a
26 licensed medical facility or educational institution], OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

27 [(4)] (3) a licensed funeral director acting within the scope of the funeral
28 director’s license; or

29 [(5)] (4) a mortician acting within the scope of the mortician’s license.

30 5–201.

31 (a) There is an Office of Cemetery Oversight in the Department.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 698 7

1 (b) The Office exercises its rights, powers, and duties subject to the authority of
2 the Secretary.

3 (c) (1) The Secretary shall appoint an Advisory Council on Cemetery
4 Operations.

5 (2) The Advisory Council consists of [12] 11 members.

6 (3) Of the [12] 11 members of the Advisory Council:

7 (i) three shall be registered cemeterians representing the for–profit
8 cemetery industry;

9 (ii) one shall be a registered cemeterian representing a nonprofit
10 cemetery;

11 (iii) one shall be a registered seller from a monument company;

12 (iv) one shall be a representative from a religious cemetery; AND

13 (v) [one shall be a representative from a crematory; and

14 (vi)] five shall be consumer members.

15 (4) The Advisory Council shall be convened at least four times a year to
16 give advice to the Secretary and the Director.

17 (5) In addition to the required meetings, the Advisory Council may meet as
18 necessary.

19 (d) The term of a member is 3 years.

20 5–204.

21 (a) [(1)] With the advice of the Advisory Council and after consultation with
22 representatives of the cemetery industry, the Director shall adopt:

23 [(i)] (1) rules and regulations to carry out this title; and

24 [(ii)] (2) a code of ethics for engaging in the operation of a
25 cemetery[, crematory, or reduction facility] or providing burial goods.

26 [(2) In conjunction with the State Board of Morticians and Funeral
27 Directors, the Director shall:
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (i) establish a process for regulating crematories and reduction
2 facilities that provides for:

3 1. registration of crematory operators and reduction facility
4 operators or issuance of permits for operating crematories and reduction facilities, and
5 renewal;

6 2. applications, including certification of ownership and
7 identification of individuals who will perform alkaline hydrolysis, cremation, or natural
8 organic reduction;

9 3. registration and permit fees;

10 4. inspections and oversight;

11 5. grounds for discipline and penalties; and

12 6. complaints and hearings; and

13 (ii) adopt regulations that are identical to regulations adopted by the
14 State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors to:

15 1. implement item (i) of this paragraph; and

16 2. ensure public health and safety.

17 (3) The Director shall adopt regulations that:

18 (i) require a registered reduction operator to notify the authorizing
19 agent in writing and before initiating natural organic reduction that a person who uses or
20 disposes of soil remains is in violation of § 5–514 of the Health – General Article;

21 (ii) require a reduction facility to monitor and record written
22 verification that the temperature during each instance of a natural organic reduction
23 process attains a specified minimum internal equipment temperature for a specified
24 minimum period of time;

25 (iii) establish appropriate standards for training and experience for
26 the registration of reduction operators;

27 (iv) prohibit the use of natural organic reduction in any instance in
28 which the human remains are known, or reasonably suspected, to be embalmed or to have
29 an infection, disease, or biological condition that renders the process of natural organic
30 reduction or the resulting soil remains unreasonably unsafe, including:

31 1. Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease or other prion disease;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 698 9

1 2. Ebola virus infection;

2 3. Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection;

3 4. the presence of diagnostic or therapeutic radioisotopes; or

4 5. any other infection, disease, or biological condition
5 identified by the Director based on the reasonable recommendation of a federal, State, or
6 local health authority;

7 (v) establish a mandatory contamination testing program for
8 reduction facilities to ensure the safety of soil remains produced, including the following
9 minimum program elements:

10 1. collecting routine material samples from soil remains for
11 analysis using:

12 A. a reliable sampling methodology; and

13 B. an appropriate frequency of sampling, as recommended or
14 approved by the U.S. Composting Council or another reliable scientific advisory authority;

15 2. recording and retaining the results of an analysis of
16 samples from the soil remains conducted by an independent third–party laboratory to
17 identify the presence of heavy metals or microbial pathogens according to the appropriate
18 contamination parameters for biosolids specified by the U.S. Environmental Protection
19 Agency under Title 40 C.F.R. Part 503, Chapter I, Subchapter O;

20 3. conducting an analysis for each production of soil remains
21 to ensure that the soil remains contain less than 0.01 mg/kg dry weight of specific physical
22 contaminants, which may include intact bone, dental fillings, and medical implants;

23 4. ensuring that no soil remains are released until the soil
24 remains comply with each of the applicable contamination testing parameters; and

25 5. periodic reporting of testing results to appropriate State
26 and local health authorities that have requested the results; and

27 (vi) establish any other reasonable prohibition, rule, or requirement
28 the Director determines is necessary to protect the public health and safety during the
29 process of natural organic reduction.]

30 (b) [Upon] ON receipt of a written complaint, or at the discretion of the Director,
31 the Director or the Director’s designee may conduct an investigation and an inspection of
32 the records and site of a registered cemeterian, [registered crematory operator, registered
33 reduction operator,] registered seller, permit holder, or any other person subject to the
34 registration or permit provisions of this title.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 HOUSE BILL 698

1 5–205.

2 (a) There is a Cemetery Oversight Fund.

3 (b) (1) [(i)] By regulation, the Director shall establish reasonable fees and a
4 fee schedule for the issuance and renewal of registrations and permits.

5 [(ii) The Director may not assess a crematory a per–occurrence
6 cremation fee.]

7 (2) In establishing the fees, the Director shall consider:

8 (I) the size of the business[,];

9 (II) whether the business is for–profit or designated as tax exempt
10 under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code[,];

11 (III) the volume of business conducted[,]; and

12 (IV) the type of services provided, including the percentage of preneed
13 contracts written.

14 5–301.

15 An individual shall register with the Office before:

16 (1) engaging in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, or reduction
17 facility] in this State; or

18 (2) providing burial goods in this State.

19 5–302.

20 (a) In order to register, an applicant shall meet the requirements of this section.

21 (b) The applicant must be at least 18 years old.

22 (c) The applicant must be of good character and reputation.

23 (d) The applicant must be affiliated with a cemetery[, crematory, reduction
24 facility,] or burial goods business operated by a registrant or permit holder.

25 (e) The cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business with
26 which the applicant is affiliated must be financially stable in accordance with § 5–304 of
27 this subtitle.
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
HOUSE BILL 698 11

1 5–303.

2 (a) An applicant shall register by:

3 (1) submitting to the Director an application on the form that the Director
4 provides; and

5 (2) paying a nonrefundable application fee set by the Director.

6 (b) The application shall state:

7 (1) the name, date of birth, and residential address of the applicant;

8 (2) the name and fixed address of the affiliated cemetery[, crematory,] or
9 burial goods business;

10 (3) whether the cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods
11 business with which the applicant is affiliated is owned or controlled by a sole proprietor,
12 partnership, limited liability company, or corporation;

13 (4) if the applicant is designated as the responsible party, the name and
14 residential address of each employee who sells burial space, goods, or services to the public
15 for the business while engaging in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction
16 facility,] or burial goods business; and

17 (5) any other reasonable information that the Director determines is
18 necessary to carry out this title.

19 5–306.

20 (a) While a registration is in effect, it authorizes the registrant to engage in the
21 operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business.

22 (b) This title does not limit the right of a person to practice funeral direction or
23 mortuary science[, or operate a crematory,] if the person is licensed or otherwise authorized
24 under Title 7 of the Health Occupations Article.

25 5–308.

26 Within 1 week after the effective date of the change, the applicant designated as the
27 responsible party or the registered responsible party shall submit to the Director an
28 application form that shows a change in the:

29 (1) cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business with
30 which a registrant is affiliated;
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
12 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (2) individual designated as the responsible party;

2 (3) employees of the business who engage in the sale of burial space, goods,
3 or services [or cremation] to the public;

4 (4) officers, directors, members, or agents of the permit holder; or

5 (5) name or address of the registrant or permit holder.

6 5–310.

7 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 5–312 of this subtitle, the Director may
8 deny a registration or permit to an applicant, reprimand a person subject to the registration
9 or permit provisions of this title, or suspend or revoke a registration or permit if an
10 applicant, registrant, or permit holder, or an agent, employee, officer, director, or partner
11 of the applicant, registrant, or permit holder:

12 (1) fraudulently or deceptively obtains or attempts to obtain a registration
13 or permit;

14 (2) fraudulently or deceptively uses a registration or permit;

15 (3) under the laws of the United States or of any state, is convicted of a:

16 (i) felony; or

17 (ii) misdemeanor that is directly related to the fitness and
18 qualifications of the applicant, registrant, or permit holder to own or operate a cemetery[,
19 crematory, or reduction facility] or provide burial goods;

20 (4) fails to provide or misrepresents any information required to be
21 provided under this title;

22 (5) violates this title;

23 (6) violates the code of ethics adopted by the Director;

24 (7) violates a regulation adopted under this title;

25 (8) fails to provide reasonable and adequate supervision of the operation of
26 the cemetery[, crematory, or reduction facility] or the provision of burial goods by agents,
27 employees, officers, directors, or partners affiliated with a cemetery[, crematory, reduction
28 facility,] or burial goods business;

29 (9) refuses to allow an inspection required by this title;
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
HOUSE BILL 698 13

1 (10) fails to comply with an order of the Director;

2 (11) fails to comply with any terms of settlement under a binding arbitration
3 agreement;

4 (12) is found guilty by a court in this State of violating an unfair, ABUSIVE,
5 or deceptive trade practices provision under Title 13 of the Commercial Law Article; or

6 (13) fails to comply with § 5–513 of the Health – General Article.

7 (b) (1) If a person is charged with a violation of this title that could result in
8 suspension or revocation of a registration or permit, the Director may seek an immediate
9 restraining order in a circuit court in this State to prohibit the person from engaging in the
10 operation of any cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business.

11 (2) The restraining order is in effect until:

12 (i) the court lifts the order; or

13 (ii) the charges are adjudicated or dismissed.

14 5–311.

15 (c) (1) The Director or the Director’s designee shall review each complaint and
16 shall attempt to negotiate a settlement of the complaint between the complainant and the
17 registrant, permit holder, or any other person subject to the registration or permit
18 provisions of this title.

19 (2) Notwithstanding § 5–102 of this title, the Director or the Director’s
20 designee may receive and attempt to negotiate a settlement to resolve complaints
21 concerning persons required to file statements under § 5–405 of this title and in connection
22 with the operation of a cemetery [or crematory] or the sale of preneed goods.

23 (3) The Director may not take any actions described in subsection (d)(1)
24 and (2) of this section for complaints involving persons exempt under § 5–102 of this title.

25 5–401.

26 (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, a registered cemeterian[, registered
27 crematory operator, registered reduction operator,] or registered seller may engage in the
28 operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business as a sole
29 proprietor or through:

30 (1) a corporation as an officer, director, employee, or agent of the
31 corporation;
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
14 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (2) a limited liability company as a member, employee, or agent of the
2 limited liability company; or

3 (3) a partnership as a partner, employee, or agent of the partnership.

4 (b) Subject to the provisions of this title, a corporation, limited liability company,
5 or partnership may engage in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,]
6 or burial goods business through a registered cemeterian[, registered crematory operator,
7 registered reduction operator,] or registered seller.

8 (c) (1) A registered cemeterian who engages in the operation of a cemetery
9 through a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership under this title is subject
10 to all of the provisions of this title that relate to engaging in the operation of a cemetery.

11 (2) [A registered crematory operator who engages in the operation of a
12 crematory through a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership under this title
13 is subject to all of the provisions of this title that relate to engaging in the operation of a
14 crematory.

15 (3) A registered reduction operator who engages in the operation of a
16 reduction facility through a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership under
17 this title is subject to all the provisions of this title that relate to engaging in the operation
18 of a reduction facility.

19 (4)] A registered seller who engages in the operation of a burial goods
20 business through a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership under this title is
21 subject to all of the provisions of this title that relate to providing burial goods services.

22 (d) (1) A corporation, limited liability company, or partnership that engages in
23 the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business under
24 this title is not, by its compliance with this title, relieved of any responsibility that the
25 corporation, limited liability company, or partnership may have for an act or an omission
26 by its officer, director, member, partner, employee, or agent.

27 (2) An individual who engages in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory,
28 reduction facility,] or burial goods business through a corporation, limited liability
29 company, or partnership is not, by reason of the individual’s employment or other
30 relationship with the corporation, limited liability company, or partnership, relieved of any
31 individual responsibility that the individual may have regarding that practice.

32 5–402.

33 A corporation, limited liability company, or partnership shall obtain a permit issued
34 by the Director, before the corporation, limited liability company, or partnership may
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
HOUSE BILL 698 15

1 engage in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods
2 business in the State.

3 5–403.

4 To qualify for a permit, a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership shall:

5 (1) designate a separate registered cemeterian[, registered crematory
6 operator, registered reduction operator,] or registered seller as the responsible party for
7 the operations of each affiliated cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods
8 business;

9 (2) provide the name and business address of each affiliated cemetery[,
10 crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business;

11 (3) provide a list of the officers, directors, members, partners, agents, and
12 employees of the entity applying for the permit; and

13 (4) comply with §§ 5–303(b)(4) and 5–304 of this title.

14 5–701.

15 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (e) (1) “Preneed services” means services that are sold:

17 (i) before the buyer’s death; and

18 (ii) in connection with burial [or cremation].

19 (2) “Preneed services” includes opening and closing a grave.

20 (f) “Seller” means a registered cemeterian, [registered crematory operator,]
21 registered seller, or any other person who sells preneed goods or preneed services.

22 5–702.

23 (a) This subtitle does not apply to:

24 (1) the sale of burial space;

25 (2) a preneed contract made by an individual in connection with:

26 (I) practicing funeral direction or practicing mortuary science, as
27 those practices are defined in and regulated by the Health Occupations Article; OR
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
16 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (II) THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY
2 SUBJECT TO REGULATION UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE; or

3 (3) the preneed sale of burial goods or services by a private family cemetery
4 that does not conduct public sales of burial goods or services.

5 5–707.

6 (f) A trustee may not use any preneed trust funds required to be held in trust in
7 accordance with this subtitle to:

8 (1) purchase an interest in any contract or agreement to which the
9 registrant, the permit holder, or any other person subject to the trust requirements of this
10 subtitle, or any entity owned or under the control of a registrant, a permit holder, or any
11 other person subject to the trust requirements of this subtitle, or a spouse, child, parent, or
12 sibling of a registrant or any other person subject to the trust requirements of this subtitle
13 is a party; or

14 (2) make any loan or direct or indirect investment of any kind:

15 (i) to any registrant, permit holder, or any other person subject to
16 the trust requirements of this subtitle or to any spouse, child, parent, or sibling of a
17 registrant or any other person subject to the trust requirements of this subtitle;

18 (ii) to or in any entity or business operations owned or under the
19 control of a registrant, a permit holder, or any other person subject to the trust
20 requirements of this subtitle, or a spouse, child, parent, or sibling of a registrant or any
21 other person subject to the trust requirements of this subtitle;

22 (iii) on or in any real property of a cemetery [or a crematory] or the
23 buildings or structures appurtenant to the property; or

24 (iv) in any permanent improvements of a cemetery, [a crematory,]
25 the facilities of a cemetery [or crematory], or the buildings or structures appurtenant to a
26 cemetery [or crematory].

27 [5–803.

28 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

29 (2) “Eligible dependent” means a veteran’s spouse, a veteran’s unmarried
30 child under the age of 21 years, or a veteran’s unmarried adult child who before the age of
31 21 became permanently incapable of self–support because of physical or mental disability.
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
HOUSE BILL 698 17

1 (3) (i) “Identifying information” means data required by a veterans
2 service organization to verify the eligibility of a veteran or an eligible dependent for burial
3 in a national or state veterans cemetery.

4 (ii) “Identifying information” includes name, service number, Social
5 Security number, date of birth, date of death, place of birth, and copy of the death
6 certificate.

7 (4) “Veterans service organization” means an association or other entity
8 organized for the benefit of veterans that has been recognized by the U.S. Department of
9 Veterans Affairs or chartered by Congress and any employee or representative of the
10 association or entity.

11 (b) (1) If a licensed funeral establishment or a crematory is in possession of
12 cremated human remains or hydrolyzed remains that have been unclaimed for 90 days or
13 more, the licensed funeral establishment or holder of the permit for the business of
14 operating a crematory shall provide identifying information of the unclaimed cremains or
15 hydrolyzed remains to a veterans service organization in order for the veterans service
16 organization to determine if the unclaimed cremains or hydrolyzed remains are those of a
17 veteran or an eligible dependent.

18 (2) (i) Subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph does not apply if:

19 1. an authorizing agent directs otherwise; or

20 2. a reduction facility reasonably concludes based on the
21 identifying information or other evidence that a decedent does not qualify for disposition
22 benefits associated with veterans status.

23 (ii) A reduction facility in possession of human remains that are
24 being processed by natural organic reduction shall provide identifying information to a
25 veterans service organization within 5 business days after natural organic reduction is
26 initiated to determine if the soil remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent.

27 (c) Within 45 days after receipt of the information required by subsection (b) of
28 this section, the veterans service organization shall notify the licensed funeral
29 establishment, permit holder, or reduction facility:

30 (1) whether the cremains, hydrolyzed remains, or soil remains are those of
31 a veteran or an eligible dependent; and

32 (2) if so, whether the veteran or eligible dependent is eligible for burial in
33 a veterans cemetery.

34 (d) If the unclaimed cremains or hydrolyzed remains are those of a veteran or an
35 eligible dependent, the licensed funeral establishment or permit holder may transfer the
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
18 HOUSE BILL 698

1 cremains to a veterans service organization for the purpose of disposition of the cremains
2 or hydrolyzed remains.

3 (e) If the unclaimed soil remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent,
4 the reduction facility may:

5 (1) transfer a portion of the soil remains not exceeding 300 cubic inches in
6 volume to a veterans service organization that grants permission for the purpose of
7 disposition; and

8 (2) if authorized by the cemetery or owner, transfer the balance of soil
9 remains to a cemetery or the owner of a woodland protected under the Forest Conservation
10 Act.

11 (f) If a veterans service organization does not take possession of unclaimed
12 cremains or hydrolyzed remains that qualify for a plot in a State veterans cemetery under
13 § 9–906 of the State Government Article, within 10 days after the licensed funeral
14 establishment or permit holder receives the notification required under subsection (c) of
15 this section, the licensed funeral establishment or permit holder shall:

16 (1) notify the Department of Veterans and Military Families of the status
17 of the cremains or hydrolyzed remains for the purpose of the appropriate disposition of the
18 cremains or hydrolyzed remains; and

19 (2) transfer the cremains or hydrolyzed remains to the Department of
20 Veterans and Military Families for the purpose of the appropriate disposition of the
21 cremains or hydrolyzed remains.

22 (g) If a veterans service organization does not take possession of a portion of
23 unclaimed soil remains under subsection (e)(1) of this section that qualifies for a plot in a
24 State veterans cemetery under § 9–906 of the State Government Article, within 10 days
25 after the reduction facility receives the notification, the reduction facility shall:

26 (1) notify the Department of Veterans and Military Families of the status
27 of the soil remains for the purpose of the appropriate disposition of the soil remains;

28 (2) transfer the soil remains to the Department of Veterans and Military
29 Families for the purpose of the appropriate disposition of the soil remains; and

30 (3) if authorized by the cemetery or owner, transfer the balance of the soil
31 remains to a cemetery or the owner of a woodland protected under the Forest Conservation
32 Act.]

33 5–804.

34 (a) In this section, “perpetual care” has the meaning stated in § 5–601 of this title.
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
HOUSE BILL 698 19

1 (b) A registered cemeterian[, registered crematory operator,] or permit holder
2 that engages in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory,] or burial goods business who sells
3 or offers to sell to the public [cremation services,] a burial lot[,] or a burial right in a
4 cemetery for pet remains as to which perpetual care is stated or implied owes a duty of
5 perpetual care for the cemetery in which the pet remains are interred.

6 (c) The Director shall adopt regulations in accordance with § 5–204(a) of this title
7 to enforce the requirements of this section.

8 5–901.

9 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual may not engage in
10 cemetery operations, attempt to engage in cemetery operations, or provide or offer to
11 provide burial space, goods, and services unless the individual is authorized as a registrant.

12 (b) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual may not engage in a
13 burial goods business or attempt to provide burial goods unless the individual is authorized
14 as a registrant.

15 [(c) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual may not engage in the
16 operation of a crematory, attempt to engage in the operation of a crematory, or provide or
17 offer to provide cremation services unless the individual is authorized as a registrant.

18 (d) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual may not engage in the
19 operation of a reduction facility, attempt to engage in the operation of a reduction facility,
20 or provide or offer to provide natural organic reduction unless the individual is a registered
21 reduction operator.]

22 5–902.

23 Except for a registered cemeterian[, registered crematory operator, registered
24 reduction operator,] or registered seller who operates a business as a sole proprietor or a
25 registrant employed by a sole proprietor, a person may not engage in the operation of a
26 cemetery[, crematory, reduction facility,] or burial goods business unless:

27 (1) the business is a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership;
28 and

29 (2) the corporation, limited liability company, or partnership holds a
30 permit issued under this title.

31 5–903.

32 Unless a person is authorized as a registrant, a person may not represent to the
33 public, by use of a title, including cemeterian, registered cemeterian, [crematory operator,
34 registered crematory operator, registered reduction operator,] burial goods seller, or
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
20 HOUSE BILL 698

1 registered seller, by description of services, methods, or procedures, or otherwise, that the
2 person is authorized to engage in the operation of a cemetery[, crematory, or reduction
3 facility] or provide burial goods.

4 Article – Health Occupations

5 Title 7. Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND CREMATORIES.

6 7–101.

7 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

8 (a–1) “Alkaline hydrolysis” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of the Business
9 Regulation Article] MEANS THE PROCESS OF REDUCING HUMAN REMAINS USING
10 WATER, ALKALINE CHEMICALS, AND HEAT INSIDE A WATERTIGHT VESSEL TO
11 ACCELERATE DECOMPOSITION.

12 (b) “Apprentice” means an individual licensed by the Board who assists a licensed
13 mortician or funeral director in the practice of mortuary science or funeral direction, under
14 direct supervision of a licensed mortician or funeral director.

15 (c) “Apprentice sponsor” means an individual who:

16 (1) Is a licensed mortician or funeral director whose license is in good
17 standing with the Board;

18 (2) Has practiced mortuary science as a licensed mortician or funeral
19 director in Maryland at least 1 year immediately prior to accepting the applicant as an
20 apprentice; and

21 (3) Provides direct supervision to an apprentice.

22 (c–1) “Authorizing agent” has the meaning stated in § 5–508 of the Health – General
23 Article.

24 (d) “Board” means the State Board of Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND
25 CREMATORIES.

26 (e) (1) “Business of operating a crematory” means controlling or managing a
27 crematory.

28 (2) “Business of operating a crematory” does not include:

29 (i) The practice of funeral direction or the practice of mortuary
30 science; or
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
HOUSE BILL 698 21

1 (ii) 1. Assistance in making decisions and filling out forms that
2 are not directly related to cremation;

3 2. Obtaining vital statistics, signatures, and other
4 information necessary to complete a death certificate;

5 3. Transportation of a body to the place of disposition; or

6 4. Any other services regarding the disposition of a body that
7 are not directly related to cremation.

8 (f) (1) “Corporation” means a mortuary science business whose articles of
9 incorporation are in good standing with the Maryland State Department of Assessments
10 and Taxation, or its successor, the initial business for which the license is issued must have
11 been incorporated on or before June 1, 1945 and have “Incorporated”, “Inc.”, or
12 “Corporation” in its name.

13 (2) “Corporation” does not include, for purposes of issuing a corporation
14 license, a “professional association” (P.A.) or a “professional corporation” (P.C.).

15 (g) “Courtesy card” means a license issued by the Board to licensed practitioners
16 of mortuary science in other states, to make a removal of a dead human body in this State
17 and to return the body to another state or country, to return dead bodies from another state
18 or country to this State, to fill out the family history portion of the death certificate, and to
19 sign the death certificate in the holder’s capacity as a licensed practitioner of mortuary
20 science.

21 (h) “Cremation” means disposition of a dead human body by means of
22 incineration.

23 (i) “Crematory” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that houses
24 the necessary appliances and facilities for cremation or alkaline hydrolysis.

25 (J) (1) “ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY” MEANS
26 CONTROLLING OR MANAGING A CREMATORY.

27 (2) “ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY” DOES NOT
28 INCLUDE:

29 (I) THE PRACTICE OF FUNERAL DIRECTION OR THE PRACTICE
30 OF MORTUARY SCIENCE; OR

31 (II) 1. ASSISTANCE IN MAKING DECISIONS AND FILLING OUT
32 FORMS THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO CREMATION;
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
22 HOUSE BILL 698

1 2. OBTAINING VITAL STATISTICS, SIGNATURES, AND
2 OTHER INFORMATION NECESSARY TO COMPLETE A DEATH CERTIFICATE;

3 3. TRANSPORTATION OF A BODY TO THE PLACE OF
4 DISPOSITION; OR

5 4. ANY OTHER SERVICES REGARDING THE DISPOSITION
6 OF A BODY THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO CREMATION.

7 (K) (1) “ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A REDUCTION FACILITY” MEANS
8 CONTROLLING OR MANAGING A REDUCTION FACILITY.

9 (2) “ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A REDUCTION FACILITY” DOES
10 NOT INCLUDE:

11 (I) THE PRACTICE OF FUNERAL DIRECTION OR THE PRACTICE
12 OF MORTUARY SCIENCE; OR

13 (II) 1. ASSISTANCE IN MAKING DECISIONS AND FILLING OUT
14 FORMS THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION;

15 2. OBTAINING VITAL STATISTICS, SIGNATURES, AND
16 OTHER INFORMATION NECESSARY TO COMPLETE A DEATH CERTIFICATE;

17 3. TRANSPORTATION OF A BODY TO THE PLACE OF
18 DISPOSITION; OR

19 4. ANY OTHER SERVICES REGARDING THE DISPOSITION
20 OF A BODY THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION.

21 [(j)] (L) “Funeral director” means an individual who is licensed by the Board to
22 practice all aspects of mortuary science except for embalming.

23 [(k)] (M) “Funeral establishment” means any building, structure, or premises
24 from which the business of practicing mortuary science is conducted.

25 [(l)] (N) (1) “Human remains” means:

26 (i) The body of a deceased person; or

27 (ii) A part of a body or limb that has been removed from a living
28 person.
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
HOUSE BILL 698 23

1 (2) “Human remains” includes the body or part of a body or limb in any
2 state of decomposition.

3 (3) “Human remains” does not include soil remains produced after the
4 completion of natural organic reduction.

5 [(l–1)] (O) “Hydrolyzed remains” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of the
6 Business Regulation Article] MEANS THE BONE FRAGMENTS PRODUCED BY THE
7 COMPLETION OF ALKALINE HYDROLYSIS.

8 [(m)] (P) (1) “License” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a license
9 issued by the Board.

10 (2) “License” includes, unless otherwise indicated:

11 (i) A mortician license;

12 (ii) An apprentice license;

13 (iii) A funeral director license;

14 (iv) A surviving spouse license;

15 (v) A corporation license;

16 (vi) A funeral establishment license; and

17 (vii) A courtesy card.

18 [(n)] (Q) “Licensed apprentice” means, unless the context requires otherwise, an
19 apprentice who is licensed by the Board to assist a licensed mortician or funeral director in
20 the practice of mortuary science or funeral direction.

21 [(o)] (R) “Licensed funeral director” means, unless the context requires
22 otherwise, a funeral director who is licensed by the Board to practice funeral direction.

23 [(p)] (S) “Licensed funeral establishment” means, unless the context requires
24 otherwise, a funeral establishment that is licensed by the Board.

25 [(q)] (T) “Licensed mortician” means, unless the context requires otherwise, a
26 mortician who is licensed by the Board under this title to practice mortuary science.

27 [(r)] (U) “Licensee” means an individual or entity licensed by the Board to
28 practice mortuary science to the extent determined by the Board.

29 [(s)] (V) “Mortician” means an individual who practices mortuary science.
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
24 HOUSE BILL 698

1 [(s–1)] (W) “Natural organic reduction” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of the
2 Business Regulation Article] MEANS THE CONTAINED ACCELERATED CONVERSION OF
3 HUMAN REMAINS INTO SOIL.

4 [(t)] (X) (1) “Practice funeral direction” means:

5 (i) To operate a funeral establishment;

6 (ii) For compensation, to prepare a dead human body for disposition;
7 or

8 (iii) For compensation, to arrange for or make final disposition of a
9 dead human body.

10 (2) “Practice funeral direction” does not include:

11 (i) For compensation, disinfecting or preserving a dead human body
12 or any of its parts by arterial or cavity injection or any other type of preservation; or

13 (ii) The business of operating a crematory or reduction facility.

14 [(u)] (Y) (1) “Practice mortuary science” means:

15 (i) To operate a funeral establishment;

16 (ii) For compensation, to prepare a dead human body for disposition;
17 or

18 (iii) For compensation, to arrange for or make final disposition of a
19 dead human body.

20 (2) “Practice mortuary science” includes:

21 (i) The practice of funeral direction; and

22 (ii) Disinfecting or preserving a dead human body or any of its parts
23 by arterial or cavity injection.

24 (3) “Practice mortuary science” does not include:

25 (i) The pickup, removal, or transportation of a dead human body, if
26 the unlicensed individual is acting under the direction of a licensed mortician or funeral
27 director; or

28 (ii) The business of operating a crematory or reduction facility.
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
HOUSE BILL 698 25

1 [(v)] (Z) “Pre–need contract” means an agreement between a consumer and a
2 licensed funeral director, licensed mortician, REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR,
3 REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR, or surviving spouse to provide any goods and
4 services purchased prior to the time of death[. Goods and services shall include],
5 INCLUDING:

6 (1) A service, including any form of preservation and disposition or
7 cremation, that a mortician normally provides in the ordinary course of business; or

8 (2) Merchandise, including a casket, vault, or clothing, that a mortician
9 normally provides in the ordinary course of business.

10 (AA) (1) “PRE–NEED GOODS” MEANS BURIAL GOODS THAT ARE SOLD
11 BEFORE THE BUYER’S DEATH.

12 (2) “PRE–NEED GOODS” DOES NOT INCLUDE BURIAL SPACE.

13 [(v–1)] (BB) “Reduction facility” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of the Business
14 Regulation Article] MEANS A BUILDING, PORTION OF A BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE
15 THAT HOUSES THE NECESSARY APPLIANCES, CONTAINERS, AND FACILITIES FOR
16 PERFORMING NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION.

17 (CC) “REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL
18 REGISTERED TO OPERATE A CREMATORY AS A SOLE PROPRIETOR OR ON BEHALF OF
19 A SOLE PROPRIETOR OR PERMIT HOLDER.

20 [(v–2)] (DD) “Registered reduction operator” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of
21 the Business Regulation Article] MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL REGISTERED TO OPERATE A
22 REDUCTION FACILITY AS A SOLE PROPRIETOR OR ON BEHALF OF A SOLE
23 PROPRIETOR OR A PERMIT HOLDER.

24 (EE) “REGISTRATION” MEANS A REGISTRATION ISSUED BY THE BOARD
25 AUTHORIZING AN INDIVIDUAL TO OPERATE A CREMATORY OR A REDUCTION
26 FACILITY.

27 (FF) “RESPONSIBLE PARTY” MEANS A SOLE PROPRIETOR OR THE
28 INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED BY A PARTNERSHIP, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, OR
29 CORPORATION TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE OPERATIONS OF A CREMATORY OR
30 REDUCTION FACILITY.

31 [(v–3)] (GG) “Soil remains” [has the meaning stated in § 5–101 of the Business
32 Regulation Article] MEANS THE SOIL PRODUCED AT FINAL DISPOSITION OF A DEAD
33 HUMAN BODY AT A REDUCTION FACILITY BY COMPLETION OF NATURAL ORGANIC
34 REDUCTION.
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
26 HOUSE BILL 698

1 [(w)] (HH) “Surviving spouse” means the legal widow or widower of a licensed
2 funeral director or licensed mortician, whose license was in good standing at the time of
3 death, and who at the time of death, wholly or partly owned and operated a mortuary
4 science business.

5 7–102.

6 (a) This title does not limit the right of an individual to practice a health
7 occupation that the individual is authorized to practice under this article.

8 (b) [(1) In this subsection, “registrant or permit holder” means a person
9 regulated under Title 5 of the Business Regulation Article as a registered cemeterian,
10 registered reduction operator, registered seller, or holder of a permit to operate a cemetery,
11 reduction facility, or burial goods business.

12 (2)] This title does not apply to:

13 [(i)] (1) The business of operating a cemetery, including the sale of
14 cemetery lots, grave sites, mausoleums, monuments, lawn crypts, or vaults; OR

15 [(ii) The ownership of a crematory or reduction facility or the
16 business of operating a crematory or reduction facility in which:

17 1. A registrant or permit holder owns a greater percentage of
18 the crematory or reduction facility than a person licensed under this title;

19 2. Ownership is equal between a registrant or permit holder
20 and a person licensed under this title; or

21 3. Neither a registrant, permit holder, or person licensed
22 under this title has an ownership interest in the crematory or reduction facility; or

23 (iii)] (2) The ownership of a crematory or the business of operating
24 a crematory or incinerator at a licensed medical facility or educational institution.

25 Subtitle 2. State Board of Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND CREMATORIES.

26 7–201.

27 There is a State Board of Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND CREMATORIES
28 in the Department.

29 7–202.

30 (a) (1) The Board consists of 11 members.
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
HOUSE BILL 698 27

1 (2) Of the 11 Board members:

2 (i) 6 shall be licensed morticians or licensed funeral directors; and

3 (ii) 5 shall be consumer members.

4 (3) All Board members shall be residents of the State.

5 (4) The Governor shall appoint each member with the advice of the
6 Secretary, and with the advice and consent of the Senate.

7 (5) The Board may not have more than one member who is employed by or
8 affiliated with, directly or indirectly, the same corporation, professional association, or
9 other entity, that owns, directly or through a subsidiary corporation, professional
10 association, or other entity, one or more funeral homes.

11 (i) [(1)] The Governor may remove an appointed member:

12 [(i)] (1) For incompetence or misconduct; [or]

13 [(ii)] (2) Who, because of events that occur after the member’s
14 appointment or reappointment to the Board, causes the Board to be in violation of the
15 prohibition set forth in subsection (a)(5) of this section;

16 (3) FOR REPEATED AND UNEXPLAINED ABSENCES; OR

17 (4) FOR ANY JUST AND REASONABLE CAUSE.

18 [(2) Upon the recommendation of the Secretary, the Governor may remove
19 an appointed member whom the Secretary finds to have been absent from 2 successive
20 Board meetings without adequate reason.]

21 7–204.

22 (a) A majority of the [full authorized membership] THEN–SERVING APPOINTED
23 MEMBERS of the Board is a quorum to do business.

24 (E) AN ACTION MAY BE TAKEN BY A SIMPLE MAJORITY VOTE OF THE
25 QUORUM.

26 7–205.

27 (c) [In conjunction with the Office of Cemetery Oversight, the] THE Board shall:
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
28 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (1) Establish a process for regulating crematories and reduction facilities
2 that provides for:

3 (i) Registration of crematory operators and reduction operators or
4 issuance of permits for operating crematories and reduction facilities, and renewal;

5 (ii) Applications, including certification of ownership and
6 identification of individuals who will perform cremation, alkaline hydrolysis, or natural
7 organic reduction;

8 (iii) Registration or permit fees;

9 (iv) Inspections and oversight;

10 (v) Grounds for discipline and penalties; and

11 (vi) Complaints and hearings; and

12 (2) Adopt regulations that [are identical to regulations adopted by the
13 Director of the Office of Cemetery Oversight to:

14 (i) Implement item (1) of this subsection;

15 (ii) Ensure public health and safety; and

16 (iii) Meet the requirements of § 5–204(a)(3) of the Business
17 Regulation Article]:

18 (I) REQUIRE A REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR TO NOTIFY
19 THE AUTHORIZING AGENT IN WRITING AND BEFORE INITIATING NATURAL ORGANIC
20 REDUCTION THAT A PERSON WHO USES OR DISPOSES OF SOIL REMAINS IS IN
21 VIOLATION OF § 5–514 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE;

22 (II) REQUIRE A REDUCTION FACILITY TO MONITOR AND
23 RECORD WRITTEN VERIFICATION THAT THE TEMPERATURE DURING EACH
24 INSTANCE OF A NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION PROCESS ATTAINS A SPECIFIED
25 MINIMUM INTERNAL EQUIPMENT TEMPERATURE FOR A SPECIFIED MINIMUM
26 PERIOD OF TIME;

27 (III) ESTABLISH APPROPRIATE STANDARDS FOR TRAINING AND
28 EXPERIENCE FOR THE REGISTRATION OF REDUCTION OPERATORS;

29 (IV) PROHIBIT THE USE OF NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION IN
30 ANY INSTANCE IN WHICH THE HUMAN REMAINS ARE KNOWN, OR REASONABLY
31 SUSPECTED, TO BE EMBALMED OR TO HAVE AN INFECTION, DISEASE, OR
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
HOUSE BILL 698 29

1 BIOLOGICAL CONDITION THAT RENDERS THE PROCESS OF NATURAL ORGANIC
2 REDUCTION OR THE RESULTING SOIL REMAINS UNREASONABLY UNSAFE,
3 INCLUDING:

4 1. CREUTZFELDT–JAKOB DISEASE OR OTHER PRION
5 DISEASE;

6 2. EBOLA VIRUS INFECTION;

7 3. MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION;

8 4. THE PRESENCE OF DIAGNOSTIC OR THERAPEUTIC
9 RADIOISOTOPES; OR

10 5. ANY OTHER INFECTION, DISEASE, OR BIOLOGICAL
11 CONDITION IDENTIFIED BY THE BOARD BASED ON THE REASONABLE
12 RECOMMENDATION OF A FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL HEALTH AUTHORITY;

13 (V) ESTABLISH A MANDATORY CONTAMINATION TESTING
14 PROGRAM FOR REDUCTION FACILITIES TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF SOIL REMAINS
15 PRODUCED, INCLUDING THE FOLLOWING MINIMUM PROGRAM ELEMENTS:

16 1. COLLECTING ROUTINE MATERIAL SAMPLES FROM
17 SOIL REMAINS FOR ANALYSIS USING:

18 A. A RELIABLE SAMPLING METHODOLOGY; AND

19 B. AN APPROPRIATE FREQUENCY OF SAMPLING, AS
20 RECOMMENDED OR APPROVED BY THE U.S. COMPOSTING COUNCIL OR ANOTHER
21 RELIABLE SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY AUTHORITY;

22 2. RECORDING AND RETAINING THE RESULTS OF AN
23 ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES FROM THE SOIL REMAINS CONDUCTED BY AN INDEPENDENT
24 THIRD–PARTY LABORATORY TO IDENTIFY THE PRESENCE OF HEAVY METALS OR
25 MICROBIAL PATHOGENS ACCORDING TO THE APPROPRIATE CONTAMINATION
26 PARAMETERS FOR BIOSOLIDS SPECIFIED BY THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
27 PROTECTION AGENCY UNDER TITLE 40 C.F.R. PART 503, CHAPTER I,
28 SUBCHAPTER O;

29 3. CONDUCTING AN ANALYSIS FOR EACH PRODUCTION
30 OF SOIL REMAINS TO ENSURE THAT THE SOIL REMAINS CONTAIN LESS THAN 0.01
31 MG/KG DRY WEIGHT OF SPECIFIC PHYSICAL CONTAMINANTS, WHICH MAY INCLUDE
32 INTACT BONE, DENTAL FILLINGS, AND MEDICAL IMPLANTS;
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
30 HOUSE BILL 698

1 4. ENSURING THAT NO SOIL REMAINS ARE RELEASED
2 UNTIL THE SOIL REMAINS COMPLY WITH EACH OF THE APPLICABLE
3 CONTAMINATION TESTING PARAMETERS; AND

4 5. PERIODIC REPORTING OF TESTING RESULTS TO
5 APPROPRIATE STATE AND LOCAL HEALTH AUTHORITIES THAT HAVE REQUESTED
6 THE RESULTS; AND

7 (VI) ESTABLISH ANY OTHER REASONABLE PROHIBITION, RULE,
8 OR REQUIREMENT THE BOARD DETERMINES IS NECESSARY TO PROTECT THE
9 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY DURING THE PROCESS OF NATURAL ORGANIC
10 REDUCTION; AND

11 (3) ADOPT A CODE OF ETHICS FOR ENGAGING IN THE OPERATION OF
12 A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY.

13 7–206.

14 (a) There is a State Board of Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND
15 CREMATORIES Fund.

16 (b) (1) The Board may set reasonable fees for its services.

17 (2) The fees charged shall be set so as to approximate the cost of
18 maintaining the Board.

19 (3) Funds to cover the compensation and expenses of the Board members
20 shall be generated by fees set under this section.

21 (4) THE BOARD MAY NOT ASSESS A CREMATORY A PER–OCCURRENCE
22 CREMATION FEE.

23 (c) (1) The Board shall pay all funds collected under this title to the
24 Comptroller of the State.

25 (2) The Comptroller shall distribute the fees to the State Board of
26 Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND CREMATORIES Fund.

27 7–320.

28 (a) Except as provided in this section for an action against any health care
29 professional under § 7–316 of this subtitle, any person aggrieved by a final decision of the
30 Board in a contested case, as defined in the Administrative Procedure Act, may petition for
31 judicial review as allowed by the Administrative Procedure Act.
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
HOUSE BILL 698 31

1 (b) Any health care professional aggrieved by a final decision of the Board under
2 § 7–316 of this subtitle may not appeal to the Secretary but may take a direct judicial appeal
3 as provided in the Administrative Procedure Act.

4 [(c) If a person notes an appeal from an order of suspension or revocation by the
5 Board, the order is stayed.]

6 SUBTITLE 3A. REGISTRATION.

7 7–3A–01.

8 AN INDIVIDUAL SHALL REGISTER WITH THE BOARD BEFORE THE INDIVIDUAL
9 MAY ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY IN THE
10 STATE.

11 7–3A–02.

12 (A) IN ORDER TO REGISTER, AN APPLICANT SHALL MEET THE
13 REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

14 (B) THE APPLICANT MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD.

15 (C) THE APPLICANT MUST BE OF GOOD CHARACTER AND REPUTATION.

16 (D) THE APPLICANT MUST BE AFFILIATED WITH A CREMATORY OR
17 REDUCTION FACILITY OPERATED BY A REGISTRANT OR PERMIT HOLDER.

18 (E) THE CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY WITH WHICH THE
19 APPLICANT IS AFFILIATED MUST BE FINANCIALLY STABLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
20 7–3A–04 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

21 7–3A–03.

22 (A) AN APPLICANT SHALL REGISTER BY:

23 (1) SUBMITTING TO THE BOARD AN APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT
24 THE BOARD PROVIDES; AND

25 (2) PAYING A NONREFUNDABLE APPLICATION FEE SET BY THE
26 BOARD.

27 (B) THE APPLICATION SHALL STATE:
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
32 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (1) THE NAME, DATE OF BIRTH, AND RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS OF THE
2 APPLICANT;

3 (2) THE NAME AND FIXED ADDRESS OF THE AFFILIATED CREMATORY;

4 (3) WHETHER THE CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY WITH
5 WHICH THE APPLICANT IS AFFILIATED IS OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY A SOLE
6 PROPRIETOR, PARTNERSHIP, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, OR CORPORATION;

7 (4) IF THE APPLICANT IS DESIGNATED AS THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY,
8 THE NAME AND RESIDENTIAL ADDRESS OF EACH EMPLOYEE WHO SELLS BURIAL
9 SPACE, GOODS, OR SERVICES TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE BUSINESS WHILE ENGAGING
10 IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY; AND

11 (5) ANY OTHER REASONABLE INFORMATION THAT THE BOARD
12 DETERMINES IS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

13 7–3A–04.

14 (A) EACH APPLICANT DESIGNATED AS THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY SHALL
15 DEMONSTRATE THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OF THE BUSINESS WITH WHICH THE
16 APPLICANT IS AFFILIATED BY PROVIDING THE BOARD WITH A FINANCIAL
17 STATEMENT OR OTHER REPORTS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
18 SECTION WITH THE APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.

19 (B) IF THE BUSINESS IS CO–LOCATED AT A CEMETERY THAT SELLS BURIAL
20 GOODS AND IS AN EXISTING BUSINESS, THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT SHALL:

21 (1) BE ON THE FORM THAT THE BOARD REQUIRES;

22 (2) CONTAIN A STATEMENT BY A CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT
23 RETAINED BY THE BUSINESS, DETAILING THE ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF THE
24 CEMETERY FOR THE LAST FISCAL YEAR; AND

25 (3) CONTAIN A REVIEW BY THE CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT AS
26 TO THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OF THE CEMETERY.

27 (C) IF THE BUSINESS IS CO–LOCATED AT AN EXISTING CEMETERY THAT
28 DOES NOT SELL BURIAL GOODS OR AN EXISTING BURIAL GOODS BUSINESS NOT
29 AFFILIATED WITH A CEMETERY, THE APPLICANT SHALL:

30 (1) COMPLETE A FORM THAT THE BOARD REQUIRES; AND
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
HOUSE BILL 698 33

1 (2) SATISFY CRITERIA THAT THE BOARD ADOPTS UNDER
2 SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

3 (D) IF THE BUSINESS IS A NEW BUSINESS, THE APPLICANT SHALL:

4 (1) COMPLETE A FORM THAT THE BOARD REQUIRES; AND

5 (2) SATISFY CRITERIA THAT THE BOARD ADOPTS UNDER
6 SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

7 (E) (1) THE BOARD SHALL MAKE A DETERMINATION OF THE FINANCIAL
8 STABILITY OF EACH APPLICANT BASED ON CRITERIA THAT THE BOARD ADOPTS FOR
9 EACH CLASS OF BUSINESS.

10 (2) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT SEPARATE CRITERIA TO DETERMINE
11 THE FINANCIAL STABILITY OF APPLICANTS THAT ARE NEW BUSINESSES OR
12 EXISTING BUSINESSES.

13 (3) THE BOARD SHALL REQUIRE THAT ALL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
14 OF A NEW CEMETERY SUBMITTED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION BE
15 PREPARED BY A CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT RETAINED BY THE BUSINESS.

16 7–3A–05.

17 (A) THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE A REGISTRATION TO AN APPLICANT WHO
18 MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

19 (B) A REGISTRATION ISSUED BY THE BOARD UNDER THIS SUBTITLE MAY
20 NOT BE TRANSFERRED FROM ONE INDIVIDUAL TO ANOTHER.

21 7–3A–06.

22 (A) WHILE A REGISTRATION IS IN EFFECT, THE REGISTRATION AUTHORIZES
23 THE REGISTRANT TO ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION
24 FACILITY OR BURIAL GOODS BUSINESS.

25 (B) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT LIMIT THE RIGHT OF A PERSON TO PRACTICE
26 FUNERAL DIRECTION OR MORTUARY SCIENCE IF THE PERSON IS LICENSED OR
27 OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS TITLE.

28 7–3A–07.
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
34 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (A) UNLESS A REGISTRATION IS RENEWED AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION,
2 THE REGISTRATION EXPIRES ON THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF ITS EFFECTIVE
3 DATE.

4 (B) (1) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE A REGISTRATION EXPIRES, THE
5 BOARD SHALL MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMIT TO THE REGISTRANT:

6 (I) A RENEWAL APPLICATION FORM; AND

7 (II) A NOTICE THAT STATES:

8 1. THE DATE ON WHICH THE CURRENT REGISTRATION
9 EXPIRES; AND

10 2. THE AMOUNT OF THE RENEWAL FEE.

11 (2) IF AN ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
12 THIS SUBSECTION IS RETURNED TO THE BOARD AS UNDELIVERABLE, THE BOARD
13 SHALL MAIL TO THE REGISTRANT, AT THE LAST KNOWN ADDRESS OF THE
14 REGISTRANT, THE MATERIALS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
15 SUBSECTION WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE BOARD RECEIVED
16 THE NOTICE THAT THE ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION WAS UNDELIVERABLE.

17 (C) BEFORE A REGISTRATION EXPIRES, THE REGISTRANT PERIODICALLY
18 MAY RENEW IT FOR AN ADDITIONAL 2–YEAR TERM, IF THE REGISTRANT:

19 (1) IS OTHERWISE ENTITLED TO BE REGISTERED;

20 (2) MEETS THE QUALIFICATIONS SET FORTH FOR AN ORIGINAL
21 REGISTRATION;

22 (3) PAYS THE RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE BOARD; AND

23 (4) SUBMITS TO THE BOARD A RENEWAL APPLICATION ON THE FORM
24 THAT THE BOARD PROVIDES.

25 (D) THE BOARD SHALL RENEW THE REGISTRATION OF EACH REGISTRANT
26 WHO MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

27 7–3A–08.

28 WITHIN 1 WEEK AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE CHANGE, THE
29 APPLICANT DESIGNATED AS THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR THE REGISTERED
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
HOUSE BILL 698 35

1 RESPONSIBLE PARTY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD AN APPLICATION FORM THAT
2 SHOWS A CHANGE IN:

3 (1) THE CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY WITH WHICH A
4 REGISTRANT IS AFFILIATED;

5 (2) THE INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED AS THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY;

6 (3) THE EMPLOYEES OF THE BUSINESS WHO ENGAGE IN THE SALE OF
7 CREMATION SERVICES TO THE PUBLIC;

8 (4) THE OFFICERS, BOARDS, MEMBERS, OR AGENTS OF THE PERMIT
9 HOLDER; OR

10 (5) THE NAME OR ADDRESS OF THE REGISTRANT OR PERMIT HOLDER.

11 7–3A–09.

12 EACH REGISTRANT SHALL DISPLAY THE REGISTRATION CONSPICUOUSLY AT
13 THE BUSINESS ADDRESS OF THE REGISTRANT.

14 7–3A–10.

15 (A) SUBJECT TO THE HEARING PROVISIONS OF § 7–3A–12 OF THIS
16 SUBTITLE, THE BOARD MAY DENY A REGISTRATION TO AN APPLICANT, REPRIMAND
17 A PERSON SUBJECT TO THE REGISTRATION PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE, OR SUSPEND
18 OR REVOKE A REGISTRATION IF AN APPLICANT, A REGISTRANT, OR AN AGENT, AN
19 EMPLOYEE, AN OFFICER, A DIRECTOR, OR A PARTNER OF THE APPLICANT OR
20 REGISTRANT:

21 (1) FRAUDULENTLY OR DECEPTIVELY OBTAINS OR ATTEMPTS TO
22 OBTAIN A REGISTRATION;

23 (2) FRAUDULENTLY OR DECEPTIVELY USES A REGISTRATION;

24 (3) UNDER THE LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES OR OF ANY STATE, IS
25 CONVICTED OF:

26 (I) A FELONY; OR

27 (II) A MISDEMEANOR THAT IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE
28 FITNESS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE APPLICANT OR REGISTRANT TO OWN OR
29 OPERATE A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
36 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (4) FAILS TO PROVIDE OR MISREPRESENTS ANY INFORMATION
2 REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED UNDER THIS TITLE;

3 (5) VIOLATES THIS TITLE;

4 (6) VIOLATES THE CODE OF ETHICS ADOPTED BY THE BOARD;

5 (7) VIOLATES A REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;

6 (8) FAILS TO PROVIDE REASONABLE AND ADEQUATE SUPERVISION
7 OF THE OPERATION OF THE CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

8 (9) REFUSES TO ALLOW AN INSPECTION REQUIRED BY THIS TITLE;

9 (10) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH AN ORDER OF THE BOARD;

10 (11) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH ANY TERMS OF SETTLEMENT UNDER A
11 BINDING ARBITRATION AGREEMENT;

12 (12) IS FOUND GUILTY BY A COURT IN THE STATE OF VIOLATING AN
13 UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICES PROVISION UNDER TITLE 13
14 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; OR

15 (13) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH § 5–513 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
16 ARTICLE.

17 (B) (1) IF A PERSON IS CHARGED WITH A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE THAT
18 COULD RESULT IN SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A REGISTRATION, THE BOARD
19 MAY SEEK AN IMMEDIATE RESTRAINING ORDER IN A CIRCUIT COURT IN THE STATE
20 TO PROHIBIT THE PERSON FROM ENGAGING IN THE OPERATION OF ANY CREMATORY
21 OR REDUCTION FACILITY.

22 (2) THE RESTRAINING ORDER IS IN EFFECT UNTIL:

23 (I) THE COURT LIFTS THE ORDER; OR

24 (II) THE CHARGES ARE ADJUDICATED OR DISMISSED.

25 (C) IF A PERSON IS CHARGED WITH A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE THAT
26 COULD RESULT IN SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A REGISTRATION, THE BOARD
27 MAY PETITION A COURT TO:
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
HOUSE BILL 698 37

1 (1) APPOINT A RECEIVER OR TRUSTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE
2 ASSETS AND OPERATE THE BUSINESS OF THE PERSON IN THE EVENT THAT THE
3 REGISTRATION IS SUSPENDED OR REVOKED; AND

4 (2) TAKE ANY ACTIONS AS ARE APPROPRIATE TO PROTECT THE
5 PUBLIC INTEREST.

6 (D) INSTEAD OF OR IN ADDITION TO REPRIMANDING A PERSON, OR
7 SUSPENDING OR REVOKING A REGISTRATION, THE BOARD MAY IMPOSE A CIVIL
8 PENALTY:

9 (1) NOT TO EXCEED $5,000 FOR EACH VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE OR
10 AN ORDER OF THE BOARD UNDER THIS TITLE; AND

11 (2) NOT TO EXCEED $500 FOR EACH DAY A VIOLATION CONTINUES
12 PAST THE TIME SET FOR ITS CORRECTION.

13 (E) TO DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF THE PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THIS
14 SECTION, THE BOARD SHALL CONSIDER:

15 (1) THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE VIOLATION;

16 (2) THE HARM CAUSED BY THE VIOLATION;

17 (3) THE GOOD FAITH EFFORTS OF THE PERSON; AND

18 (4) ANY HISTORY OF PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS BY THE PERSON.

19 (F) ANY CIVIL PENALTIES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE PAID
20 INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

21 (G) THE BOARD SHALL CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING FACTS IN THE
22 GRANTING, DENIAL, RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF A REGISTRATION
23 OR THE REPRIMAND OF A REGISTRANT WHEN AN APPLICANT OR A REGISTRANT, OR
24 AN AGENT, AN EMPLOYEE, AN OFFICER, OR A PARTNER OF AN APPLICANT OR A
25 REGISTRANT, IS CONVICTED OF A FELONY OR MISDEMEANOR DESCRIBED IN
26 SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION:

27 (1) THE NATURE OF THE CRIME;

28 (2) THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE CRIME TO THE ACTIVITIES
29 AUTHORIZED BY THIS TITLE;
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
38 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (3) THE LENGTH OF TIME SINCE THE CONVICTION; AND

2 (4) THE BEHAVIOR AND ACTIVITIES OF THE APPLICANT OR
3 REGISTRANT, OR ANY AGENT, EMPLOYEE, OFFICER, BOARD, OR PARTNER OF AN
4 APPLICANT OR A REGISTRANT, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CONVICTION.

5 7–3A–11.

6 (A) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, THE BOARD OR THE
7 BOARD’S DESIGNEE SHALL COMMENCE PROCEEDINGS ON A COMPLAINT
8 REGARDING A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE MADE BY ANY PERSON TO THE BOARD.

9 (B) A COMPLAINT SHALL:

10 (1) BE IN WRITING;

11 (2) STATE SPECIFICALLY THE FACTS ON WHICH THE COMPLAINT IS
12 BASED; AND

13 (3) BE MADE UNDER OATH BY THE PERSON WHO SUBMITS THE
14 COMPLAINT.

15 (C) THE BOARD OR THE BOARD’S DESIGNEE SHALL REVIEW EACH
16 COMPLAINT AND SHALL ATTEMPT TO NEGOTIATE A SETTLEMENT OF THE
17 COMPLAINT BETWEEN THE COMPLAINANT AND THE REGISTRANT OR ANY OTHER
18 PERSON SUBJECT TO THE REGISTRATION PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

19 (D) IF THE BOARD OR THE BOARD’S DESIGNEE IS UNABLE TO NEGOTIATE A
20 SETTLEMENT OF THE COMPLAINT, THE BOARD MAY:

21 (1) AT THE REQUEST OF EITHER PARTY, REFER THE COMPLAINT TO
22 THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE
23 HEARINGS FOR BINDING ARBITRATION, IF BOTH PARTIES AGREE TO BINDING
24 ARBITRATION;

25 (2) INITIATE AN INVESTIGATION; OR

26 (3) DISMISS THE COMPLAINT.

27 (E) IF, AFTER INVESTIGATION, THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT THERE IS A
28 REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINARY
29 ACTION UNDER § 7–3A–10 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE THE
30 PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED NOTICE AND AN
31 OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING UNDER § 7–3A–12 OF THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
HOUSE BILL 698 39

1 (F) (1) IF, AFTER INVESTIGATION, THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT
2 THERE IS NOT A REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR
3 DISCIPLINARY ACTION, THE BOARD SHALL DISMISS THE COMPLAINT.

4 (2) ANY PARTY AGGRIEVED BY THE DISMISSAL MAY TAKE A JUDICIAL
5 APPEAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 10 OF THE STATE
6 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

7 (G) ONCE A COMPLAINT HAS BEEN REFERRED FOR BINDING ARBITRATION,
8 THE REGISTRANT OR ANY OTHER PERSON SUBJECT TO THE REGISTRATION OF THIS
9 TITLE SHALL COMPLY WITH THE TERMS OF THE SETTLEMENT.

10 (H) (1) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT GUIDELINES THAT ESTABLISH A
11 SCHEDULE FOR THE PROMPT AND TIMELY PROCESSING AND RESOLUTION OF EACH
12 COMPLAINT MADE TO THE BOARD REGARDING A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

13 (2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2028,
14 THE BOARD SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
15 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

16 (I) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS RESOLVED WITHIN THE
17 SCHEDULE ADOPTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

18 (II) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS BY THE TYPE OF
19 REGISTRANT OR EXEMPTION FROM THE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
20 TITLE;

21 (III) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS BY PERSONS SUBJECT TO,
22 BUT NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH, THE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE;

23 (IV) THE NATURE OF COMPLAINTS, INCLUDING WHETHER
24 COMPLAINTS ARE RELATED TO THE ILLEGAL RECYCLING OF GRAVES;

25 (V) THE TYPE OF PURCHASE, FOCUS OF DISSATISFACTION, AND
26 TYPE OF RESOLUTION FOR COMPLAINTS;

27 (VI) WHETHER COMPLAINTS REPORTED UNDER ITEM (I) OF
28 THIS PARAGRAPH WERE RESOLVED THROUGH NEGOTIATION, BINDING
29 ARBITRATION, OR ANOTHER METHOD; AND
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
40 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (VII) ANY DISCIPLINARY OR ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS TAKEN
2 AGAINST A REGISTRANT OR A PERSON SUBJECT TO, BUT NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH,
3 THE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.

4 (3) THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE ANNUAL REPORT
5 REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO EACH MEMBER OF THE
6 ADVISORY COUNCIL.

7 7–3A–12.

8 (A) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN § 10–226 OF THE STATE
9 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, BEFORE THE BOARD TAKES A FINAL ACTION UNDER THIS
10 SUBTITLE, THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION
11 IS CONTEMPLATED NOTICE OF THE BOARD’S PROPOSED ACTION AND THE
12 OPPORTUNITY TO REQUEST A HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD.

13 (2) A PERSON SHALL FILE A REQUEST FOR A HEARING NOT LATER
14 THAN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
15 THIS SUBSECTION IS MAILED.

16 (B) THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE AND CONDUCT THE HEARING IN
17 ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

18 (C) THE BOARD MAY ADMINISTER OATHS IN CONNECTION WITH A
19 PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SECTION.

20 (D) THE HEARING NOTICE PROVIDED TO THE PERSON UNDER SUBSECTION
21 (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL TO THE LAST KNOWN
22 ADDRESS OF THE PERSON AT LEAST 10 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING.

23 (E) IF A HEARING IS NOT REQUESTED WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD SPECIFIED
24 UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION OR IF THE PERSON FAILS TO APPEAR
25 FOR THE HEARING AFTER REQUESTING A HEARING, THE PROPOSED ACTION OF THE
26 BOARD SHALL BE AFFIRMED.

27 (F) THE PERSON MAY BE REPRESENTED AT THE HEARING BY COUNSEL.

28 (G) (1) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE SUBPOENAS IN CONNECTION WITH A
29 PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SECTION.

30 (2) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER
31 THIS SUBSECTION, ON PETITION OF THE BOARD, A CIRCUIT COURT MAY COMPEL
32 COMPLIANCE WITH THE SUBPOENA.
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
HOUSE BILL 698 41

1 (H) IF, AFTER A HEARING, THE PROPOSED ACTION BY THE BOARD IS
2 UPHELD, THE APPELLANT SHALL PAY THE HEARING COSTS, AS SPECIFIED BY THE
3 OFFICE IN ITS REGULATIONS.

4 SUBTITLE 3B. PERMITS AND STATEMENT FILINGS.

5 7–3B–01.

6 (A) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, A REGISTERED
7 CREMATORY OPERATOR OR REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR MAY ENGAGE IN
8 THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY AS A SOLE PROPRIETOR
9 OR THROUGH:

10 (1) A CORPORATION AS AN OFFICER, A BOARD, AN EMPLOYEE, OR AN
11 AGENT OF THE CORPORATION;

12 (2) A LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY AS A MEMBER, AN EMPLOYEE, OR
13 AN AGENT OF THE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY; OR

14 (3) A PARTNERSHIP AS A PARTNER, AN EMPLOYEE, OR AN AGENT OF
15 THE PARTNERSHIP.

16 (B) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE, A CORPORATION, LIMITED
17 LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP MAY ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A
18 CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY THROUGH A REGISTERED CREMATORY
19 OPERATOR OR REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR.

20 (C) (1) A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR WHO ENGAGES IN THE
21 OPERATION OF A CREMATORY THROUGH A CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY
22 COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP UNDER THIS TITLE IS SUBJECT TO ALL OF THE
23 PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE THAT RELATE TO ENGAGING IN THE OPERATION OF A
24 CREMATORY.

25 (2) A REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR WHO ENGAGES IN THE
26 OPERATION OF A REDUCTION FACILITY THROUGH A CORPORATION, LIMITED
27 LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP UNDER THIS TITLE IS SUBJECT TO ALL OF
28 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE THAT RELATE TO ENGAGING IN THE OPERATION OF
29 A REDUCTION FACILITY.

30 (D) (1) A CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, OR
31 PARTNERSHIP THAT ENGAGES IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION
32 FACILITY UNDER THIS TITLE IS NOT, BY ITS COMPLIANCE WITH THIS TITLE,
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
42 HOUSE BILL 698

1 RELIEVED OF ANY RESPONSIBILITY THAT THE CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY
2 COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP MAY HAVE FOR AN ACT OR AN OMISSION BY ITS
3 OFFICER, BOARD, MEMBER, PARTNER, EMPLOYEE, OR AGENT.

4 (2) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO ENGAGES IN THE OPERATION OF A
5 CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY THROUGH A CORPORATION, LIMITED
6 LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP IS NOT, BY REASON OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S
7 EMPLOYMENT OR OTHER RELATIONSHIP WITH THE CORPORATION, LIMITED
8 LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP, RELIEVED OF ANY INDIVIDUAL
9 RESPONSIBILITY THAT THE INDIVIDUAL MAY HAVE REGARDING THAT PRACTICE.

10 7–3B–02.

11 A CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP SHALL
12 OBTAIN A PERMIT ISSUED BY THE BOARD BEFORE THE CORPORATION, LIMITED
13 LIABILITY COMPANY, OR PARTNERSHIP MAY ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A
14 CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY IN THE STATE.

15 7–3B–03.

16 TO QUALIFY FOR A PERMIT, A CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY,
17 OR PARTNERSHIP SHALL:

18 (1) DESIGNATE A SEPARATE REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR
19 OR REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR AS THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY FOR THE
20 OPERATIONS OF EACH AFFILIATED CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

21 (2) PROVIDE THE NAME AND BUSINESS ADDRESS OF EACH
22 AFFILIATED CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

23 (3) PROVIDE A LIST OF THE OFFICERS, BOARDS, MEMBERS,
24 PARTNERS, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES OF THE ENTITY APPLYING FOR THE PERMIT;
25 AND

26 (4) COMPLY WITH §§ 7–3A–03(B)(4) AND 7–3A–04 OF THIS TITLE.

27 7–3B–04.

28 AN APPLICANT FOR A PERMIT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD:

29 (1) AN APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE BOARD PROVIDES;

30 (2) AN APPLICATION FEE AS SET BY THE BOARD; AND
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
HOUSE BILL 698 43

1 (3) DOCUMENTATION VERIFYING THE NUMBER OF SALES CONTRACTS
2 SUBJECT TO THE SALES CONTRACT FEE ENTERED INTO WITHIN THE BUSINESS’S
3 LAST 2 FISCAL YEARS.

4 7–3B–05.

5 (A) UNLESS A PERMIT IS RENEWED AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, THE
6 PERMIT EXPIRES ON THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF ITS EFFECTIVE DATE.

7 (B) (1) AT LEAST 90 DAYS BEFORE A PERMIT EXPIRES, THE BOARD SHALL
8 MAIL OR ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMIT TO THE PERMIT HOLDER:

9 (I) A RENEWAL APPLICATION FORM; AND

10 (II) A NOTICE THAT STATES:

11 1. THE DATE ON WHICH THE CURRENT PERMIT EXPIRES;
12 AND

13 2. THE AMOUNT OF THE RENEWAL FEE.

14 (2) IF AN ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
15 THIS SUBSECTION IS RETURNED TO THE BOARD AS UNDELIVERABLE, THE BOARD
16 SHALL MAIL TO THE PERMIT HOLDER, AT THE LAST KNOWN ADDRESS OF THE
17 PERMIT HOLDER, THE MATERIALS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
18 SUBSECTION WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE BOARD RECEIVED
19 THE NOTICE THAT THE ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION WAS UNDELIVERABLE.

20 (C) BEFORE A PERMIT EXPIRES, THE PERMIT HOLDER PERIODICALLY MAY
21 RENEW IT FOR AN ADDITIONAL 2–YEAR TERM, IF THE PERMIT HOLDER:

22 (1) IS OTHERWISE ENTITLED TO RECEIVE A PERMIT;

23 (2) MEETS THE QUALIFICATIONS SET FORTH FOR AN ORIGINAL
24 PERMIT;

25 (3) PAYS THE RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE BOARD; AND

26 (4) SUBMITS TO THE BOARD A RENEWAL APPLICATION ON THE FORM
27 THAT THE BOARD PROVIDES.

28 (D) THE BOARD SHALL RENEW THE PERMIT OF EACH PERMIT HOLDER WHO
29 MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
44 HOUSE BILL 698

1 7–3B–06.

2 EACH PERMIT HOLDER SHALL DISPLAY THE PERMIT CONSPICUOUSLY AT THE
3 BUSINESS ADDRESS OF THE PERMIT HOLDER.

4 7–3B–07.

5 (A) SUBJECT TO THE HEARING PROVISIONS OF § 7–3B–09 OF THIS
6 SUBTITLE, THE BOARD MAY DENY A PERMIT TO AN APPLICANT, REPRIMAND A
7 PERSON SUBJECT TO THE PERMIT PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE, OR SUSPEND OR
8 REVOKE A PERMIT IF AN APPLICANT, A PERMIT HOLDER, OR AN AGENT, AN
9 EMPLOYEE, AN OFFICER, A DIRECTOR, OR A PARTNER OF THE APPLICANT OR
10 PERMIT HOLDER:

11 (1) FRAUDULENTLY OR DECEPTIVELY OBTAINS OR ATTEMPTS TO
12 OBTAIN A PERMIT;

13 (2) FRAUDULENTLY OR DECEPTIVELY USES A PERMIT;

14 (3) UNDER THE LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES OR OF ANY STATE, IS
15 CONVICTED OF:

16 (I) A FELONY; OR

17 (II) A MISDEMEANOR THAT IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE
18 FITNESS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE APPLICANT OR PERMIT HOLDER TO OWN OR
19 OPERATE A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

20 (4) FAILS TO PROVIDE OR MISREPRESENTS ANY INFORMATION
21 REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED UNDER THIS TITLE;

22 (5) VIOLATES THIS TITLE;

23 (6) VIOLATES THE CODE OF ETHICS ADOPTED BY THE BOARD;

24 (7) VIOLATES A REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS TITLE;

25 (8) FAILS TO PROVIDE REASONABLE AND ADEQUATE SUPERVISION
26 OF THE OPERATION OF THE CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY;

27 (9) REFUSES TO ALLOW AN INSPECTION REQUIRED BY THIS TITLE;
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
HOUSE BILL 698 45

1 (10) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH AN ORDER OF THE BOARD;

2 (11) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH ANY TERMS OF SETTLEMENT UNDER A
3 BINDING ARBITRATION AGREEMENT;

4 (12) IS FOUND GUILTY BY A COURT IN THIS STATE OF VIOLATING AN
5 UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICES PROVISION UNDER TITLE 13
6 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; OR

7 (13) FAILS TO COMPLY WITH § 5–513 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
8 ARTICLE.

9 (B) (1) IF A PERSON IS CHARGED WITH A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE THAT
10 COULD RESULT IN SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT, THE BOARD MAY
11 SEEK AN IMMEDIATE RESTRAINING ORDER IN A CIRCUIT COURT IN THIS STATE TO
12 PROHIBIT THE PERSON FROM ENGAGING IN THE OPERATION OF ANY CREMATORY
13 OR REDUCTION FACILITY.

14 (2) THE RESTRAINING ORDER IS IN EFFECT UNTIL:

15 (I) THE COURT LIFTS THE ORDER; OR

16 (II) THE CHARGES ARE ADJUDICATED OR DISMISSED.

17 (C) IF A PERSON IS CHARGED WITH A VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE THAT
18 COULD RESULT IN SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT, THE BOARD MAY
19 PETITION A COURT TO:

20 (1) APPOINT A RECEIVER OR TRUSTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE
21 ASSETS AND OPERATE THE BUSINESS OF THE PERSON IN THE EVENT THAT THE
22 PERMIT IS SUSPENDED OR REVOKED; AND

23 (2) TAKE ANY ACTIONS AS ARE APPROPRIATE TO PROTECT THE
24 PUBLIC INTEREST.

25 (D) INSTEAD OF OR IN ADDITION TO REPRIMANDING A PERSON, OR
26 SUSPENDING OR REVOKING A PERMIT, THE BOARD MAY IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY:

27 (1) NOT TO EXCEED $5,000 FOR EACH VIOLATION OF THIS TITLE OR
28 AN ORDER OF THE BOARD UNDER THIS TITLE; AND

29 (2) NOT TO EXCEED $500 FOR EACH DAY A VIOLATION CONTINUES
30 PAST THE TIME SET FOR ITS CORRECTION.
END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
46 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (E) TO DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF THE PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THIS
2 SECTION, THE BOARD SHALL CONSIDER:

3 (1) THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE VIOLATION;

4 (2) THE HARM CAUSED BY THE VIOLATION;

5 (3) THE GOOD FAITH EFFORTS OF THE PERSON; AND

6 (4) ANY HISTORY OF PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS BY THE PERSON.

7 (F) ANY CIVIL PENALTIES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE PAID
8 INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

9 (G) THE BOARD SHALL CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING FACTS IN THE
10 GRANTING, DENIAL, RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT OR THE
11 REPRIMAND OF A PERMIT HOLDER WHEN AN APPLICANT OR A PERMIT HOLDER, OR
12 AN AGENT, AN EMPLOYEE, AN OFFICER, OR A PARTNER OF AN APPLICANT OR A
13 PERMIT HOLDER, IS CONVICTED OF A FELONY OR MISDEMEANOR DESCRIBED IN
14 SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION:

15 (1) THE NATURE OF THE CRIME;

16 (2) THE RELATIONSHIP OF THE CRIME TO THE ACTIVITIES
17 AUTHORIZED BY THIS TITLE;

18 (3) THE LENGTH OF TIME SINCE THE CONVICTION; AND

19 (4) THE BEHAVIOR AND ACTIVITIES OF THE APPLICANT OR PERMIT
20 HOLDER, OR ANY AGENT, EMPLOYEE, OFFICER, OR PARTNER OF AN APPLICANT OR
21 A PERMIT HOLDER, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CONVICTION.

22 7–3B–08.

23 (A) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, THE BOARD OR THE
24 BOARD’S DESIGNEE SHALL COMMENCE PROCEEDINGS ON A COMPLAINT
25 REGARDING A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE MADE BY ANY PERSON TO THE BOARD.

26 (B) A COMPLAINT SHALL:

27 (1) BE IN WRITING;
END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
HOUSE BILL 698 47

1 (2) STATE SPECIFICALLY THE FACTS ON WHICH THE COMPLAINT IS
2 BASED; AND

3 (3) BE MADE UNDER OATH BY THE PERSON WHO SUBMITS THE
4 COMPLAINT.

5 (C) THE BOARD OR THE BOARD’S DESIGNEE SHALL REVIEW EACH
6 COMPLAINT AND SHALL ATTEMPT TO NEGOTIATE A SETTLEMENT OF THE
7 COMPLAINT BETWEEN THE COMPLAINANT AND THE PERMIT HOLDER, OR ANY
8 OTHER PERSON SUBJECT TO THE PERMIT PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

9 (D) IF THE BOARD OR THE BOARD’S DESIGNEE IS UNABLE TO NEGOTIATE A
10 SETTLEMENT OF THE COMPLAINT, THE BOARD MAY:

11 (1) AT THE REQUEST OF EITHER PARTY, REFER THE COMPLAINT TO
12 THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE
13 HEARINGS FOR BINDING ARBITRATION, IF BOTH PARTIES AGREE TO BINDING
14 ARBITRATION;

15 (2) INITIATE AN INVESTIGATION; OR

16 (3) DISMISS THE COMPLAINT.

17 (E) IF, AFTER INVESTIGATION, THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT THERE IS A
18 REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINARY
19 ACTION UNDER § 7–3B–07 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE THE
20 PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION IS CONTEMPLATED NOTICE AND AN
21 OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING UNDER § 7–3B–09 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

22 (F) (1) IF, AFTER INVESTIGATION, THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT
23 THERE IS NOT A REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE THAT THERE ARE GROUNDS FOR
24 DISCIPLINARY ACTION, THE BOARD SHALL DISMISS THE COMPLAINT.

25 (2) ANY PARTY AGGRIEVED BY THE DISMISSAL MAY TAKE A JUDICIAL
26 APPEAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 10 OF THE STATE
27 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

28 (G) ONCE A COMPLAINT HAS BEEN REFERRED FOR BINDING ARBITRATION,
29 THE REGISTRANT, PERMIT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PERSON SUBJECT TO THE
30 REGISTRATION OR PERMIT PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE SHALL COMPLY WITH THE
31 TERMS OF THE SETTLEMENT.
END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
48 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (H) (1) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT GUIDELINES THAT ESTABLISH A
2 SCHEDULE FOR THE PROMPT AND TIMELY PROCESSING AND RESOLUTION OF EACH
3 COMPLAINT MADE TO THE BOARD REGARDING A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

4 (2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2028,
5 THE BOARD SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
6 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON:

7 (I) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS RESOLVED WITHIN THE
8 SCHEDULE ADOPTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

9 (II) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS BY THE TYPE OF PERMIT
10 HOLDER, OR EXEMPTION FROM THE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE;

11 (III) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS BY PERSONS SUBJECT TO,
12 BUT NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH, THE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE;

13 (IV) THE NATURE OF COMPLAINTS, INCLUDING WHETHER
14 COMPLAINTS ARE RELATED TO THE ILLEGAL RECYCLING OF GRAVES;

15 (V) THE TYPE OF PURCHASE, FOCUS OF DISSATISFACTION, AND
16 TYPE OF RESOLUTION FOR COMPLAINTS;

17 (VI) WHETHER COMPLAINTS REPORTED UNDER ITEM (I) OF
18 THIS PARAGRAPH WERE RESOLVED THROUGH NEGOTIATION, BINDING
19 ARBITRATION, OR ANOTHER METHOD; AND

20 (VII) ANY DISCIPLINARY OR ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS TAKEN
21 AGAINST A PERMIT HOLDER, OR A PERSON SUBJECT TO, BUT NOT IN COMPLIANCE
22 WITH, THE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.

23 (3) THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF THE ANNUAL REPORT
24 REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO EACH MEMBER OF THE
25 ADVISORY COUNCIL.

26 7–3B–09.

27 (A) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN § 10–226 OF THE STATE
28 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, BEFORE THE BOARD TAKES A FINAL ACTION UNDER THIS
29 SUBTITLE, THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE THE PERSON AGAINST WHOM THE ACTION
30 IS CONTEMPLATED NOTICE OF THE BOARD’S PROPOSED ACTION AND THE
31 OPPORTUNITY TO REQUEST A HEARING BEFORE THE BOARD.
END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
HOUSE BILL 698 49

1 (2) A PERSON SHALL FILE A REQUEST FOR A HEARING NOT LATER
2 THAN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
3 THIS SUBSECTION IS MAILED.

4 (B) THE BOARD SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE AND CONDUCT THE HEARING IN
5 ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

6 (C) THE BOARD MAY ADMINISTER OATHS IN CONNECTION WITH A
7 PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SECTION.

8 (D) THE HEARING NOTICE PROVIDED TO THE PERSON UNDER SUBSECTION
9 (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL TO THE LAST KNOWN
10 ADDRESS OF THE PERSON AT LEAST 10 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING.

11 (E) IF A HEARING IS NOT REQUESTED WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD SPECIFIED
12 UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION OR IF THE PERSON FAILS TO APPEAR
13 FOR THE HEARING AFTER REQUESTING A HEARING, THE PROPOSED ACTION OF THE
14 BOARD SHALL BE AFFIRMED.

15 (F) THE PERSON MAY BE REPRESENTED AT THE HEARING BY COUNSEL.

16 (G) (1) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE SUBPOENAS IN CONNECTION WITH A
17 PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SECTION.

18 (2) IF A PERSON FAILS TO COMPLY WITH A SUBPOENA ISSUED UNDER
19 THIS SUBSECTION, ON PETITION OF THE BOARD, A CIRCUIT COURT MAY COMPEL
20 COMPLIANCE WITH THE SUBPOENA.

21 (H) IF, AFTER A HEARING, THE PROPOSED ACTION BY THE BOARD IS
22 UPHELD, THE APPELLANT SHALL PAY THE HEARING COSTS, AS SPECIFIED BY THE
23 OFFICE IN ITS REGULATIONS.

24 7–405.

25 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

26 (2) “Beneficiary” means a person for whose benefit a pre–need contract is
27 purchased and who will receive the merchandise or services offered under the contract.

28 (3) “Buyer” means a person that purchases a pre–need contract.

29 (4) “Guaranteed contract” means a written pre–need contract that:
END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
50 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (i) Is signed by the consumer and a licensee of a licensed funeral
2 establishment, A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, OR A REGISTERED
3 REDUCTION OPERATOR; and

4 (ii) Guarantees in whole the price of goods and services and cash
5 advance items specified in the contract.

6 (5) “Guaranteed in part contract” means a written pre–need contract that:

7 (i) Is signed by the consumer and a licensee of a licensed funeral
8 establishment, A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, OR A REGISTERED
9 REDUCTION OPERATOR; and

10 (ii) Guarantees in part the price of goods and services and cash
11 advance items specified in the contract.

12 (6) “Nonguaranteed contract” means a written pre–need contract:

13 (i) That is signed by the consumer and a licensee of a licensed
14 funeral establishment, A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, OR A REGISTERED
15 REDUCTION OPERATOR;

16 (ii) That does not guarantee the price of any specific goods and
17 services or cash advance items; and

18 (iii) For which any funds or benefits paid under the contract are only
19 a deposit or partial payment to be applied toward the final cost, determined at the time of
20 death, of the goods, services, or cash advance items.

21 (7) “Seller” means a person who agrees to provide services or merchandise,
22 directly or indirectly, under a pre–need contract.

23 (8) “Trustee” means a person that has responsibility for making pre–need
24 arrangements in a manner that entitles the beneficiary to be eligible for benefits that
25 restrict assets.

26 (b) (1) Only a licensed mortician, a licensed funeral director, A REGISTERED
27 CREMATORY OPERATOR, A REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR, or a holder of a
28 surviving spouse license may offer or agree, directly or indirectly, to provide services or
29 merchandise under a pre–need contract.

30 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, a
31 licensed mortician or a licensed funeral director who is employed by a funeral
32 establishment may execute pre–need contracts on behalf of the funeral establishment with
33 which the mortician or funeral director is employed.
END OF PAGE 50

START OF PAGE 51
HOUSE BILL 698 51

1 (3) Any funeral establishment on whose behalf pre–need contracts are
2 executed under this subsection must comply with the requirements of this section.

3 (f) (1) A pre–need contract is not subject to the Retail Installment Sales Act.

4 (2) The making of a pre–need contract by a licensed mortician, a licensed
5 funeral director, A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, A REGISTERED REDUCTION
6 OPERATOR, or a holder of a surviving spouse license is not the practice of insurance
7 business.

8 (3) (i) A pre–need contract that is a guaranteed contract, a guaranteed
9 in part contract, or a nonguaranteed contract may be funded by a life insurance policy or
10 an annuity contract if:

11 1. The mortician, funeral director, licensed funeral
12 establishment, REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, REGISTERED REDUCTION
13 OPERATOR, or surviving spouse is not the owner of or beneficiary under the life insurance
14 policy or annuity contract;

15 2. An irrevocable assignment of benefits to the licensed
16 funeral establishment:

17 A. May be transferred at any time by the owner of the life
18 insurance policy or annuity contract to any other licensed funeral establishment; and

19 B. May not be transferred to the consumer; and

20 3. Any benefits payable under the life insurance policy or
21 annuity contract in excess of the amount necessary to pay the total price, as determined at
22 the time of death of the insured, of the services and merchandise agreed on in the pre–need
23 contract are paid to the beneficiary under the life insurance policy or annuity contract.

24 (ii) A pre–need contract that is funded by a life insurance policy or
25 an annuity contract shall terminate if the assignment of benefits to the mortician, funeral
26 director, REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, REGISTERED REDUCTION
27 OPERATOR, or surviving spouse is revoked by the owner of the life insurance policy or
28 annuity contract.

29 (iii) 1. The offer, sale, or assignment of a life insurance policy or
30 annuity contract to fund a pre–need contract is not subject to this section.

31 2. A pre–need contract funded by a life insurance policy or an
32 annuity contract is not subject to subsection (d) or (e) of this section.

33 7–409.
END OF PAGE 51

START OF PAGE 52
52 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all inspections of funeral
2 establishments shall be unannounced and may take place at any time without notice from
3 the Board.

4 (b) An unannounced inspection may include advance notice that an inspector may
5 be in the region of the funeral establishment for the purpose of conducting an inspection if:

6 (1) The advance notice is no more than 14 days prior to the inspection;

7 (2) No specific date or time is provided for the inspection; and

8 (3) The advance notice is provided solely to ensure that a licensed
9 mortician or funeral director will be on–site for the inspection.

10 (c) (1) This subsection applies to inspections conducted:

11 (i) In response to valid information provided to the Board resulting
12 in a complaint being opened by the Board concerning the preparation or body storage areas
13 of a licensed funeral establishment only if the Board has provided a copy of the complaint
14 to the licensed funeral establishment; or

15 (ii) Of a funeral establishment that the Board has placed on
16 probationary status in accordance with § 7–316(b) of this title.

17 (2) A trained staff member of the Board who is qualified to do inspections
18 may call the supervising mortician of a licensed funeral establishment, as designated under
19 § 7–310(e) of this title, and request immediate access to the preparation and body storage
20 areas of the funeral establishment.

21 (3) If a request is made under paragraph (2) of this subsection, the
22 supervising mortician immediately shall provide the staff member of the Board with the
23 location of the key or access code to the preparation or body storage areas of the funeral
24 establishment.

25 (4) An employee of a licensed funeral establishment is not required to
26 accompany a staff member of the Board while the staff member conducts an inspection of
27 a preparation or body storage area in accordance with this subsection.

28 (d) An unannounced inspection of a licensed funeral establishment shall be
29 conducted during the hours that the business of mortuary science is being conducted at the
30 licensed funeral establishment.

31 (e) Within 24 hours after the completion of an unannounced inspection of a
32 licensed funeral establishment, the Board shall provide the results of the inspection to:

33 (1) The holder of the funeral establishment license; or
END OF PAGE 52

START OF PAGE 53
HOUSE BILL 698 53

1 (2) The supervising mortician for the licensed funeral establishment, as
2 designated under § 7–310(e) of this title.

3 (F) THE BOARD SHALL EMPLOY AT LEAST TWO INSPECTORS TO PERFORM
4 INSPECTIONS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

5 7–409.1.

6 ON RECEIPT OF A WRITTEN COMPLAINT, OR AT THE DISCRETION OF THE
7 BOARD, THE BOARD OR THE BOARD’S DESIGNEE MAY CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION
8 AND AN INSPECTION OF THE RECORDS AND SITE OF A REGISTERED CREMATORY
9 OPERATOR OR REGISTERED REDUCTION OPERATOR OR ANY OTHER PERSON
10 SUBJECT TO THE REGISTRATION OR PERMIT PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

11 7–412.

12 (A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

13 (1) A CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT BY A PARTY TO THE PROCEEDINGS OF
14 THE BOARD WHO CLAIMS TO BE AGGRIEVED BY THE DECISION OF THE BOARD; OR

15 (2) ANY RECORD OR DOCUMENT THAT IS CONSIDERED BY THE BOARD
16 AND THAT OTHERWISE WOULD BE SUBJECT TO DISCOVERY AND INTRODUCTION
17 INTO EVIDENCE IN A CIVIL TRIAL.

18 (B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE
19 PROCEEDINGS, RECORDS, AND FILES OF THE BOARD ARE NOT DISCOVERABLE AND
20 ARE NOT ADMISSIBLE IN EVIDENCE IN ANY CIVIL ACTION.

21 (2) THE PROCEEDINGS, RECORDS, AND FILES OF THE BOARD ARE
22 CONFIDENTIAL AND ARE NOT DISCOVERABLE AND ARE NOT ADMISSIBLE IN
23 EVIDENCE IN ANY CIVIL ACTION ARISING OUT OF MATTERS THAT ARE BEING
24 REVIEWED AND EVALUATED BY THE BOARD IF REQUESTED BY THE FOLLOWING:

25 (I) THE DEPARTMENT TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
26 PROVISIONS OF § 19–319 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE;

27 (II) A HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION TO ENSURE
28 COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF TITLE 19, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE HEALTH –
29 GENERAL ARTICLE AND APPLICABLE REGULATIONS;
END OF PAGE 53

START OF PAGE 54
54 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (III) A HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION TO ENSURE
2 COMPLIANCE WITH THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE (NCQA)
3 CREDENTIALING REQUIREMENTS; OR

4 (IV) AN ACCREDITING ORGANIZATION TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE
5 WITH ACCREDITATION REQUIREMENTS OR THE PROCEDURES AND POLICIES OF THE
6 ACCREDITING ORGANIZATION.

7 (3) IF THE PROCEEDINGS, RECORDS, AND FILES OF THE BOARD ARE
8 REQUESTED BY ANY PERSON FROM ANY OF THE ENTITIES IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
9 SUBSECTION:

10 (I) THE PERSON SHALL GIVE THE BOARD NOTICE BY
11 CERTIFIED MAIL OF THE NATURE OF THE REQUEST AND THE BOARD SHALL BE
12 GRANTED A PROTECTIVE ORDER PREVENTING THE RELEASE OF ITS PROCEEDINGS,
13 RECORDS, AND FILES; AND

14 (II) THE ENTITIES LISTED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
15 SUBSECTION MAY NOT RELEASE ANY OF THE PROCEEDINGS, RECORDS, AND FILES
16 OF THE BOARD.

17 (C) (1) A PERSON SHALL HAVE THE IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY
18 DESCRIBED UNDER § 5–637 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE FOR ANY ACTION AS A
19 MEMBER OF THE BOARD OR FOR GIVING INFORMATION TO, PARTICIPATING IN, OR
20 CONTRIBUTING TO THE FUNCTION OF THE BOARD.

21 (2) A CONTRIBUTION TO THE FUNCTION OF THE BOARD INCLUDES
22 ANY STATEMENT BY ANY PERSON, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER IT IS A DIRECT
23 COMMUNICATION WITH THE BOARD, THAT IS MADE WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF THE
24 PERSON’S EMPLOYMENT OR IS MADE TO A PERSON WITH A PROFESSIONAL INTEREST
25 IN THE FUNCTIONS OF A MEDICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE AND IS INTENDED TO LEAD
26 TO REDRESS OF A MATTER WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THE BOARD’S FUNCTIONS.

27 7–501.

28 (A) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a person may not practice, attempt
29 to practice, offer to practice, or assist in the practice of mortuary science in this State unless
30 licensed by the Board.

31 (B) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS TITLE, AN INDIVIDUAL MAY
32 NOT ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY, ATTEMPT TO ENGAGE IN THE
33 OPERATION OF A CREMATORY, OR PROVIDE OR OFFER TO PROVIDE CREMATION
34 SERVICES UNLESS THE INDIVIDUAL IS AUTHORIZED AS A REGISTRANT.
END OF PAGE 54

START OF PAGE 55
HOUSE BILL 698 55

1 (C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS TITLE, AN INDIVIDUAL MAY
2 NOT ENGAGE IN THE OPERATION OF A REDUCTION FACILITY, ATTEMPT TO ENGAGE
3 IN THE OPERATION OF A REDUCTION FACILITY, OR PROVIDE OR OFFER TO PROVIDE
4 NATURAL ORGANIC REDUCTION UNLESS THE INDIVIDUAL IS A REGISTERED
5 REDUCTION OPERATOR.

6 7–501.1.

7 EXCEPT FOR A REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, OR A REGISTERED
8 REDUCTION OPERATOR WHO OPERATES A BUSINESS AS A SOLE PROPRIETOR OR A
9 REGISTRANT EMPLOYED BY A SOLE PROPRIETOR, A PERSON MAY NOT ENGAGE IN
10 THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY UNLESS:

11 (1) THE BUSINESS IS A CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY,
12 OR PARTNERSHIP; AND

13 (2) THE CORPORATION, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, OR
14 PARTNERSHIP HOLDS A PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS TITLE.

15 7–502.

16 (A) Unless authorized to practice mortuary science under this title, a person may
17 not represent to the public by title, by description of services, methods, or procedures, or
18 otherwise, that the person is authorized to practice mortuary science in this State.

19 (B) UNLESS A PERSON IS AUTHORIZED AS A REGISTRANT, A PERSON MAY
20 NOT REPRESENT TO THE PUBLIC, BY USE OF A TITLE, INCLUDING CREMATORY
21 OPERATOR, REGISTERED CREMATORY OPERATOR, REGISTERED REDUCTION
22 OPERATOR, OR REGISTERED SELLER, BY DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES, METHODS, OR
23 PROCEDURES, OR OTHERWISE, THAT THE PERSON IS AUTHORIZED TO ENGAGE IN
24 THE OPERATION OF A CREMATORY OR REDUCTION FACILITY.

25 7–701.

26 This title may be cited as the “Maryland Morticians [and], Funeral Directors, AND
27 CREMATORIES Act”.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

29 (a) Except as provided in this section, on October 1, 2026:

30 (1) the responsibility for regulating crematories and reduction facilities
31 currently in the Office of Cemetery Oversight shall be transferred to the State Board of
32 Morticians, Funeral Directors, and Crematories; and
END OF PAGE 55

START OF PAGE 56
56 HOUSE BILL 698

1 (2) all the functions, powers, duties, books, and records (including
2 electronic records) of the Office of Cemetery Oversight related to the regulation of
3 crematories and reduction facilities shall be transferred to the State Board of Morticians,
4 Funeral Directors, and Crematories.

5 (b) The Office of Cemetery Oversight shall retain jurisdiction over:

6 (1) complaints regarding crematories and reduction facilities filed with the
7 Office before the effective date of this Act until the complaint is closed or otherwise resolved;
8 and

9 (2) persons who are the subject of the complaints described in item (1) of
10 this subsection to the extent necessary to close or otherwise resolve the complaint.

11 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

12 (a) A person registered as a crematory operator or reduction operator or who
13 holds a permit to engage in the operation of a crematory or reduction facility issued by the
14 Office of Cemetery Oversight is considered for all purposes to be registered or a permit
15 holder for the duration of the term for which the registration or permit was issued and may
16 renew the authorization in accordance with the appropriate renewal provisions provided
17 under this Act.

18 (b) A person that was originally registered or issued a permit under a provision
19 of law that has been repealed by this Act as obsolete or inconsistent continues to meet the
20 requirements of the registration to the same extent as though that provision had not been
21 repealed.

22 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 56