START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 601

R5, L2 6lr0854

By: Montgomery County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Montgomery County – Stop Sign Monitoring Systems Pilot Program –
3 Gaithersburg and Rockville

4 MC 5–26

5 FOR the purpose of authorizing the use of stop sign monitoring systems in school zones in
6 the City of Gaithersburg and the City of Rockville under the pilot program
7 authorized for Prince George’s County, certain school zones in Baltimore City, and
8 the City of Takoma Park, if authorized by local law; and generally relating to the use
9 of stop sign monitoring systems in the City of Gaithersburg and the City of Rockville.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Transportation
12 Section 21–707
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Transportation
17 Section 21–707.1
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Transportation

23 21–707.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0601*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 601

1 (a) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
2 of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of the
3 intersection at a clearly marked stop line.

4 (b) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
5 of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of the
6 intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, before entering any crosswalk.

7 (c) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
8 of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of an
9 intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest point before entering the
10 intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic approaching on the intersecting roadway.

11 (d) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
12 for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop
13 line.

14 (e) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
15 for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly
16 marked stop line, before entering any crosswalk.

17 (f) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
18 for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no crosswalk,
19 at the nearest point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic
20 approaching on the intersecting roadway.

21 21–707.1.

22 (a) This section applies only in:

23 (1) Prince George’s County[, the];

24 (2) THE 45th and 46th Legislative Districts in Baltimore City[,];

25 (3) THE CITY OF GAITHERSBURG;

26 (4) THE CITY OF ROCKVILLE; and [the]

27 (5) THE City of Takoma Park.

28 (b) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

29 (2) “Agency” means a law enforcement agency that is authorized to issue a
30 citation for a violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local traffic laws or regulations.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 601 3

1 (3) (i) “Owner” means the registered owner of a motor vehicle or lessee
2 of a motor vehicle under a lease of 6 months or more.

3 (ii) “Owner” does not include:

4 1. A motor vehicle leasing company; or

5 2. A holder of a special registration plate issued under Title
6 13, Subtitle 9, Part III of this article.

7 (4) “Recorded image” means images recorded by a stop sign monitoring
8 system:

9 (i) On:

10 1. Two or more photographs;

11 2. Two or more microphotographs;

12 3. Two or more electronic images;

13 4. Videotape; or

14 5. Any other medium; and

15 (ii) Showing a motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of
16 tape, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.

17 (5) “Stop sign monitoring system” means a device designed to capture a
18 recorded image of a violation.

19 (6) (i) “Violation” means a failure to come to a complete stop at a stop
20 sign in violation of § 21–707 of this subtitle.

21 (ii) “Violation” does not include any action a driver is instructed to
22 take by a police officer.

23 (c) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) through (5) of this subsection, an agency may
24 use stop sign monitoring systems:

25 (i) On highways located in a school zone maintained by a local
26 jurisdiction, if authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction; or

27 (ii) On State highways located in a school zone, if authorized by the
28 State Highway Administration.

29 (2) A stop sign monitoring system:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 601

1 (i) May not be used in a local jurisdiction under this section unless
2 its use is authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction by local law enacted
3 after reasonable notice and a public hearing; and

4 (ii) In Prince George’s County, may only be used at a location
5 approved by the Prince George’s County Council.

6 (3) Prince George’s County shall prioritize the placement of stop sign
7 monitoring systems within municipalities that have high violation rates.

8 (4) Before beginning use of stop sign monitoring systems, an agency shall
9 publish notice that the agency has adopted the use of stop sign monitoring systems on its
10 website and, in Baltimore City and Prince George’s County only, in a newspaper of general
11 circulation in the jurisdiction in which the stop sign monitoring system will be used.

12 (5) (i) A local jurisdiction that implements a stop sign monitoring
13 system shall prominently place signs on highways within the local jurisdiction providing
14 notice that stop sign monitoring systems are used in the local jurisdiction.

15 (ii) The State Highway Administration shall place signs prominently
16 providing notice that stop sign monitoring systems are in use on State highways.

17 (d) A recorded image under this section indicating that the driver of a motor
18 vehicle has committed a violation shall include:

19 (1) The time and date of the violation; and

20 (2) To the extent possible, the location of the violation.

21 (e) (1) Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police
22 officer at the time of the violation, the owner or, in accordance with subsection (f)(3) or (h)(4)
23 or (5) of this section, the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if the motor
24 vehicle is recorded by a stop sign monitoring system during the commission of a violation.

25 (2) A civil penalty under this subsection may not exceed $40.

26 (3) For purposes of this section, the District Court shall prescribe:

27 (i) A uniform citation form consistent with subsection (f)(1) of this
28 section and § 7–302 of the Courts Article; and

29 (ii) A civil penalty, which shall be indicated on the citation, to be paid
30 by persons who choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 601 5

1 (f) (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (2) through (5) of this
2 subsection, an agency shall mail to the owner liable under subsection (e) of this section a
3 citation that shall include:

4 (i) The name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle;

5 (ii) The registration plate number of the motor vehicle involved in
6 the violation;

7 (iii) The violation charged;

8 (iv) To the extent possible, the location of the violation;

9 (v) The date and time of the violation;

10 (vi) A copy of the recorded image;

11 (vii) The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which
12 the civil penalty must be paid;

13 (viii) A signed statement by a technician employed by the agency that,
14 based on the inspection of the recorded image, the motor vehicle was being operated during
15 the commission of a violation;

16 (ix) A statement that the recorded image is evidence of a violation;
17 and

18 (x) Information advising the person alleged to be liable under this
19 section:

20 1. Of the manner and time in which liability as alleged in the
21 citation may be contested in the District Court; and

22 2. That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability
23 in a timely manner is an admission of liability and may result in refusal or suspension of
24 the motor vehicle registration.

25 (2) The agency may mail a warning notice in place of a citation to the owner
26 liable under subsection (e) of this section.

27 (3) (i) Before mailing a citation to a motor vehicle rental company liable
28 under subsection (e) of this section, an agency shall mail a notice to the motor vehicle rental
29 company stating that a citation will be mailed to the motor vehicle rental company unless,
30 within 45 days after receiving the notice, the motor vehicle rental company provides the
31 agency with:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 601

1 1. A statement made under oath that states the name and
2 last known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the motor vehicle when the
3 violation occurred;

4 2. A. A statement made under oath that states that the
5 motor vehicle rental company is unable to determine who was driving the vehicle at the
6 time the violation occurred because the motor vehicle was stolen at the time of the violation;
7 and

8 B. A copy of the police report associated with the motor
9 vehicle theft claimed under item A of this item; or

10 3. Payment for the penalty associated with the violation.

11 (ii) An agency may not mail a citation to a motor vehicle rental
12 company liable under subsection (e) of this section if the motor vehicle rental company
13 complies with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

14 (4) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection and subsection
15 (h)(4) and (5) of this section, a citation issued under this section shall be mailed not later
16 than 2 weeks after the alleged violation.

17 (5) A person who receives a citation under paragraph (1) of this subsection
18 may:

19 (i) Pay the civil penalty in accordance with instructions on the
20 citation; or

21 (ii) Elect to stand trial for the alleged violation.

22 (g) (1) A certificate alleging that a violation occurred, sworn to or affirmed by
23 a duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by or under contract with an agency,
24 based on the inspection of a recorded image, shall be evidence of the facts contained in the
25 certificate and shall be admissible in any proceeding concerning the alleged violation.

26 (2) Adjudication of liability shall be based on preponderance of the
27 evidence.

28 (h) (1) The District Court may consider in defense of a violation:

29 (i) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, that the motor vehicle
30 or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and
31 were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation;

32 (ii) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, evidence that the
33 person named in the citation was not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation; and
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 601 7

1 (iii) Any other issues and evidence that the District Court considers
2 pertinent.

3 (2) To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were
4 stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the
5 owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a police report about
6 the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed in a timely manner.

7 (3) To satisfy the evidentiary burden under paragraph (1)(ii) of this
8 subsection, the person named in the citation shall provide to the District Court evidence to
9 the satisfaction of the District Court of who was operating the vehicle at the time of the
10 violation, including, at a minimum, the operator’s name and current address.

11 (4) (i) The provisions of this paragraph apply only to a citation that
12 involves a Class E (truck) vehicle with a registered gross weight of 26,001 pounds or more,
13 Class F (tractor) vehicle, Class G (trailer) vehicle operated in combination with a Class F
14 (tractor) vehicle, or Class P (passenger bus) vehicle.

15 (ii) To satisfy the evidentiary burden under paragraph (1)(ii) of this
16 subsection, the person named in a citation described under subparagraph (i) of this
17 paragraph may provide to the District Court a letter, sworn to or affirmed by the person
18 and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, that:

19 1. States that the person named in the citation was not
20 operating the vehicle at the time of the violation; and

21 2. Provides the name, address, and driver’s license
22 identification number of the person who was operating the vehicle at the time of the
23 violation.

24 (5) (i) If the District Court finds that the person named in the citation
25 was not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation or receives evidence under
26 paragraph (4)(ii)2 of this subsection identifying the person driving the vehicle at the time
27 of the violation, the clerk of court shall provide to the agency issuing the citation a copy of
28 any evidence substantiating who was operating the vehicle at the time of the violation.

29 (ii) On receipt of substantiating evidence from the District Court
30 under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the agency may issue a citation as provided in
31 subsection (f) of this section to the person who the evidence indicates was operating the
32 vehicle at the time of the violation.

33 (iii) A citation issued under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall
34 be mailed not later than 2 weeks after receipt of the evidence from the District Court.

35 (i) If the civil penalty is not paid and the violation is not contested, the
36 Administration may refuse to register or reregister or may suspend the registration of the
37 motor vehicle.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 HOUSE BILL 601

1 (j) A violation for which a civil penalty is imposed under this section:

2 (1) Is not a moving violation for the purpose of assessing points under §
3 16–402 of this article and may not be recorded by the Administration on the driving record
4 of the owner or driver of the vehicle; and

5 (2) May not be considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance
6 coverage.

7 (k) (1) In consultation with law enforcement agencies, the Chief Judge of the
8 District Court shall adopt procedures for the issuance of citations, trials for violations, and
9 the collection of civil penalties imposed under this section.

10 (2) The standards and requirements for the use, processing, and disposal
11 of recorded images and associated data established under § 12–113.1 of this article apply
12 to citations issued under this section.

13 (l) (1) An agency or an agent or a contractor designated by the agency shall
14 administer and process civil citations issued under this section in coordination with the
15 District Court.

16 (2) If a contractor in any manner operates a stop sign monitoring system
17 or administers or processes citations generated by a stop sign monitoring system on behalf
18 of a local jurisdiction, the contractor’s fee may not be contingent on a per–ticket basis on
19 the number of citations issued or paid.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
21 2028, the City of Gaithersburg and the City of Rockville, respectively, shall each report to
22 the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the
23 General Assembly on:

24 (1) through October 1, 2028:

25 (i) the time period during which stop sign monitoring systems were
26 in use in the local jurisdiction; and

27 (ii) the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of
28 violations recorded by a stop sign monitoring system in the local jurisdiction over the
29 reported time period, by location and date;

30 (2) (i) the costs associated with implementing and operating stop sign
31 monitoring systems; and

32 (ii) the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations
33 recorded by stop sign monitoring systems;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
HOUSE BILL 601 9

1 (3) appropriate locations for the deployment of stop sign monitoring
2 systems;

3 (4) the performance and reliability of stop sign monitoring systems used by
4 the local jurisdiction; and

5 (5) the effectiveness of stop sign monitoring systems in reducing violations,
6 crashes, and pedestrian injuries in the local jurisdiction generally and in areas where the
7 stop sign monitoring systems were implemented and used.

8 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of June 30, 2029,
10 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
11 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 9