START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 676

O1 6lr0920
HB 801/25 – W&M CF 6lr0921

By: Delegates Spiegel, Cardin, Crutchfield, Fair, Foley, Hornberger, D. Jones,
Kaiser, Kaufman, Moreno, Palakovich Carr, Rogers, Schindler, Simmons,
Stinnett, Terrasa, Tomlinson, Vogel, Wims, Wolek, Woods, Woorman, and
Wu
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Financial Empowerment Center Network Pilot Program –
3 Establishment

4 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Financial Empowerment Center Network
5 Pilot Program within the Office of the Comptroller; and generally relating to the
6 Maryland Financial Empowerment Center Network Pilot Program.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Tax – General
9 Section 1–501 through 1–505 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 5. Maryland
10 Financial Empowerment Center Network Pilot Program”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Tax – General

16 SUBTITLE 5. MARYLAND FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT CENTER NETWORK PILOT
17 PROGRAM.

18 1–501.

19 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0676*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 676

1 (B) “CENTER” MEANS A FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT CENTER ESTABLISHED
2 UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

3 (C) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND FINANCIAL
4 EMPOWERMENT CENTER NETWORK PILOT PROGRAM.

5 1–502.

6 (A) THERE IS A MARYLAND FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT CENTER NETWORK
7 PILOT PROGRAM.

8 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO ESTABLISH A STATEWIDE
9 NETWORK OF FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT CENTERS IN DIFFERENT REGIONS OF THE
10 STATE.

11 (C) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE PILOT
12 PROGRAM.

13 1–503.

14 (A) (1) EACH CENTER SHALL PROVIDE ONE–ON–ONE FINANCIAL
15 COUNSELING AND COACHING SERVICES FREE OF CHARGE, INCLUDING
16 INFORMATION ON HOW TO:

17 (I) INCREASE SAVINGS;

18 (II) PAY DOWN DEBT;

19 (III) ACCESS BANKING; AND

20 (IV) IMPROVE CREDIT SCORES.

21 (2) EACH CENTER SHALL MAKE THE INFORMATION PROVIDED UNDER
22 THIS SUBSECTION AVAILABLE IN ENGLISH, SPANISH, AND ANY OTHER LANGUAGE
23 REQUIRED BY THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER.

24 (B) EACH FINANCIAL COUNSELOR EMPLOYED BY A CENTER SHALL
25 COMPLETE TRAINING THAT MEETS OR EXCEEDS THE FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT
26 CENTER COUNSELOR TRAINING STANDARDS DEVELOPED BY THE CITIES FOR
27 FINANCIAL EMPOWERMENT FUND.

28 1–504.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 676 3

1 FOR FISCAL YEARS 2028 AND 2029, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
2 ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION TO THE COMPTROLLER IN AN AMOUNT
3 SUFFICIENT TO COVER THE COSTS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

4 1–505.

5 THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
6 SUBTITLE.

7 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
8 October 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of September
9 30, 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
10 abrogated and of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 3