START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 629

M5 6lr1995
CF SB 429

By: Delegate A. Johnson
Introduced and read first time: January 30, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Energy Administration – Study on Land–Based Wind Energy

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Energy Administration to conduct a study on
4 the potential for land–based wind energy generation in the State and the siting of
5 land–based wind energy generating systems in the State; authorizing the
6 Administration to use available funds in the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment
7 Fund to conduct the study; and generally relating to a study on land–based wind
8 energy.

9 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
10 That:

11 (a) The Maryland Energy Administration shall conduct a study on land–based
12 wind energy generating systems in the State.

13 (b) The study shall include:

14 (1) the total potential for land–based wind energy generation in the State;

15 (2) a description of the locations used to determine the total potential for
16 land–based wind energy generation under item (1) of this subsection;

17 (3) information on locations in the United States where mitigation efforts
18 have been successfully employed to allow wind energy generating systems and military
19 radar technologies, including the Advanced Dynamic Aircraft Measurement System
20 (ADAMS), to operate successfully in the same area;

21 (4) a description of the successful mitigation efforts identified under item
22 (3) of this subsection, the effects of the mitigation efforts, and the potential for their use in
23 the State; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0629*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 629

1 (5) any other relevant matter, as determined by the Administration.

2 (c) The Administration may use available funds in the Strategic Energy
3 Investment Fund under § 9–20B–05 of the State Government Article to conduct the study
4 required under subsection (a) of this section.

5 (d) On or before December 1, 2026, the Administration shall report its findings
6 and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
7 Government Article, the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
8 and the House Environment and Transportation Committee.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
10 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2