START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 703

L2 6lr2766
CF SB 391

By: Dorchester County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Dorchester County – County Property Leases – Notice Exemptions

3 FOR the purpose of exempting a lease of county property for a certain duration and with a
4 certain rent made by Dorchester County from certain notice requirements; and
5 generally relating to notice requirements for leases of county property in Dorchester
6 County.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Local Government
9 Section 10–312(f)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Local Government

15 10–312.

16 (f) (1) Except as provided in [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of this
17 subsection, before the county makes any disposition, grant, or lease of county property, the
18 county shall publish notice of the disposition, grant, or lease once a week for 3 successive
19 weeks in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the county and shall include the
20 terms and the compensation to be received and give opportunity for objections.

21 (2) A county may grant an easement for a public utility without giving
22 notice under this subsection.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0703*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 703

1 (3) DORCHESTER COUNTY MAY ENTER INTO A LEASE OF COUNTY
2 PROPERTY WITHOUT GIVING NOTICE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IF THE LEASE HAS A
3 TERM OF 5 YEARS OR LESS AND AN ANNUAL RENT OF NOT GREATER THAN $750.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2