START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 715

C7, E2, D4 6lr0734
HB 1119/24 – APP & ECM CF 6lr0732

By: Delegate Rosenberg
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations and Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Algorithmic Addiction Fund – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Algorithmic Addiction Fund as a special, nonlapsing
4 fund; requiring interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; requiring
5 the Secretary of Health to develop certain goals, objectives, and indicators relating
6 to algorithmic addiction treatment and prevention efforts and to consult with certain
7 stakeholders on a certain basis to identify recommended appropriations from the
8 Fund; and generally relating to the Algorithmic Addiction Fund.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – State Finance and Procurement
11 Section 6–226(a)(2)(i) and (ii)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – State Finance and Procurement
16 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)212. and 213.
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – State Finance and Procurement
21 Section 6–226(a)(2)(iii)214. and 7–332
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – State Finance and Procurement

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0715*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 715

1 6–226.

2 (a) (2) (i) This paragraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024 through 2028.

3 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
4 inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
5 terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
6 State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
7 receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
8 Fund of the State.

9 (iii) The provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph do not
10 apply to the following funds:

11 212. the Department of Social and Economic Mobility Special
12 Fund; [and]

13 213. the Population Health Improvement Fund; AND

14 214. THE ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION FUND.

15 7–332.

16 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION
17 FUND.

18 (B) THERE IS AN ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION FUND.

19 (C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO RETAIN THE AMOUNT OF
20 SETTLEMENT REVENUES DEPOSITED TO THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH
21 SUBSECTION (F)(1) OF THIS SECTION.

22 (D) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHALL ADMINISTER THE
23 FUND.

24 (E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
25 SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

26 (2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
27 AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

28 (F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 715 3

1 (1) ALL CIVIL PENALTIES RECEIVED BY THE STATE FROM ANY
2 SOURCE RESULTING, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, FROM A JUDGMENT AGAINST OR
3 SETTLEMENT RELATING TO CLAIMS CONCERNING HARM TO CHILDREN FROM THE
4 USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA AND THE IMPROPER USE OF ALGORITHMS MADE OR
5 PROSECUTED BY THE STATE TO RECOVER DAMAGES FOR VIOLATIONS OF STATE
6 LAW;

7 (2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND; AND

8 (3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND.

9 (G) (1) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO PROVIDE FUNDS FOR:

10 (I) CONDUCTING A NEEDS ASSESSMENT THROUGHOUT THE
11 STATE TO DETERMINE WHERE RESOURCES ARE NEEDED AND BEST PRACTICES FOR
12 ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION PREVENTION, INTERVENTION, AND TREATMENT;

13 (II) IMPROVING AND STRENGTHENING ACCESS TO SERVICES
14 PROVEN TO TREAT THE MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH IMPACTS ASSOCIATED WITH
15 ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION, INCLUDING DEPRESSION, ANXIETY, EATING DISORDERS,
16 SUICIDE, AND SLEEP PROBLEMS;

17 (III) ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION INTERVENTION SERVICES;

18 (IV) ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION PREVENTION SERVICES,
19 INCLUDING THE ORGANIZATION OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL EDUCATION
20 CAMPAIGNS TO PREVENT ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION AND PROMOTE DIGITAL AND
21 MEDIA LITERACY, INCLUDING FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES;

22 (V) RESEARCH AND TRAINING FOR ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION
23 TREATMENT AND PREVENTION, AND SOCIAL MEDIA AND YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH,
24 INCLUDING FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES; AND

25 (VI) SUPPORTING AND EXPANDING OTHER EVIDENCE–BASED
26 INTERVENTIONS FOR ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION PREVENTION AND TREATMENT.

27 (2) AFTER SATISFYING THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF
28 THIS SUBSECTION, ANY UNSPENT FUNDS IN THE FUND MAY BE EXPENDED BY THE
29 MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH FOR YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.

30 (H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
31 IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 715

1 (2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
2 THE FUND.

3 (I) (1) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
4 ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

5 (2) FOR CIVIL PENALTIES RECEIVED BY THE STATE FROM ANY
6 SOURCE RESULTING, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, FROM A JUDGMENT AGAINST OR
7 SETTLEMENT RELATING TO CLAIMS CONCERNING HARM TO CHILDREN FROM THE
8 USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA AND THE IMPROPER USE OF ALGORITHMS:

9 (I) APPROPRIATIONS FROM THE FUND IN THE STATE BUDGET
10 SHALL BE MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
11 FUNDS TO THE STATE AND ITS POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS AS AGREED ON IN ANY
12 STATE–SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT, AS AMENDED; AND

13 (II) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH SHALL ESTABLISH AND
14 ADMINISTER A GRANT PROGRAM FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS TO POLITICAL
15 SUBDIVISIONS OF THE STATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY STATE–SUBDIVISION
16 AGREEMENT, AS AMENDED.

17 (3) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL IDENTIFY AND DESIGNATE THE
18 CONTROLLING VERSION OF AN AGREEMENT OR AMENDMENT DESCRIBED UNDER
19 PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

20 (J) (1) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PROGRAMS AND
21 SERVICES DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION IS SUPPLEMENTAL
22 TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT OTHERWISE
23 WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES.

24 (2) EXCEPT AS SPECIFIED IN SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION,
25 MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND MAY NOT BE USED FOR ADMINISTRATIVE
26 EXPENSES.

27 (K) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH SHALL:

28 (1) DEVELOP KEY GOALS, KEY OBJECTIVES, AND KEY PERFORMANCE
29 INDICATORS RELATING TO ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION TREATMENT AND
30 PREVENTION EFFORTS;

31 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (H)(2) OF THIS SECTION, AT LEAST
32 ONCE EACH YEAR, CONSULT WITH ALGORITHMIC ADDICTION TREATMENT AND
33 PREVENTION STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING CONSUMERS, PROVIDERS, FAMILIES,
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 715 5

1 AND ADVOCATES, TO IDENTIFY RECOMMENDED APPROPRIATIONS FROM THE FUND;
2 AND

3 (3) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, REPORT TO THE
4 GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
5 ARTICLE, ON:

6 (I) AN ACCOUNTING OF TOTAL FUNDS EXPENDED FROM THE
7 FUND IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR BY:

8 1. USE;

9 2. IF APPLICABLE, JURISDICTION; AND

10 3. BUDGET PROGRAM AND SUBDIVISION;

11 (II) THE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AND PROGRESS TOWARD
12 ACHIEVING THE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES DEVELOPED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS
13 SUBSECTION; AND

14 (III) THE RECOMMENDED APPROPRIATIONS FROM THE FUND
15 IDENTIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ITEM (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

17 (a) Section 1 of this Act shall take effect contingent on a judgment by a federal or
18 State court against or settlement with technology conglomerates, technology companies,
19 social media conglomerates, or social media companies relating to any claims made or
20 prosecuted by the State to recover damages for violations of State law.

21 (b) Within 5 days after a judgment or settlement described in subsection (a) of
22 this section is awarded or approved, the Attorney General shall notify the Department of
23 Legislative Services.

24 (c) Section 1 of this Act shall take effect on the date the notice is received by the
25 Department of Legislative Services in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.

26 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 2 of this
27 Act, this Act shall take effect June 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5