START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 701

M3 6lr2460
CF 6lr2675

By: Delegates Hill, Lehman, Terrasa, and Wu
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Department of the Environment – Water Resources – Protection of Vernal Pools
3 (Vernal Pool Wetlands Protection Act of 2026)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of the Environment to adopt regulations in
5 a certain manner to identify and protect certain vernal pools in the State; requiring
6 the Department, when issuing a certain permit, to protect certain vernal pools that
7 are located within the geographic area covered by the permit; and generally relating
8 to the regulatory protection of water resources and vernal pools in the State.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Environment
11 Section 5–205
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
15 Article – Environment
16 Section 5–901(a), (b), (f), and (m)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 Preamble

20 WHEREAS, Vernal pools are unique, small–scale ecosystems that contribute
21 significantly to the biodiversity of Maryland by providing habitat for species that cannot
22 reproduce in alternative habitats, including the wood frog, mole salamanders, and fairy
23 shrimp; and

24 WHEREAS, Vernal pools provide a significant amount of ecosystem services as they
25 occur frequently throughout Maryland and have the capacity to replenish groundwater and
26 filter stormwater flows; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0701*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 701

1 WHEREAS, Nontidal wetlands that meet the three federal wetland delineation
2 criteria of hydrology, hydric soils, and hydrophytic vegetation, including vernal pools that
3 satisfy those criteria, are regulated and protected by the State; and

4 WHEREAS, Vernal pools that do not meet all three federal wetland delineation
5 criteria are not afforded the regulatory protections applicable to nontidal wetlands in the
6 State and may suffer impairments or losses without regulatory review or approval; now,
7 therefore,

8 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
9 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

10 Article – Environment

11 5–205.

12 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
13 INDICATED.

14 (2) “AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
15 5–901 OF THIS TITLE.

16 (3) “FORESTRY ACTIVITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–901 OF
17 THIS TITLE.

18 (4) “NONTIDAL WETLAND” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–901 OF
19 THIS TITLE.

20 (5) “OBLIGATE SPECIES” MEANS AN ANIMAL SPECIES THAT DEPENDS
21 ON VERNAL POOLS AS A NECESSARY PART OF ITS LIFE CYCLE.

22 (6) “QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL” MEANS A CONFINED DEPRESSION
23 THAT:

24 (I) HAS SURFACE WATER FOR PART OF THE YEAR;

25 (II) PROVIDES A PERSISTENT OR BREEDING HABITAT FOR
26 OBLIGATE SPECIES, INCLUDING NATIVE AMPHIBIANS AND INVERTEBRATES; AND

27 (III) DOES NOT MEET THE CRITERIA FOR PROTECTION AS A
28 NONTIDAL WETLAND UNDER FEDERAL OR STATE LAW, INCLUDING THE FEDERAL
29 WETLAND DELINEATION CRITERIA OF HYDROLOGY, HYDRIC SOILS, AND
30 HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 701 3

1 (7) (I) “REGULATED ACTIVITY” MEANS ANY OF THE FOLLOWING
2 ACTIVITIES IN A QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL OR WITHIN A BUFFER AROUND A
3 QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL:

4 1. THE REMOVAL, EXCAVATION, OR DREDGING OF SOIL,
5 SAND, GRAVEL, MINERALS, ORGANIC MATTER, OR MATERIALS OF ANY KIND;

6 2. THE CHANGING OF EXISTING DRAINAGE
7 CHARACTERISTICS, SEDIMENTATION PATTERNS, FLOW PATTERNS, OR FLOOD
8 RETENTION CHARACTERISTICS;

9 3. THE DISTURBANCE OF THE WATER LEVEL OR WATER
10 TABLE BY DRAINAGE, IMPOUNDMENT, OR OTHER MEANS;

11 4. THE DUMPING, DISCHARGING OF MATERIAL, OR
12 FILLING WITH MATERIAL, INCLUDING THE DRIVING OF PILES AND PLACING OF
13 OBSTRUCTIONS;

14 5. THE GRADING OR REMOVAL OF MATERIAL THAT
15 WOULD ALTER EXISTING TOPOGRAPHY; AND

16 6. THE DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF PLANT LIFE
17 THAT WOULD ALTER THE CHARACTER OF A QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL.

18 (II) “REGULATED ACTIVITY” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN
19 AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY OR FORESTRY ACTIVITY AS DEFINED IN THIS SECTION.

20 (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO:

21 (1) ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN A LIST OF QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS
22 IN THE STATE;

23 (2) ESTABLISH PROTECTIONS RELATED TO THE PRESERVATION OF
24 QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS IN THE STATE;

25 (3) ESTABLISH PROTECTIONS FOR BUFFERS AROUND QUALIFIED
26 VERNAL POOLS IN THE STATE; AND

27 (4) REQUIRE THAT A PERSON CONDUCTING A REGULATED ACTIVITY
28 RESULTING IN IMPAIRMENTS OR LOSSES TO A QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL OR A
29 BUFFER AROUND A QUALIFIED VERNAL POOL:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 701

1 (I) AVOID IMPAIRMENTS AND LOSSES TO THE MAXIMUM
2 EXTENT PRACTICABLE;

3 (II) MINIMIZE IMPAIRMENTS AND LOSSES TO THE MAXIMUM
4 EXTENT PRACTICABLE WHERE AVOIDANCE IS NOT POSSIBLE; AND

5 (III) PROVIDE COMPENSATION OR OTHER MITIGATION AS
6 DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR ANY REMAINING UNAVOIDABLE
7 IMPAIRMENTS AND LOSSES.

8 (C) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION
9 SHALL APPLY ONLY TO QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS THAT HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED OR
10 DOCUMENTED BY:

11 (1) THE DEPARTMENT;

12 (2) A PERSON USING IDENTIFICATION METHODS APPROVED BY THE
13 DEPARTMENT, INCLUDING MAPPING OR OTHER SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION; OR

14 (3) A CERTIFIED WETLAND DELINEATOR DURING A SITE ASSESSMENT
15 CONDUCTED BEFORE THE ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT FOR A REGULATED ACTIVITY.

16 (D) (1) IN DEVELOPING THE REGULATIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
17 THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE:

18 (I) ENSURE THAT THE BUFFER SPECIFICATIONS FOR
19 QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS BE CONSISTENT WITH THE BUFFER SPECIFICATIONS FOR
20 NONTIDAL WETLANDS UNDER § 5–906 OF THIS TITLE; AND

21 (II) ENSURE THAT THE COMPENSATION AND MITIGATION
22 REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPAIRMENTS AND LOSSES WITHIN QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS
23 BE CONSISTENT WITH THE COMPENSATION AND MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
24 IMPAIRMENTS AND LOSSES WITHIN NONTIDAL WETLANDS UNDER §§ 5–909 AND
25 5–910 OF THIS TITLE.

26 (2) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
27 THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY:

28 (I) USE MAPPING OR OTHER SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION TO
29 IDENTIFY ADDITIONAL QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS FOR INCLUSION ON THE
30 DEPARTMENT’S LIST OF QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 701 5

1 (II) CONSULT WITH ANY STAKEHOLDER GROUP AS
2 APPROPRIATE, INCLUDING THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE
3 UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND.

4 (E) IN ISSUING A PERMIT FOR A REGULATED ACTIVITY, THE DEPARTMENT
5 SHALL PROVIDE PROTECTIONS FOR ANY QUALIFIED VERNAL POOLS THAT ARE:

6 (1) LISTED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
7 SUBSECTIONS (B) AND (C) OF THIS SECTION; AND

8 (2) LOCATED WITHIN THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA COVERED BY THE
9 PERMIT.

10 5–901.

11 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

12 (b) (1) “Agricultural activity” means aquaculture and farming activities.

13 (2) “Agricultural activity” includes:

14 (i) Plowing, tillage, cropping, seeding, cultivating, and harvesting
15 for the production of food and fiber products; and

16 (ii) The grazing of livestock.

17 (f) “Forestry activity” means planting, cultivating, thinning, harvesting, or any
18 other activity undertaken to use forest resources or to improve their quality or productivity.

19 (m) (1) “Nontidal wetland” means an area that is inundated or saturated by
20 surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
21 under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
22 life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.

23 (2) The determination of whether an area is a nontidal wetland shall be
24 made in accordance with the publication known as the “Federal Manual for Identifying and
25 Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands”, published in 1989 and as may be amended.

26 (3) “Nontidal wetlands” do not include tidal wetlands regulated under Title
27 16 of this article.

28 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
29 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5