START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 717

C7 6lr2051
CF 6lr2014

By: Delegate Edelson
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Ways and Means

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore City – Raffles – Organizations Affiliated With Professional Baseball
3 and Football Teams

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing certain organizations that are affiliated with a professional
5 National Football League team that plays its home games in Baltimore City to
6 conduct certain raffles, subject to certain limitations; repealing a certain termination
7 date of certain provisions of law authorizing certain organizations that are affiliated
8 with a professional Major League Baseball team that plays its home games in
9 Baltimore City to conduct certain raffles; and generally relating to raffles in
10 Baltimore City.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Criminal Law
13 Section 13–501, 13–503, and 13–505
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Criminal Law
18 Section 13–505.1
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 Chapter 372 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
23 Section 2

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Criminal Law

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0717*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 717

1 13–501.

2 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

3 (b) “Commissioner” means the Baltimore City Police Commissioner.

4 (c) “Designated city agency” means an agency designated by the Baltimore City
5 government.

6 (d) (1) “Electronic device” means a device that is capable of transmitting,
7 receiving, or recording messages, images, sounds, data, or other information by electronic
8 means or that, in appearance, purports to be a cell phone, computer, or other such device.

9 (2) “Electronic device” includes a cell phone or computer.

10 (3) “Electronic device” does not include a video lottery terminal as defined
11 under § 9–1A–01 of the State Government Article.

12 (e) “Gaming event” means a carnival, bazaar, or raffle.

13 (f) (1) “Geofence” means technology that establishes a virtual geographical
14 boundary.

15 (2) “Geofence” includes boundaries that are established or monitored
16 through the use of:

17 (i) global positioning technology;

18 (ii) cell tower connectivity;

19 (iii) cellular data;

20 (iv) radio frequency identification;

21 (v) wireless fidelity technology; or

22 (vi) any other form of location determination technology.

23 (g) “Raffle” means one or more drawings from a single series of chances sold.

24 13–503.

25 (a) This section does not apply to a raffle authorized under § 13–505.1 of this
26 subtitle.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 717 3

1 (b) Before an organization listed in subsection (c) of this section may operate a
2 gaming event, the organization shall obtain a permit from the commissioner.

3 (c) (1) An organization that meets the conditions of paragraph (2) of this
4 subsection may conduct a gaming event for the benefit of any of the following listed
5 organizations if the organization is a bona fide:

6 (i) religious organization;

7 (ii) fraternal organization;

8 (iii) civic organization;

9 (iv) veterans’ hospital;

10 (v) amateur athletic organization in which all playing members are
11 under the age of 18 years; or

12 (vi) charitable organization.

13 (2) An organization conducting a gaming event shall:

14 (i) be located in Baltimore City; and

15 (ii) spend a majority of the organization’s funds in Baltimore City
16 for:

17 1. fraternal purposes;

18 2. civic purposes;

19 3. purposes related to a veterans’ hospital;

20 4. purposes related to amateur athletics; or

21 5. charitable purposes.

22 (d) (1) Before the commissioner may issue a permit, the commissioner shall
23 review the character of the organization applying for the permit to ascertain that the
24 organization meets the requirements of §§ 13–503 through 13–505 of this subtitle.

25 (2) The commissioner shall make any application for a permit and the
26 action taken by the commissioner on that application a matter of public record.

27 (e) (1) The permit shall state that the gaming event shall be managed and
28 operated personally only by members of the organization obtaining the permit.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 717

1 (2) The permit is not transferable.

2 (f) An organization conducting a gaming event in Baltimore City may not allow
3 an individual or group of individuals to:

4 (1) benefit financially from the gaming event; or

5 (2) receive any of the proceeds of the gaming event for personal use or
6 benefit.

7 13–505.

8 (a) A permit holder may award prizes in merchandise and money in a raffle in
9 any amount.

10 (b) Except as provided in § 13–505.1(d)(1)(ii) of this subtitle, a permit holder may
11 not conduct more than 12 raffles in a calendar year.

12 13–505.1.

13 (a) A raffle may be conducted by an organization that:

14 (1) is located in Baltimore City;

15 (2) spends a majority of the organization’s funds in Baltimore City for:

16 (i) fraternal purposes;

17 (ii) civic purposes;

18 (iii) purposes related to a veterans’ hospital;

19 (iv) purposes related to amateur athletics; or

20 (v) charitable purposes; and

21 (3) is affiliated with:

22 (I) a professional Major League Baseball team that plays its home
23 games in Baltimore City; OR

24 (II) A PROFESSIONAL NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE TEAM
25 THAT PLAYS ITS HOME GAMES IN BALTIMORE CITY.

26 (b) (1) Before conducting a raffle, an organization shall obtain a written permit
27 from the designated city agency.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 717 5

1 (2) Before issuing a permit, the designated city agency shall ascertain the
2 character of the organization to determine if the permit should be issued.

3 (c) (1) A permit issued to an organization under this section may not be
4 transferred.

5 (2) The permit shall state that the raffle is required to be managed and
6 operated only by members of the organization obtaining the permit.

7 (d) (1) (i) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the designated city
8 agency may issue a single permit to an organization to hold raffles at multiple professional
9 Major League Baseball OR PROFESSIONAL NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE games
10 played in Baltimore City.

11 (ii) There is no limit on the number of raffles that an organization
12 may conduct in conjunction with professional Major League Baseball OR PROFESSIONAL
13 NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE games played in Baltimore City.

14 (2) A permit to hold raffles at multiple professional Major League Baseball
15 OR PROFESSIONAL NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE games played in Baltimore City
16 expires [at the end of the calendar year in] ONE YEAR AFTER THE DATE ON which the
17 permit is issued.

18 (e) An organization conducting a raffle may:

19 (1) set the price of raffle tickets; and

20 (2) award prizes in merchandise and money in any amount.

21 (f) An organization conducting a raffle may not allow an individual or group of
22 individuals to:

23 (1) benefit financially from the raffle; or

24 (2) receive any of the proceeds of the raffle for personal use or benefit.

25 (g) (1) A raffle ticket sold by an organization in conjunction with a professional
26 Major League Baseball OR PROFESSIONAL NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE game played
27 in Baltimore City:

28 (i) may only be sold using age–verification measures to ensure that
29 the buyer is at least 18 years old;

30 (ii) may be sold and received in–person or on an electronic device
31 only within the geographical boundaries described in paragraph (2) of this subsection; and
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 717

1 (iii) 1. WITH RESPECT TO A RAFFLE CONDUCTED BY AN
2 ORGANIZATION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3)(I) OF THIS SECTION, shall be
3 sold and received not earlier than 1 hour before the official start of the baseball game and
4 not later than the seventh inning of that baseball game; OR

5 2. WITH RESPECT TO A RAFFLE CONDUCTED BY AN
6 ORGANIZATION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3)(II) OF THIS SECTION, SHALL
7 BE SOLD AND RECEIVED NOT EARLIER THAN 4.5 HOURS BEFORE THE OFFICIAL
8 START OF THE FOOTBALL GAME AND NOT LATER THAN THE THIRD QUARTER OF
9 THAT FOOTBALL GAME.

10 (2) An organization conducting a raffle under this section:

11 (i) is not subject to § 12–108 of this article, provided that an
12 individual may not purchase more than $50 worth of tickets or make more than one credit
13 transaction each day; and

14 (ii) shall use a geofence to ensure that raffle tickets sold and received
15 on an electronic device are sold and received within an area in Baltimore City that is
16 bounded as follows:

17 1. WITH RESPECT TO A RAFFLE CONDUCTED BY AN
18 ORGANIZATION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3)(I) OF THIS SECTION DURING
19 A BASEBALL GAME, from the intersection of West Camden Street and South Howard
20 Street, south on South Howard Street to West Conway Street, west on West Conway Street
21 to South Eutaw Street, south on South Eutaw Street to West Lee Street, west on West Lee
22 Street to Russell Street, north on Russell Street to South Paca Street, northeast on South
23 Paca Street to West Camden Street, and east on West Camden Street to the intersection of
24 West Camden Street and South Howard Street; AND

25 2. WITH RESPECT TO A RAFFLE CONDUCTED BY AN
26 ORGANIZATION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3)(II) OF THIS SECTION
27 DURING A FOOTBALL GAME, FROM THE INTERSECTION OF WEST CAMDEN STREET
28 AND SOUTH HOWARD STREET, WEST ON WEST CAMDEN STREET TO WASHINGTON
29 BOULEVARD, SOUTHWEST ON WASHINGTON BOULEVARD TO WEST BARRE STREET,
30 SOUTH ON WEST BARRE STREET TO CARROLL STREET, NORTHEAST ON CARROLL
31 STREET TO SOUTH PACA STREET, SOUTH ON SOUTH PACA STREET TO WEST
32 OSTEND STREET, INCLUDING THE SOUTHERN BOUNDARY OF 701 WEST OSTEND
33 STREET, EAST ON THE SOUTHERN BOUNDARY OF 701 WEST OSTEND STREET TO
34 RIDGELY STREET, NORTH ON RIDGELY STREET TO THE INTERSECTION OF WEST
35 OSTEND STREET AND RIDGELY STREET, EAST ON WEST OSTEND STREET TO CAL
36 RIPKEN WAY, NORTH ON CAL RIPKEN WAY TO SOUTH HOWARD STREET, AND
37 NORTH ON SOUTH HOWARD STREET TO THE INTERSECTION OF SOUTH HOWARD
38 STREET AND WEST CAMDEN STREET.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 717 7

1 Chapter 372 of the Acts of 2025

2 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
3 1, 2025. [It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
4 30, 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
5 abrogated and of no further force and effect.]

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
7 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7