START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 726

R1 6lr2487
HB 263/25 – ENT

By: Delegates R. Long, Arentz, Baker, Chisholm, Ciliberti, Grammer, Griffith,
Hornberger, Hutchinson, Kipke, Miller, T. Morgan, Tomlinson, and
Valentine
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Transportation Authority – Francis Scott Key Memorial Bridge –
3 Naming

4 FOR the purpose of requiring that, on completion of a new bridge to replace the collapsed
5 Francis Scott Key Bridge, the Maryland Transportation Authority name the new
6 bridge the Francis Scott Key Memorial Bridge; and generally relating to the naming
7 of toll bridges.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Transportation
10 Section 4–408
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Transportation
15 Section 4–101(h)(1) and 6–209(c)(2)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Transportation

21 4–408.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0726*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 726

1 ON COMPLETION OF A NEW BRIDGE OVER THE PATAPSCO RIVER AS A
2 REPLACEMENT FOR THE COLLAPSED FRANCIS SCOTT KEY BRIDGE, THE
3 AUTHORITY SHALL NAME THE NEW BRIDGE THE FRANCIS SCOTT KEY MEMORIAL
4 BRIDGE.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
6 as follows:

7 Article – Transportation

8 4–101.

9 (h) “Transportation facilities project” includes:

10 (1) The Susquehanna River Bridge, the Harry W. Nice/Thomas “Mac”
11 Middleton Potomac River Bridge, the William Preston Lane, Jr. Memorial Chesapeake Bay
12 Bridge and parallel Chesapeake Bay Bridge, the Baltimore Harbor Tunnel, the Fort
13 McHenry Tunnel, the Francis Scott Key MEMORIAL Bridge, and the John F. Kennedy
14 Memorial Highway, together with their appurtenant causeways, approaches, interchanges,
15 entrance plazas, toll stations, and service facilities;

16 6–209.

17 (c) (2) An authorization issued under this section authorizes gaming on the
18 waters of the State only while the vessel:

19 (i) Is underway;

20 (ii) Is east of the Francis Scott Key MEMORIAL Bridge; and

21 (iii) Is operating under an itinerary that either originates or
22 terminates in a foreign port outside the continental United States.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

24 (a) Section 2 of this Act is contingent on completion of a new bridge over the
25 Patapsco River as a replacement for the collapsed Francis Scott Key Bridge.

26 (b) Within 5 days after the new bridge opens to vehicle traffic the Maryland
27 Transportation Authority shall notify the Department of Legislative Services.

28 (c) If notice of the opening of the new bridge is received by the Department of
29 Legislative Services on or before December 31, 2031, Section 2 of this Act shall take effect
30 on the date the notice is received by the Department of Legislative Services in accordance
31 with subsection (b) of this section.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 726 3

1 (d) If notice is not received by the Department of Legislative Services on or before
2 December 31, 2031, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
3 Assembly, shall be null and void.

4 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 3 of this
5 Act, this Act shall take effect October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3