START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 718

S1, P3, F2 6lr2510
CF 6lr2440

By: Delegate Stewart
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Information Technology – State and Higher Education E–Mail – Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of establishing that certain provisions of law governing information
4 technology plans apply to certain public institutions of higher education; establishing
5 a certain policy of the State relating to State and higher education employee e–mail
6 systems; requiring certain policies, plans, and standards to include certain
7 provisions relating to e–mail security; and generally relating to State e–mail
8 systems.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – State Finance and Procurement
11 Section 3.5–302(c) and 3.5–305
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – State Finance and Procurement

17 3.5–302.

18 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except as provided in subsection
19 (a) of this section and §§ 3.5–305, 3.5–307(a)(2), 3.5–308, and 3.5–309 of this subtitle, this
20 subtitle applies to all units of the Executive Branch of State government including public
21 institutions of higher education other than Morgan State University, the University
22 System of Maryland, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, and Baltimore City Community
23 College.

24 3.5–305.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0718*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 718

1 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
2 INDICATED.

3 (2) (I) “SPAM E–MAIL” MEANS UNSOLICITED, PHISHING,
4 SOLICITATION, AND BULK E–MAILS UNRELATED TO STATE BUSINESS.

5 (II) “SPAM E–MAIL” DOES NOT INCLUDE SOLICITATION AND
6 BULK E–MAILS RELATING TO STATE BUSINESS, INCLUDING BULK E–MAIL FROM
7 STATE VENDORS, PARTNERS, AND EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES.

8 (3) “STATE BUSINESS” MEANS THE FURTHERANCE OF THE STATE’S
9 OBLIGATIONS:

10 (I) UNDER THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, MARYLAND CODE,
11 AND CODE OF MARYLAND REGULATIONS;

12 (II) UNDER THE LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES; AND

13 (III) BY OPERATION OF CONTRACTS AND SIMILAR OBLIGATIONS.

14 (B) IT IS THE POLICY OF THE STATE THAT E–MAIL SYSTEMS AND
15 RESOURCES FOR STATE AND HIGHER EDUCATION EMPLOYEES ARE INTENDED TO
16 SUPPORT STATE BUSINESS AND MAY NOT SERVE AS A PUBLIC FORUM.

17 [(a)] (C) Except as provided in subsection [(b)] (D) of this section, in accordance
18 with guidelines established by the Secretary, each unit of State government shall develop
19 and submit to the Secretary:

20 (1) information technology policies and standards;

21 (2) an information technology plan; and

22 (3) an annual project plan outlining the status of efforts to make
23 information and services available to the public over the Internet.

24 [(b)] (D) (1) The governing boards of the public institutions of higher
25 education shall develop and submit information technology policies and standards and an
26 information technology plan for their respective institutions or systems to the Secretary.

27 (2) If the Secretary finds that the submissions required under this
28 subsection are consistent with the master plan, the Secretary shall incorporate those
29 submissions into the master plan.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 718 3

1 (3) If the Secretary finds that the submissions required under this
2 subsection are not consistent with the master plan:

3 (i) the Secretary shall return the submissions to the governing
4 boards; and

5 (ii) the governing boards shall revise the submissions as appropriate
6 and submit the revised policies, standards, and plans to the Secretary.

7 (E) (1) IN ORDER TO PROTECT THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
8 RESOURCES OF THE STATE, THE POLICIES, PLANS, AND STANDARDS REQUIRED
9 UNDER SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE PROVISIONS TO
10 PROTECT STATE AND HIGHER EDUCATION EMPLOYEE E–MAIL SERVICES FROM
11 SPAM E–MAIL AND OTHER USE THAT DOES NOT SUPPORT STATE BUSINESS,
12 INCLUDING BY IMPLEMENTING SYSTEMS THAT AUTOMATICALLY FILTER SPAM
13 E–MAIL FROM STATE AND HIGHER EDUCATION EMPLOYEES’ E–MAIL ACCOUNTS.

14 (2) THE POLICIES, PLANS, AND STANDARDS REQUIRED UNDER
15 SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION SHALL PERMIT INCIDENTAL PERSONAL
16 USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, INCLUDING E–MAIL, BY STATE EMPLOYEES
17 THAT:

18 (I) HAS A DE MINIMIS IMPACT ON RESOURCES; AND

19 (II) IS CONSISTENT WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED
20 PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS NORMS AND EXPECTATIONS.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3