START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 716

C3, C2 6lr2974
CF 6lr3304

By: Delegates Pippy, Bouchat, Ciliberti, Mangione, Miller, Rose, and Tomlinson
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Economic Matters

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Land Surveyors and Property Line Surveyors – Private Property Access –
3 Prohibition

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a land surveyor or a property line surveyor from conducting
5 a survey on private property during deer firearms hunting season except in certain
6 circumstances; and generally relating to land surveyors and property line surveyors.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
9 Section 15–101(a), (e), and (n)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY adding to
13 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
14 Section 15–610
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
19 Section 15–610
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

25 15–101.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0716*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 716

1 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (e) “Land surveyor” means an individual who practices land surveying.

3 (n) “Property line surveyor” means an individual who practices property line
4 surveying.

5 15–610.

6 DURING DEER FIREARMS HUNTING SEASON UNDER § 10–410 OF THE
7 NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE, A LAND SURVEYOR OR A PROPERTY LINE
8 SURVEYOR MAY NOT CONDUCT A SURVEY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT THE
9 WRITTEN PERMISSION OF THE PROPERTY OWNER.

10 [15–610.] 15–611.

11 (a) A person who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor
12 and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 6
13 months or both.

14 (b) (1) The Board may impose on a person who violates any provision of this
15 title a penalty not exceeding $5,000 for each violation.

16 (2) In setting the amount of the penalty, the Board shall consider:

17 (i) the seriousness of the violation;

18 (ii) the harm caused by the violation;

19 (iii) the good faith of the violator;

20 (iv) any history of previous violations by the violator; and

21 (v) any other relevant factors.

22 (3) The Board shall pay any penalty collected under this subsection into
23 the General Fund of the State.

24 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
25 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2