START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 708

G1, L3 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr0935
HB 680/25 – W&M

By: Delegates Grammer, Arikan, Chisholm, Fisher, M. Morgan, Nawrocki, and
Szeliga
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Municipal Elections – Voter Registration – List and Qualifications

3 FOR the purpose of requiring each municipality to require voter registration for its
4 elections; prohibiting an individual from becoming registered to vote in a municipal
5 election if the individual is not a citizen of the United States; and generally relating
6 to voter registration in municipal elections.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Election Law
9 Section 3–402
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Election Law
14 Section 3–403(a) and (g)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY adding to
18 Article – Local Government
19 Section 4–108.6
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
23 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

24 Article – Election Law

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0708*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 708

1 3–402.

2 This subtitle does not apply to a municipal corporation that:

3 (1) [does not require voter registration for its elections;

4 (2)] prior to January 1, 1990, used the voter registry supplied by the local
5 board as qualification for voting in municipal elections; or

6 [(3)] (2) provides for the local board to conduct municipal elections.

7 3–403.

8 (a) A voter residing in a municipal corporation is considered to be registered for
9 elections in that municipal corporation if the voter is included on the statewide voter
10 registration list at an address within the municipal corporation.

11 (g) This section may not be construed to prohibit a municipal corporation from
12 administering and maintaining a supplemental list of those individuals who are not on the
13 statewide voter registration list but who may otherwise be qualified to register to vote with
14 the municipal corporation.

15 Article – Local Government

16 4–108.6.

17 (A) EACH MUNICIPALITY SHALL REQUIRE VOTER REGISTRATION FOR ITS
18 ELECTIONS.

19 (B) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT BECOME REGISTERED TO VOTE IN A
20 MUNICIPAL ELECTION IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS NOT A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
22 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
23 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
24 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
25 enacted.
END OF PAGE 2