START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 714

J1 6lr0977
HB 373/25 – HGO

By: Delegates Grammer, Arikan, Chisholm, Fisher, M. Morgan, Nawrocki, and
Szeliga
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Health

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health – Abortion Data – Submission to the Centers for Disease Control and
3 Prevention

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to submit to the Centers
5 for Disease Control and Prevention any data regarding abortion requested by the
6 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, unless submitting the data would
7 violate federal or State law; and generally relating to the submission of abortion data
8 to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Health – General
11 Section 20–217 to be under the new part “Part V. Reporting Requirements”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health – General

17 20–215. RESERVED.

18 20–216. RESERVED.

19 PART V. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

20 20–217.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0714*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 714

1 (A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
2 DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
3 PREVENTION ANY DATA REGARDING ABORTION REQUESTED BY THE CENTERS FOR
4 DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

5 (B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REFUSE TO SUBMIT DATA REQUESTED UNDER
6 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IF SUBMITTING THE DATA WOULD BE IN
7 VIOLATION OF FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2