START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 702

C5, M5 6lr1982
CF SB 434

By: Delegates Korman, Wolek, and Woorman
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund – Uses – Cooperative Housing
3 Corporations and Condominiums
4 (Co–Op and Condo Energy Refund Equity Act)

5 FOR the purpose of altering the authorized uses of certain compliance fee revenue paid into
6 the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund; requiring certain funds in the
7 Fund be used in a certain manner in a certain fiscal year; and generally relating to
8 the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – State Government
11 Section 9–20B–05(i)(4)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – State Government

17 9–20B–05.

18 (i) (4) (i) 1. IN THIS PARAGRAPH THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE
19 THE MEANINGS INDICATED.

20 2. “CONDOMINIUM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
21 11–101 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0702*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 702

1 3. “COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION” HAS THE
2 MEANING STATED IN § 5–6B–01 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS
3 ARTICLE.

4 4. “RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION CUSTOMER” INCLUDES
5 A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AND AN OWNER OF A
6 CONDOMINIUM UNIT.

7 (II) Subject to subparagraphs [(ii), (iii), and (iv)] (III) THROUGH (VI)
8 of this paragraph, compliance fees paid under § 7–705 of the Public Utilities Article may be
9 used to provide grants to electric companies to be refunded or credited to each residential
10 distribution customer based on the customer’s consumption of electricity supply that is
11 subject to the renewable energy portfolio standard.

12 [(ii)] (III) [The] FOR A RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION CUSTOMER
13 OTHER THAN A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION OR A UNIT
14 OWNER OF A CONDOMINIUM, THE refunding or crediting of amounts to residential
15 distribution customers shall be identified on the customer’s bill as a line item identified as
16 a “legislative energy relief refund”.

17 (IV) FOR A MEMBER OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
18 CORPORATION OR A UNIT OWNER OF A CONDOMINIUM:

19 1. THE ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL ISSUE A REFUND OR
20 CREDIT TO THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION
21 OR THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE CONDOMINIUM; AND

22 2. THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COOPERATIVE
23 HOUSING CORPORATION OR THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE CONDOMINIUM
24 SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE REFUND OR CREDIT TO THE MEMBERS OF THE
25 COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION OR UNIT OWNERS OF THE CONDOMINIUM.

26 [(iii)] (V) An electric company awarded a grant under this
27 paragraph:

28 1. may not retain any of the grant funds to cover overhead
29 expenses; and

30 2. shall provide all of the grant funds to residential
31 distribution customers.

32 [(iv)] (VI) The process under subparagraphs [(i) and] (II), (III), AND
33 (IV) of this paragraph related to the refunding or crediting of amounts to residential
34 distribution customers shall be directed and overseen by the Commission.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 702 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

2 (a) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, from the alternative
3 compliance fees paid into the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Fund in accordance
4 with § 7–705 of the Public Utilities Article, a portion shall be used to provide grant awards
5 to electric companies, including electric cooperatives and municipal electric utilities, to be
6 refunded or credited to residential distribution customers for electric service in fiscal year
7 2027 in accordance with subsection (b) of this section if the customers:

8 (i) are members of cooperative housing corporations or unit owners
9 of condominiums; and

10 (ii) did not receive the refund or credit required under Section 11 of
11 Chapters 625 and 626 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025.

12 (2) The Governor may transfer by budget amendment the funds described
13 in paragraph (1) of this subsection to the Public Service Commission to be awarded to
14 electric companies, including electric cooperatives and municipal electric utilities.

15 (3) Refunds or credits made under this section shall be in addition to
16 refunds or credits made to members of cooperative housing corporations or unit owners of
17 condominiums in fiscal year 2027 under § 9–20B–05(i)(4) of the State Government Article,
18 as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

19 (b) The funds described in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be distributed:

20 (1) in accordance with § 9–20B–05(i)(4) of the State Government Article,
21 as enacted by Section 1 of this Act;

22 (2) in amounts per residential distribution customer calculated in the same
23 manner as a distribution would have been calculated in fiscal year 2026; and

24 (3) to distribution customers that are members of cooperative housing
25 corporations or unit owners of condominiums as follows:

26 (i) half of the amount granted under subsection (a)(1) of this section
27 to be refunded or credited during a peak summer month; and

28 (ii) half of the amount granted under subsection (a)(1) of this section
29 to be refunded or credited during a peak winter month.

30 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3