START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 706

P1, P3 6lr0798
CF 6lr2085

By: Delegates Moon, Bagnall, Bartlett, Korman, Valderrama, Wells, and Wilkins
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Finance – Delinquent Federal Funds
3 (Federal Obligations Enforcement Act)

4 FOR the purpose of reserving jurisdiction with respect to certain federal land in the State
5 under certain conditions; authorizing the Central Collection Unit of the Department
6 of Budget and Management to collect a certain amount of delinquent federal funds;
7 authorizing the Central Collection Unit, under a certain circumstance, to collect
8 certain federal funds owed to the State, place liens on federal property in the State,
9 and direct the Comptroller to withhold certain payments to the federal government;
10 authorizing the Board of Public Works, by a majority vote, to determine the federal
11 government to be delinquent in federal funds owed to the State under a certain
12 circumstance; requiring certain delinquent federal funds to be referred to the Central
13 Collection Unit; authorizing the Comptroller to withhold State payments to the
14 federal government for certain delinquent federal funds referred by the Central
15 Collection Unit; and generally relating to delinquent federal funds owed to the State.

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – General Provisions
18 Section 6–202
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY adding to
22 Article – General Provisions
23 Section 6–204
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
27 Article – State Finance and Procurement
28 Section 3–101, 3–206(a), (b), and (d), and 10–101

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0706*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 706

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

3 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
4 Article – State Finance and Procurement
5 Section 3–302(a)(1) and 3–304(a)
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

8 BY adding to
9 Article – State Finance and Procurement
10 Section 3–302(d) and 10–208
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY adding to
14 Article – State Government
15 Section 4–115
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
19 Article – State Government
20 Section 6–106.1(a)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – General Provisions

26 6–202.

27 Notwithstanding § 6–201(a) [or], § 6–203, OR § 6–204 of this subtitle, for the
28 purpose of enforcing the civil or criminal laws of the State, the Governor may enter into an
29 agreement with the United States to establish full or partial concurrent jurisdiction of the
30 State and the United States over any land in the State held by the United States.

31 6–204.

32 FOR FEDERAL FUNDS DETERMINED DELINQUENT UNDER § 10–208 OF THE
33 STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE STATE RESERVES
34 JURISDICTION WITH RESPECT TO LAND THAT THE UNITED STATES OR ANY UNIT OF
35 THE UNITED STATES LEASES OR OTHERWISE HOLDS IN THE STATE WHEN THE
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 706 3

1 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS FOUND NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH COURT DECISIONS
2 UPHOLDING FEDERAL CONGRESSIONALLY APPROVED SPENDING.

3 Article – State Finance and Procurement

4 3–101.

5 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (b) “Department” means the Department of Budget and Management.

7 (c) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Budget and Management.

8 3–206.

9 (a) The Attorney General is legal adviser to the Department.

10 (b) (1) With the advice of the Secretary, the Attorney General shall assign at
11 least 1 assistant Attorney General to the Central Collection Unit.

12 (2) At the request of the Governor, the Attorney General shall assign to the
13 Department:

14 (i) at least 1 assistant Attorney General; and

15 (ii) any other assistant Attorneys General authorized by law to be
16 assigned to the Department.

17 (d) Each assistant Attorney General who is assigned to the Central Collection
18 Unit shall devote full time to the duties with that Unit and may have no other duties.

19 3–302.

20 (a) (1) Except as otherwise provided in [subsection (b)] SUBSECTIONS (B)
21 AND (D) of this section, paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection, or in other law, the Central
22 Collection Unit is responsible for the collection of each delinquent account or other debt
23 that is owed to the State or any of its officials or units.

24 (D) THE CENTRAL COLLECTION UNIT MAY COLLECT DELINQUENT
25 FEDERAL FUNDS DETERMINED UNDER § 10–208 OF THIS ARTICLE IN AN AMOUNT UP
26 TO THE TOTAL OF DELINQUENT FEDERAL FUNDS OWED TO THE STATE.

27 3–304.

28 (a) In carrying out its responsibilities, the Central Collection Unit may:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 706

1 (1) (i) institute, in its name, any action that is available under State
2 law for collection of a debt or claim; or

3 (ii) without suit, settle the debt or claim;

4 (2) for all debts or claims collected on or after June 1, 1992:

5 (i) in addition to the outstanding principal and interest, assess and
6 collect from the debtor a fee, which may not exceed 20% of the outstanding principal and
7 interest, sufficient to cover all collection and administrative costs; and

8 (ii) prior to crediting any amount to any agency which refers a debt
9 for any purpose, withhold a fee sufficient to cover all collection and administrative costs;

10 (3) waive or reduce any fee assessed under paragraph (2) of this subsection;
11 [and]

12 (4) certify a debt or claim and the debtor responsible for the debt or claim
13 to:

14 (i) the Comptroller for income tax refund interception in accordance
15 with Title 13, Subtitle 9 of the Tax – General Article; and

16 (ii) the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency for State lottery
17 prize interception in accordance with § 3–307 of this subtitle; AND

18 (5) IF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS DETERMINES THE FEDERAL
19 GOVERNMENT TO BE DELINQUENT IN FEDERAL FUNDS OWED TO THE STATE UNDER
20 § 10–208 OF THIS ARTICLE, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ATTORNEY GENERAL:

21 (I) COLLECT FEDERAL FUNDS OWED TO THE STATE;

22 (II) PLACE LIENS ON FEDERAL PROPERTY IN THE STATE; AND

23 (III) DIRECT THE COMPTROLLER TO WITHHOLD PAYMENTS TO
24 THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AS PROVIDED UNDER § 4–115 OF THE STATE
25 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

26 10–101.

27 In this title, “Board” means the Board of Public Works.

28 10–208.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 706 5

1 (A) IF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT DOES NOT COMPLY WITH COURT
2 DECISIONS UPHOLDING CONGRESSIONALLY APPROVED SPENDING, THE BOARD MAY
3 DETERMINE, BY A MAJORITY VOTE, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO BE DELINQUENT
4 IN FEDERAL FUNDS OWED TO THE STATE.

5 (B) FEDERAL FUNDS DETERMINED DELINQUENT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
6 OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE REFERRED TO THE CENTRAL COLLECTION UNIT OF THE
7 DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT.

8 Article – State Government

9 4–115.

10 FOR DELINQUENT FEDERAL FUNDS REFERRED BY THE CENTRAL
11 COLLECTION UNIT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT UNDER §
12 3–304(A)(5)(III) OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, THE
13 COMPTROLLER MAY WITHHOLD STATE PAYMENTS TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.

14 6–106.1.

15 (a) The General Assembly finds that:

16 (1) the federal government’s action or failure to take action may pose a
17 threat to the health and welfare of the residents of the State; and

18 (2) the State should investigate and obtain relief from any arbitrary,
19 unlawful, or unconstitutional federal action or inaction and prevent such action or inaction
20 from harming the residents of the State.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
22 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
23 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other
24 provisions or any other application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid
25 provision or application, and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared
26 severable.

27 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5