START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 727

A2 6lr2970
CF SB 76

By: Delegates Rogers, Behler, Chang, Chisholm, Howard, D. Jones, Kipke,
Nkongolo, Pruski, Schmidt, and Simmons
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Government, Labor, and Elections

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class C (Veterans’ Organization)
3 Licenses – Membership

4 FOR the purpose of altering the membership criteria for a Class C (veterans’ organization)
5 alcoholic beverages license in Anne Arundel County to include certain members of
6 the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Public Health
7 Service; repealing a requirement that members of the veterans’ organization served
8 in a war; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Anne Arundel
9 County.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
12 Section 11–102 and 11–1009(a) and (c)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
17 Section 11–1009(b)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

23 11–102.

24 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0727*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 727

1 11–1009.

2 (a) There is a Class C (veterans’ organization) license.

3 (b) The Board shall issue the license for use by a local unit of a nationwide
4 nonprofit organization or club that:

5 (1) is composed only of members who served in the [armed forces of the
6 United States in a war in which the United States has been engaged] UNIFORMED
7 SERVICES;

8 (2) has a charter from a national veterans’ organization that was granted
9 before the application for the license was made;

10 (3) has a bona fide membership of at least 100 individuals and dues of at
11 least $5 per year per individual; and

12 (4) operates for its members and meets in a clubhouse principally used for
13 its members.

14 (c) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the license authorizes the
15 license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place described in the license for
16 on–premises consumption, including:

17 (i) during an event held on the licensed premises; and

18 (ii) to a member of the veterans’ organization or a guest of the
19 member.

20 (2) If the license holder hosts an event for an outside group, the outside
21 group shall obtain a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license from the Board.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2