START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 721

P1, F2, K3 6lr2448
CF SB 243

By: Delegates Patterson, Acevero, Allen, Arentz, Bagnall, Behler, Boafo, Buckel,
Cardin, Coley, Crutchfield, Fair, Fennell, Griffith, Hornberger, Howard,
Ivey, A. Johnson, S. Johnson, Kaufman, Lewis, J. Long, McComas, Miller,
T. Morgan, Odom, Pasteur, Pruski, Queen, Reilly, Roberson, Roberts,
Rogers, Rose, Schmidt, Simmons, Solomon, Spiegel, Stinnett, Taveras,
Toles, Turner, Wims, Wolek, and Woods
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Appropriations

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Uniformed Services Spouses Act

3 FOR the purpose of applying certain provisions of law regarding priority registration at
4 public institutions of higher education, resources and support at community colleges,
5 senatorial and Delegate scholarships, and preferences in hiring by the Public Service
6 Commission to the spouses of active service members and veterans; altering the
7 veterans to whom certain provisions of law regarding priority registration at public
8 institutions of higher education, resources and support at community colleges,
9 senatorial and Delegate scholarships, preferences in hiring by private employers,
10 and credits on selection tests for State personnel apply; and generally relating to
11 active service members, veterans, and the spouses of veterans and service members.

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Education
14 Section 15–124, 16–109, 18–405(d)(3), 18–406(g), and 18–501(b)(2)(iii)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
18 Article – Education
19 Section 18–401 and 18–501(a)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
23 Article – Labor and Employment

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0721*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 721

1 Section 3–714(a) and (b)
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2025 Replacement Volume)

4 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
5 Article – Public Utilities
6 Section 18–111(a) and (b)
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
11 Section 7–207(c)(1)(i), (2), and (3)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – State Personnel and Pensions
16 Section 7–207(c)(1)(iii)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Education

22 15–124.

23 (a) (1) In this section[, “eligible] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
24 MEANINGS INDICATED.

25 (2) “ELIGIBLE service member” means:

26 [(1)] (I) An active service member; and

27 [(2)] (II) A veteran who has received an [honorable] OTHER THAN
28 DISHONORABLE discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of service.

29 (3) “ELIGIBLE SPOUSE” MEANS THE SPOUSE OF AN ELIGIBLE
30 SERVICE MEMBER.

31 (b) Subject to subsection (c) of this section, a public institution of higher education
32 shall grant priority registration for courses to an eligible service member OR ELIGIBLE
33 SPOUSE.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 721 3

1 (c) The priority registration requirement under subsection (b) of this section:

2 (1) Applies only within 15 years after the eligible service member WHO
3 WOULD RECEIVE OR WHOSE ELIGIBLE SPOUSE WOULD RECEIVE PRIORITY
4 REGISTRATION was last on active duty; and

5 (2) Does not apply after an eligible service member’s OR ELIGIBLE
6 SPOUSE’S fourth academic year.

7 (d) Each public institution of higher education shall adopt policies necessary to
8 implement this section.

9 16–109.

10 Each community college shall:

11 (1) Ensure all student advisors are trained on the unique needs and
12 resources available for students who are [veterans]:

13 (I) VETERANS; OR

14 (II) SPOUSES OF VETERANS;

15 (2) Employ at least one employee who, as a component of the employee’s
16 job duties and responsibilities, provides comprehensive and intensive enrollment and
17 advising services to current and prospective students who are [veterans]:

18 (I) VETERANS; OR

19 (II) SPOUSES OF VETERANS; and

20 (3) Establish a veterans resource center on campus to:

21 (i) Provide access to federal and State veterans AND SPOUSES OF
22 VETERANS resources;

23 (ii) Serve as a quiet place for veterans AND SPOUSES OF VETERANS
24 to study;

25 (iii) Enable veterans AND SPOUSES OF VETERANS to connect to
26 other veterans AND SPOUSES OF VETERANS, helping them renew the bonds of service;
27 and

28 (iv) Be the central hub for all activities on campus related to veterans
29 AND SPOUSES OF VETERANS.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 HOUSE BILL 721

1 18–401.

2 There is a program of senatorial scholarships in this State that are awarded under
3 this subtitle.

4 18–405.

5 (d) Each Senator may award not more than 10% of the funds available under this
6 subtitle to applicants planning to attend accredited undergraduate, graduate, or
7 professional institutions outside the State, provided the applicant:

8 (3) Is an active service member OR THE SPOUSE OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE
9 MEMBER who is domiciled in this State.

10 18–406.

11 (g) A recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is an active service member OR
12 THE SPOUSE OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER and otherwise meets the conditions of
13 subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be domiciled in this State rather than eligible for
14 in–State tuition under this article.

15 18–501.

16 (a) There is a program of Delegate Scholarships in this State that are awarded
17 under this subtitle.

18 (b) A scholarship awarded under this subtitle may be used at:

19 (2) An accredited undergraduate, graduate, or professional institution
20 outside the State, if the applicant:

21 (iii) Is an active service member OR THE SPOUSE OF AN ACTIVE
22 SERVICE MEMBER who is domiciled in this State; and

23 Article – Labor and Employment

24 3–714.

25 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

26 (2) “Eligible veteran” means a veteran, as defined in § 9–901 of the State
27 Government Article, who has received an [honorable] OTHER THAN DISHONORABLE
28 discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of service, including:

29 (i) a reserve component;
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HOUSE BILL 721 5

1 (ii) the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service; and

2 (iii) the Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and
3 Atmospheric Administration.

4 (3) “Employer” includes a county or municipal corporation.

5 (b) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, an employer may grant a preference
6 in hiring and promotion to:

7 (1) an eligible veteran;

8 (2) the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service–connected disability;

9 (3) the spouse of an [eligible] active service member; or

10 (4) the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran.

11 Article – Public Utilities

12 18–111.

13 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (2) “ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
15 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

16 (3) “Eligible veteran” means a veteran [of any branch of the uniformed
17 services] who has received an [honorable] OTHER THAN DISHONORABLE discharge or a
18 certificate of satisfactory completion of service, including:

19 (i) a reserve component;

20 (ii) the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service; and

21 (iii) the Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and
22 Atmospheric Administration.

23 [(3)] (4) “Reserve component” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the
24 State Government Article.

25 [(4)] (5) “Veteran” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the State
26 Government Article.

27 (b) The Commission may grant a preference in hiring and promotion to:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 HOUSE BILL 721

1 (1) an eligible veteran;

2 (2) the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service–connected disability;
3 [or]

4 (3) THE SPOUSE OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER; OR

5 (4) the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran.

6 Article – State Personnel and Pensions

7 7–207.

8 (c) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
9 indicated.

10 (iii) “Eligible veteran” means a veteran who has received an
11 [honorable] OTHER THAN DISHONORABLE discharge or a certificate of satisfactory
12 completion of service, including:

13 1. a reserve component;

14 2. THE COMMISSIONED CORPS OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH
15 SERVICE; AND

16 3. THE COMMISSIONED CORPS OF THE NATIONAL
17 OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION.

18 (2) (i) An appointing authority shall apply a credit of 10 points on any
19 selection test for:

20 1. an eligible spouse;

21 2. an eligible veteran;

22 3. the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service
23 connected disability; or

24 4. the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran.

25 (ii) An appointing authority shall apply a credit of two additional
26 points on any selection test for a former prisoner of war.

27 (3) The following applicants are ineligible for a credit under this
28 subsection:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
HOUSE BILL 721 7

1 (i) a current State employee; and

2 (ii) an eligible veteran who is convicted of a crime after being
3 discharged from or completing military service.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7