START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 713

D2 6lr1719
CF 6lr1723

By: Cecil County Delegation
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Judiciary

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Cecil County – Orphans’ Court Judges – Compensation

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the salary of a judge of the Orphans’ Court for Cecil County
4 to be an amount determined by the County Council of Cecil County, but not less than
5 a certain minimum amount; establishing that the Chief Judge shall receive certain
6 additional compensation; specifying a certain annual allowance for travel expenses;
7 and generally relating to the Orphans’ Court for Cecil County.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Estates and Trusts
10 Section 2–108(i)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Estates and Trusts

16 2–108.

17 (i) (1) [Each] BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2027, EACH of the judges of the
18 Court for Cecil County shall receive an annual [compensation of:

19 (i) $5,500 for fiscal year 2015;

20 (ii) $6,500 for fiscal year 2016;

21 (iii) $7,500 for fiscal year 2017; and

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0713*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 713

1 (iv) $8,750 for fiscal year 2018 and each subsequent fiscal year]
2 SALARY AS DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL, BUT NOT LESS THAN $11,000.

3 (2) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2027, THE CHIEF JUDGE SHALL
4 RECEIVE ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION AS DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL,
5 BUT NOT LESS THAN $1,500 ANNUALLY.

6 [(2)] (3) Each judge shall also receive an allowance for traveling expenses
7 [of] AS DETERMINED BY THE COUNTY COUNCIL, BUT NOT LESS THAN $1,500 annually,
8 to be paid quarterly by the county.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in accordance with Article
10 III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to
11 the salary or compensation of the judges of the Orphans’ Court for Cecil County while
12 serving in a term of office beginning before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions
13 of this Act concerning the salary or compensation of the judges of the Orphans’ Court for
14 Cecil County shall take effect at the beginning of the next following term of office. This
15 limitation does not apply to an individual appointed or elected after the effective date of
16 this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

17 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2