START OF PAGE 1
HOUSE BILL 709

L2, P3 6lr1484
HB 1533/25 – ENT CF SB 404

By: Delegate Lewis (By Request – Baltimore City Administration) and Delegates
Addison, Edelson, Embry, Ruff, Stinnett, and Young
Introduced and read first time: February 2, 2026
Assigned to: Environment and Transportation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motor Vehicle Administration – Access to Digital Records – Baltimore City
3 Department of Housing and Community Development

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Motor Vehicle Administration to make a digital
5 photographic image or signature available to the Special Investigations Unit of the
6 Baltimore City Department of Housing and Community Development or its
7 successor; and generally relating to access to Motor Vehicle Administration records.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Transportation
10 Section 12–111
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Transportation

16 12–111.

17 (a) IN THIS SECTION, “CRIMINAL JUSTICE AGENCY” INCLUDES THE
18 SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS UNIT OF THE BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF
19 HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OR ITS SUCCESSOR.

20 (B) The Administration shall keep a record of each application or other document
21 filed with it and each certificate or other official document that it issues.

22 [(b)] (C) (1) Subject to § 4–320 of the General Provisions Article, and except

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *hb0709*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 HOUSE BILL 709

1 as otherwise provided by law, all records of the Administration are public records and open
2 to public inspection during office hours.

3 (2) Subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, the Administrator may
4 classify as confidential and not open to public inspection any record or record entry:

5 (i) That is over 5 years old; or

6 (ii) That relates to any happening that occurred over 5 years earlier.

7 (3) Subject to § 4–320 of the General Provisions Article, a record or record
8 entry of any age shall be open to inspection by authorized representatives of any federal,
9 State, or local governmental agency.

10 (4) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, the Administrator may not
11 open to public inspection any record or record entry that is:

12 (i) All or part of a licensed driver’s public driving record; and

13 (ii) Over 3 years old.

14 (5) Subject to paragraph (6) of this subsection, the Administration may not
15 permit public inspection of a digital photographic image or signature of an individual, or
16 the actual stored data thereof, recorded by the Administration.

17 (6) The Administration may make a digital photographic image or
18 signature of an individual, or the actual stored data thereof, recorded by the Administration
19 available to:

20 (i) The courts;

21 (ii) Criminal justice agencies;

22 (iii) Driver license authorities;

23 (iv) The individual;

24 (v) The individual’s attorney;

25 (vi) Third parties designated by the individual; and

26 (vii) The Child Support Administration.

27 [(c)] (D) Except for records required by law to be kept in their original or other
28 specified form, the Administrator may order any record of the Administration to be kept on
29 microfilm or in other microform, and the original destroyed.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HOUSE BILL 709 3

1 [(d)] (E) Except for records required by law to be kept longer, the Administrator
2 may destroy any record of the Administration that it has kept for 3 years or more and that
3 the Administrator considers obsolete and unnecessary to the work of the Administration.

4 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
5 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3