START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 42 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 42 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Reduction Facilities and Veterans Service Organizations - Hydrolyzed and Soil 
Remains - Immunity 
 
   
This bill expands existing immunity protections to encompass certain transfers of 
hydrolyzed and soil remains. More specifically, a licensed funeral establishment, 
registered reduction operator, or holder of a permit to engage in the business of a 
crematory who acts in good faith is not civilly liable for transferring the unclaimed 
cremains or hydrolyzed or soil remains of a veteran or an eligible dependent of a veteran 
to a veterans service organization for the purpose of disposition. Likewise, a veterans 
service organization that acts in good faith is not civilly liable for receiving the unclaimed 
cremains or hydrolyzed or soil remains of a veteran or an eligible dependent of a veteran 
for the purposes of specified disposition.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State operations and finances are not materially affected.     
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Requirements related to the final disposition of human bodies are 
established under the Health – General Article. Also, in Maryland, cremation is regulated 
either by the Office of Cemetery Oversight (OCO) within the Maryland Department of 
Labor (under the Business Regulation Article) or the State Board of Morticians and Funeral 
Directors within the Maryland Department of Health (under the Health Occupations 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 42/ Page 2 
Article), based on ownership of the crematory or reduction facility. Specifically, OCO and 
the board each regulate facilities in which their registrants/permit holders or licensees hold 
majority ownership. As part of their joint oversight of crematories and reduction facilities, 
OCO and the board must adopt identical regulations.     
 
Cremated, Hydrolyzed, and Soil Remains         
 
The Business Regulation and Health Occupations articles generally mirror each other with 
regard to cremated, hydrolyzed, and soil remains.  
 
In general, “cremation” means the disposition of a dead human body by means of 
incineration. A “crematory” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that 
houses the necessary appliances and facilities for cremation or alkaline hydrolysis. 
Cremains are the cremated remains following the process of cremation.  
 
“Hydrolyzed remains” means the bone fragments produced by the completion of alkaline 
hydrolysis. “Alkaline hydrolysis” means the process of reducing human remains using 
water, alkaline chemicals, and heat inside a watertight vessel to accelerate decomposition. 
 
“Soil remains” means the soil produced at final disposition of a dead human body at a 
reduction facility by completion of natural organic reduction. “Natural organic reduction” 
means 
the 
contained 
accelerated 
conversion 
of 
human 
remains 
into 
soil.  
“Reduction facility” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that houses the 
necessary appliances, containers, and facilities for performing natural organic reduction. 
 
Remains of Veterans 
 
A licensed funeral establishment or crematory in possession of cremated human remains 
or hydrolyzed remains that have been unclaimed for 90 days or more must provide 
identifying information of the unclaimed remains to a veterans service organization in 
order for the organization to determine if the unclaimed remains are those of a veteran or 
an eligible dependent. Within 45 days of receipt of the information, a veterans service 
organization must notify the licensed funeral establishment, crematory permit holder, or 
reduction facility whether the remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent and, 
if so, whether the veteran or eligible dependent is eligible for burial in a veterans’ cemetery. 
If the unclaimed remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent, the licensed 
funeral establishment or crematory may transfer the remains to a veterans service 
organization for the purpose of disposition of the cremains or hydrolyzed remains. 
 
Likewise, a reduction facility in possession of human remains that are being processed by 
natural organic reduction must provide identifying information to a veterans service 
organization within five business days after natural organic reduction is initiated to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 42/ Page 3 
determine if the soil remains are those of a veteran or eligible dependent. This requirement 
does not apply if an authorizing agent directs otherwise, or a reduction facility reasonably 
concludes based on the identifying information or other evidence that a decedent does not 
qualify for disposition benefits associated with veteran status. If the unclaimed soil remains 
are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent, the reduction facility may (1) transfer a 
portion of the soil remains – not exceeding 300 cubic inches in volume – to a veterans 
service organization that grants permission for the purpose of disposition and (2) if 
authorized by the cemetery owner, transfer the balance of soil remains to a cemetery or the 
owner of a woodland protected under Forest Conservation Act (FCA). 
 
If a veterans service organization does not take possession of unclaimed cremains, 
hydrolyzed remains, or soil remains that qualify for a plot in a State veterans’ cemetery 
within 10 days after the licensed funeral establishment, crematory permit holder, or 
reduction facility receives the required notification, the licensed funeral establishment, 
crematory permit holder, or reduction facility must (1) notify Department of Veterans and 
Military Families (DVMF) of the status of the cremains or hydrolyzed remains for the 
purpose of appropriate disposition and (2) transfer the cremains, hydrolyzed remains, or 
soil remains to DVMF for appropriate disposition. For unclaimed soil remains, if 
authorized by the cemetery or owner, the reduction facility must transfer the balance of the 
soil remains to a cemetery or the owner of a woodland protected under FCA.  
 
Civil Immunity  
 
A licensed funeral establishment or holder of a permit to engage in the business of a 
crematory who acts in good faith is not civilly liable for transferring the unclaimed 
cremated remains of a veteran or an eligible dependent of a veteran to a veterans service 
organization for the purposes of disposition.  
 
A veterans service organization that acts in good faith is also not civilly liable for receiving 
the unclaimed cremated remains of a veteran or eligible dependent of a veteran for the 
purposes of disposition.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 42/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4