START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 83 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 83 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
 
 
Health Occupations - Grounds for Discipline - Federal and Court Actions 
 
   
This bill makes consistent the grounds for discipline by specified health occupations boards 
such that a board may deny licensure to an applicant or discipline a licensee if the applicant 
or licensee is disciplined by (1) a court or disciplinary authority of any other state or 
country; (2) any branch of the uniformed services; or (3) the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs for an act that would be grounds for discipline under the board’s disciplinary 
statutes. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical and does not directly affect governmental 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The specified boards for which grounds for discipline are altered are the 
(1) Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, 
and Music Therapists; (2) Dental Examiners; (3) Dietetic Practice; (4) Examiners in 
Optometry; (5) Pharmacy; (6) Physical Therapy Examiners; (7) Physicians (and the allied 
health committees); (8) Podiatric Medical Examiners; (9) Professional Counselors and 
Therapists; (10) Examiners of Psychologists; (11) Social Work Examiners; and 
(12) Environmental Health Specialists. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 83/ Page 2 
Current Law:  “Uniformed Services,” as defined by 37 U.S.C. § 101, refers to the Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and Public Health Service (PHS). 
 
Chapters 259 and 260 of 2025 altered references to the military throughout the 
Health‑General Article, including disciplinary procedures under certain health occupations 
boards, to replace “military” with “uniformed services,” thereby explicitly incorporating 
violations that occur while an individual is serving in PHS or NOAA into existing 
disciplinary practices.  
 
Though there are some differences in the statutory language of health occupations boards, 
most boards may deny a certificate/license (credential), reprimand any credential holder, 
place any credential holder on probation, or suspend or revoke a credential if the applicant 
or credential holder is disciplined or convicted by any state or country or a court of any 
state or country. Some boards may also deny or suspend a credential from an individual 
who is disciplined or convicted by any branch of the uniformed services, or the  
United States Veterans’ Administration.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2