START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 96

J1 6lr0728
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: August 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant Program for
3 Service Members and Veterans – Terminology – Active Service Members

4 FOR the purpose of altering certain terminology used in the Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral
5 Health Services Matching Grant Program for Service Members and Veterans that
6 refers to active service members to refer to service members; and generally relating
7 to the Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant Program for
8 Service Members and Veterans.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Health – General
11 Section 7.5–210(a), (b), and (e)(1)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health – General

17 7.5–210.

18 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (2) “Eligible individual” means:

20 (i) [An active] A service member;

21 (ii) A veteran;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0096*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 96

1 (iii) The spouse of [an active] A service member or veteran;

2 (iv) A child of [an active] A service member or veteran; or

3 (v) A stepchild of [an active] A service member or veteran.

4 (3) “Program” means the Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services
5 Matching Grant Program for Service Members and Veterans.

6 (b) (1) There is a Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant
7 Program for Service Members and Veterans.

8 (2) The purpose of the Program is to provide funds to local nonprofit
9 organizations to establish and expand community behavioral health programs to serve
10 [active] service members, veterans, and their families.

11 (e) (1) To be eligible for a grant from the Program, a nonprofit organization
12 must have a mission to:

13 (i) Provide behavioral health services; or

14 (ii) Provide services to [active] service members, veterans, or their
15 families.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
17 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2