START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 78

J1 6lr1485
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Ellis
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Health – Prostate–Specific Antigen Testing
3 (Protect Our Prostate Act)

4 FOR the purpose of requiring certain providers and laboratories to provide certain written
5 information to patients receiving prostate–specific antigen testing; requiring clinical
6 laboratories that administer prostate–specific antigen tests to follow certain
7 disclosure requirements, use standard calibration for testing assays and report test
8 results in a standard manner, make certain disclosures to ordering providers, and
9 follow guidelines from certain organizations; and generally relating to
10 prostate–specific antigen testing.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Health – General
13 Section 17–801 through 17–803 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 8.
14 Prostate–Specific Antigen Testing”
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 Preamble

18 WHEREAS, Prostate–specific antigen testing, while an important tool for the early
19 detection of prostate cancer, is not a definitive diagnostic tool and can produce misleading
20 results that could lead to invasive biopsies or overtreatment; and

21 WHEREAS, Patients undergoing prostate–specific antigen testing should be
22 adequately informed of the potential costs associated with the testing and the implications
23 surrounding false–positive results; now, therefore,

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0078*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 78

1 Article – Health – General

2 SUBTITLE 8. PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN TESTING.

3 17–801.

4 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANING
5 INDICATED.

6 (B) “CLINICAL LABORATORY” MEANS A FACILITY IN WHICH LABORATORY
7 TESTING IS PERFORMED ON HUMAN SPECIMENS FOR DIAGNOSIS, PREVENTION, OR
8 TREATMENT OF DISEASE.

9 (C) “PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN TEST” MEANS A LABORATORY BLOOD
10 TEST THAT MEASURES THE CONCENTRATION OF PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN FOR
11 USE IN DIAGNOSING A PROSTATE DISORDER.

12 17–802.

13 (A) IF A PROVIDER ORDERS A PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN TEST FOR A
14 PATIENT DURING A PATIENT ENCOUNTER, THE PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN
15 INFORMATION TO THE PATIENT RELATING TO THE NECESSARY PREPARATION FOR
16 ENSURING ACCURATE TEST RESULTS.

17 (B) IF A CLINICAL LABORATORY OFFERS PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN
18 TESTING WITHOUT A PROVIDER ORDER FROM A PATIENT ENCOUNTER, THE
19 LABORATORY IN WHICH BLOOD IS DRAWN FOR THE TEST SHALL PROVIDE WRITTEN
20 INFORMATION TO THE PATIENT RELATING TO THE NECESSARY PREPARATION FOR
21 ENSURING ACCURATE TEST RESULTS THAT SHALL ALSO BE MADE:

22 (1) NOT LATER THAN 3 DAYS BEFORE A SCHEDULED APPOINTMENT;
23 AND

24 (2) AVAILABLE THROUGH IN–PERSON EDUCATION.

25 17–803.

26 A CLINICAL LABORATORY ADMINISTERING A PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN
27 TEST SHALL:

28 (1) USE TESTING ASSAYS THAT HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY THE U.S.
29 FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 78 3

1 (2) IMPLEMENT CALIBRATION OF PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN
2 TEST ASSAYS USING WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
3 OR ANOTHER NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED REFERENCE STANDARD;

4 (3) REPORT PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN TEST RESULTS IN
5 NANOGRAMS PER MILLILITER AND INCLUDE ANY REFERENCE RANGE UNIQUE TO
6 THE TESTING ASSAY USED;

7 (4) DOCUMENT AND DISCLOSE TO THE ORDERING PROVIDER THE
8 TEST METHODOLOGY, MANUFACTURER, AND LOT NUMBER OF THE TESTING ASSAY
9 USED; AND

10 (5) PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL TESTING PROFICIENCY PROGRAM
11 RELATING TO PROSTATE–SPECIFIC ANTIGEN TESTS THAT IS RECOGNIZED BY THE
12 CLINICAL LABORATORY IMPROVEMENT AMENDMENTS OR THE COLLEGE OF
13 AMERICAN PATHOLOGISTS.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3