START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 51 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 51 
(Senator Folden) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Public Schools - Self-Contained Special Education Classrooms - Use of Video 
Recording Devices 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education, beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, to 
install at least one video recording device in each self-contained public school classroom 
in which a majority of the regularly attending students are provided special education 
instruction. These devices must record all areas of the classroom, including all exclusion 
areas, during school hours and any time the space is being used. However, recording may 
not occur in bathroom areas or in areas where students change clothing. A local board must 
provide specified notice of the use of these recording devices. If a public school employee 
observes an action that could be considered abuse or neglect of a student in a self‑contained 
special education classroom or exclusion area, the employee must report the action in 
accordance with any applicable child abuse and neglect reporting guidelines. The principal 
must, within 24 hours of receiving such a report, notify the parent of the student who is the 
subject of the report. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) can adopt regulations 
and collect school system information with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, local school systems incur significant additional 
costs related to the purchase, installation, maintenance and eventual replacement of video 
recording equipment, as well as costs associated with storing and accessing video 
recordings and for training in the use of recording systems. This bill imposes a mandate 
on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 51/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Special education classroom” means a classroom in a public school in 
which a majority of the regularly attending students are provided special education 
instruction, including students who are classified primarily as certificate track, are 
primarily nonverbal, and are participating in life skills or community-based programming. 
 
“Exclusion area” means a supervised area to which a student who receives instruction in a 
self‑contained special education classroom is taken for a limited time to regain self‑control. 
 
The bill specifies how long recordings may be stored and who may view the recordings 
and under which circumstances. The bill specifies procedures for reporting incidences of a 
video recording device being discovered to have been interrupted. Video recording devices 
may not be used to monitor the performance of school employees. A county board must 
make reasonable efforts to conceal the identity of students who appear in a recording but 
who are not involved in the incident that prompts viewing of the recording. 
 
On complaint or report to the school, local board, or other legal authority from specified 
interested parties, regarding an incident that occurs in a self-contained special education 
classroom while the video device was recording, the school administration must review the 
video recording. After review of the video recording, if the school administration or, if 
applicable, a representative from child protective services believes that the video recording 
shows potential criminal conduct, the video must be made available only to law 
enforcement.  
 
Each local board of education must collect data on the number of requests to view a video 
recording and the identity of the person who made the request and annually report this 
information to MSDE, beginning January 1, 2027. MSDE must adopt regulations to carry 
out provisions of the bill. 
 
Current Law:  The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires 
that a child with disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least 
restrictive environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student 
turns 21 years old, in accordance with the Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) or 
the Individualized Education Program (IEP) specific to the individual needs of the child.  
 
An IFSP is for children with disabilities from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5, under 
Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent chooses the option. An IEP is for students 
with disabilities age 3 through 21. Local school systems are required to make a free 
appropriate public education available to students with disabilities from age 3 through 21. 
However, the State, under its supervisory authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 51/ Page 3 
Privacy of Student Records and School Safety 
 
The federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) generally prohibits the 
disclosure by schools that receive federal education funding of personally identifiable 
information from a student’s education records, unless the educational institution has 
obtained written consent from a parent or eligible student or one of FERPA’s exceptions 
applies. As with any other education record, a photo or video of a student is an education 
record, subject to specific exclusions, when the photo or video is (1) directly related to a 
student, and (2) maintained by an educational agency or institution or by a party acting for 
the agency or institution. 
 
While FERPA generally requires schools to ask for written consent before disclosing a 
student’s personally identifiable information to individuals other than his or her parents, it 
also allows schools to take key steps to maintain school safety, including the disclosure 
without consent during an emergency to protect the health or safety of students or other 
individuals. The FERPA statute and regulations exclude from the definition of education 
records those records created and maintained by a law enforcement unit of an educational 
agency or institution for a law enforcement purpose. 
 
According to the Code of Maryland Regulations, individual student records maintained by 
teachers or other school personnel under certain provisions are to be confidential in nature, 
and access to these records may be granted only for the purpose of serving legitimate and 
recognized educational ends. Individual student records, with the exception of records that 
are designated as permanent and with other exceptions provided by law, must be destroyed 
when they are no longer able to serve legitimate and recognized educational ends.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, local school systems incur substantial 
additional costs under the bill. Much of the cost to each school system depends on the 
number of self-contained special education classrooms and exclusion areas in the 
school system, and the per-classroom cost of (1) the initial purchase and installation of 
video recording equipment and (2) maintenance and replacement of video recording 
equipment. Local school systems may also incur costs related to training staff in the use of 
video recording devices and related to storing, accessing, and modifying video recordings 
(to conceal the identities of uninvolved students). The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) notes that local school systems quote different per-classroom costs for the 
installation of video recording devices. Some of the variation stems from different 
assumptions regarding the number of devices required in each classroom. DLS cannot 
independently verify these diverse estimates, but concurs that the costs are substantial and 
that many classrooms may require more than one recording device to provide full coverage. 
 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools (AACPS) anticipates additional first-year 
expenditures totaling $620,200, including $444,200 for installation of video equipment in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 51/ Page 4 
a minimum of 200 classrooms, assuming one camera per classroom, as well as additional 
data servers. In addition to eventual equipment replacement costs, AACPS advises it 
requires one additional school security specialist, at approximately $140,000 annually, and 
that it will also incur contractual service costs. 
 
Based upon an estimate of 407 applicable spaces that require video recording under the 
bill, and assuming $1,350 per room in hardware and installation labor, Baltimore City 
Public Schools assumes approximately $550,000 in equipment costs alone in the first year. 
Frederick County Public Schools anticipates the need for a security video management 
technician at an annual cost of approximately $100,000, $170,000 in one-time equipment 
costs, as well as $20,000 annually for equipment replacement and maintenance costs. 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools anticipates about $180,000 in one-time equipment costs, 
as well as $4,000 annually for equipment replacement and maintenance costs. 
 
Prince George’s County Public Schools (PGCPS) estimates a total one-time cost of 
$4.9 million based on $6,000 for equipment and installation for each of 831 self-contained 
special education classrooms, and assuming the need for two cameras per classroom. 
PGCPS also anticipates $42,000 in ongoing costs in every other year following fiscal 2027, 
as well as additional costs to preserve, and eventually destroy, video records. Given 
approximately 170 self-contained special education classrooms, and assuming a cost of 
$1,500 per video camera, Wicomico County Public Schools advises it will incur 
approximately $255,000 in one-time equipment costs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Given the large number of classrooms in the State that require the 
installation of video recording devices, small businesses that sell and service video 
recording equipment may benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Wicomico 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Center for School Safety; Department of Human Services; Department of State 
Police; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 51/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5