START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 96 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 96 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
 
 
Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant Program for 
Service Members and Veterans - Terminology - Active Service Members 
 
 
This bill broadens the definition of “eligible individual” under the Sheila E. Hixon 
Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant Program for Service Members and Veterans 
by allowing additional service members and their spouses, children, and stepchildren to 
participate. More specifically, the bill removes the limitation that a participant be an 
active service member or the spouse, child, or stepchild of an active service member. 
Eligibility for veterans and their family members is not changed.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Broadening eligibility for the program is not anticipated to materially affect 
State finances. Overall funding for the program is unchanged. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 785 and 786 of 2021 established the Sheila E. Hixon Behavioral 
Health Services Matching Grant Program for Service Members and Veterans. The purpose 
of the program is to provide funds to local nonprofit organizations to establish and expand 
community behavioral health programs to serve active service members, veterans, and their 
families. Under the program, “eligible individual” means an (1) active service member; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 96/ Page 2 
(2) a veteran; (3) the spouse of an active service member or veteran; (4) the child of an 
active service member or veteran; or (5) a stepchild of an active service member or veteran. 
 
The program must award competitive matching grants to local nonprofit organizations to 
establish and expand community behavioral health programs that (1) serve the behavioral 
health needs of eligible individuals in the locality serviced by the nonprofit organization; 
(2) meet national standards; (3) integrate the delivery of mental health and substance use 
treatment; and (4) connect eligible individuals to appropriate community-based care in a 
timely manner on discharge from the community behavioral health program. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must submit an annual report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly regarding program activity. MDH’s most recent annual report can be 
read here.  
 
The Governor is authorized to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of 
$2.5 million for the program. The fiscal 2026 budget includes a total of $3.0 million in 
general funds for the program, with $2.4 million available for grants. The fiscal 2027 
budget, as introduced, includes $3.0 million for the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2