START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 54

M4, A3 6lr0905
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1754

By: Senator Lam
Requested: September 19, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners – Grounds for Disciplinary Action
3 – Restrictions

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners from
5 suspending or revoking a license to practice veterinary medicine in the State,
6 reprimanding or censuring a licensee, or placing a licensee on probation solely on the
7 basis of the licensee discussing or recommending the use of cannabis or a product
8 that contains cannabidiol on an animal for certain purposes; and generally relating
9 to the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners and grounds for disciplinary
10 action.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
12 Article – Agriculture
13 Section 2–301(a), (b), (d), (h), and (i)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Agriculture
18 Section 2–310
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2016 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
23 Section 1–101(a) and (d)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0054*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 54

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Agriculture

4 2–301.

5 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

6 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners.

7 (d) “License” means a license to practice veterinary medicine in the State.

8 (h) “Veterinarian” means any person who is a graduate of a college of veterinary
9 medicine.

10 (i) “Veterinary practitioner” means a licensed and registered veterinarian
11 engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine.

12 2–310.

13 (A) [The] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE Board may
14 refuse, suspend, or revoke any application or license, and censure or place on probation any
15 licensee after a hearing, if the veterinarian or veterinary practitioner:

16 (1) Is unable to practice veterinary medicine competently due to a physical
17 or mental disability;

18 (2) Is convicted of a violation of any federal or State law relating to
19 prescription drugs, a controlled dangerous substance under Title 5, Subtitle 4 of the
20 Criminal Law Article, or a controlled substance as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812;

21 (3) Is convicted of a felony, or of a crime involving moral turpitude;

22 (4) Is convicted of violating any provision of this subtitle, any unlawful or
23 fraudulent practice, or any fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive representation or
24 advertising concerning his professional qualifications or the quality of materials or drugs
25 used by him in his professional work or in the treatment of animals;

26 (5) Has a final judgment entered against him in a civil malpractice case
27 involving gross personal negligence;

28 (6) Obtains the license by fraud or misrepresentation, either in the
29 application, or in passing the examination;

30 (7) Is guilty of employing or permitting to practice veterinary medicine any
31 person who does not hold a license to practice veterinary medicine in the State;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 54 3

1 (8) Fails to comply with Board rules or regulations after receiving a license;

2 (9) Is grossly negligent or deliberately cruel to an animal;

3 (10) Is determined by four members to be professionally incompetent as a
4 veterinary practitioner;

5 (11) Is disciplined by a licensing authority of another state, including the
6 suspension or revocation of a license to practice veterinary medicine, for an act that would
7 be grounds for disciplinary action under this section;

8 (12) Fails to comply with animal cruelty or animal fighting reporting
9 requirements under § 2–313.1 of this subtitle; or

10 (13) Willfully violates the cat declawing prohibition under § 2–313.3 of this
11 subtitle.

12 (B) THE BOARD MAY NOT SUSPEND OR REVOKE A LICENSE, REPRIMAND OR
13 CENSURE A LICENSEE, OR PLACE A LICENSEE ON PROBATION SOLELY ON THE BASIS
14 OF THE LICENSEE DISCUSSING OR RECOMMENDING THE USE OF CANNABIS, AS
15 DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CANNABIS ARTICLE, OR
16 A PRODUCT THAT CONTAINS CANNABIDIOL ON AN ANIMAL FOR POTENTIAL
17 THERAPEUTIC EFFECT OR HEALTH SUPPLEMENTATION PURPOSES.

18 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

19 1–101.

20 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (d) (1) “Cannabis” means the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of the
22 plant, including all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of
23 isomers, whether growing or not, with a delta–9–tetrahydrocannabinol concentration
24 greater than 0.3% on a dry weight basis.

25 (2) “Cannabis” includes cannabis products, seeds, seedlings, immature
26 plants, and clones.

27 (3) “Cannabis” does not include hemp or hemp products, as defined in §
28 14–101 of the Agriculture Article.

29 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
30 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3