START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 50

F1, D5 6lr1228
SB 588/25 – EEE (PRE–FILED)

By: Senators Carozza and Watson
Requested: October 8, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Education – Interscholastic and Intramural Junior Varsity and Varsity Teams
3 and Sports – Designation
4 (Fairness in Girls’ Sports Act)

5 FOR the purpose of requiring certain interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and
6 varsity athletic teams or sports sponsored by certain schools to be expressly
7 designated in a certain manner; prohibiting certain interscholastic and intramural
8 junior varsity and varsity athletic teams or sports from including certain students;
9 prohibiting certain entities from taking certain adverse actions against a school for
10 maintaining separate interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and varsity
11 athletic teams and sports for students of the female sex; authorizing certain students
12 to bring a civil action against certain entities under certain circumstances; and
13 generally relating to interscholastic and intramural junior varsity and varsity teams
14 and sports of public and nonpublic schools.

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Education
17 Section 7–118
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Education

23 7–118.

24 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0050*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 50

1 INDICATED.

2 (2) “STUDENT OF THE FEMALE SEX” MEANS A STUDENT WHOSE
3 BIOLOGICAL SEX IS FEMALE.

4 (3) “STUDENT OF THE MALE SEX” MEANS A STUDENT WHOSE
5 BIOLOGICAL SEX IS MALE.

6 (B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

7 (1) PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS; AND

8 (2) NONPUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS FOR WHICH THE STUDENT ATHLETES
9 OR ATHLETIC TEAMS COMPETE AGAINST STUDENT ATHLETES OR ATHLETIC TEAMS
10 FROM PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.

11 (C) (1) AN INTERSCHOLASTIC OR INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR
12 VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAM OR SPORT THAT IS SPONSORED BY A PUBLIC OR
13 NONPUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL SHALL BE EXPRESSLY DESIGNATED AS ONE OF THE
14 FOLLOWING:

15 (I) A BOYS’, MALE, OR MEN’S TEAM OR SPORT;

16 (II) A GIRLS’, FEMALE, OR WOMEN’S TEAM OR SPORT; OR

17 (III) A COEDUCATIONAL OR MIXED TEAM OR SPORT.

18 (2) AN INTERSCHOLASTIC OR INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR
19 VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAM OR SPORT DESIGNATED FOR GIRLS, FEMALES, OR WOMEN
20 MAY NOT INCLUDE STUDENTS OF THE MALE SEX.

21 (D) A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, A LICENSING OR ACCREDITING
22 ORGANIZATION, OR AN ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION MAY NOT ACCEPT
23 A COMPLAINT, CONDUCT AN INVESTIGATION, OR TAKE ANY OTHER ADVERSE ACTION
24 AGAINST A SCHOOL FOR MAINTAINING SEPARATE INTERSCHOLASTIC OR
25 INTRAMURAL JUNIOR VARSITY OR VARSITY ATHLETIC TEAMS OR SPORTS FOR
26 STUDENTS OF THE FEMALE SEX.

27 (E) (1) A STUDENT WHO IS DEPRIVED OF AN ATHLETIC OPPORTUNITY OR
28 SUFFERS ANY DIRECT OR INDIRECT HARM AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS
29 SECTION MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE SCHOOL THE STUDENT ATTENDS.

30 (2) A STUDENT WHO IS SUBJECT TO RETALIATION OR OTHER
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 50 3

1 ADVERSE ACTION BY A SCHOOL OR AN ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION
2 AS A RESULT OF REPORTING A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION TO AN EMPLOYEE OR
3 REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SCHOOL, ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION, OR
4 ANY STATE OR FEDERAL AGENCY WITH OVERSIGHT OF SCHOOLS IN THE STATE MAY
5 BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST THE SCHOOL OR ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION OR
6 ORGANIZATION.

7 (F) THIS SECTION MAY BE KNOWN AND CITED AS THE FAIRNESS IN GIRLS’
8 SPORTS ACT.

9 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
10 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
11 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the provision shall be construed to give the
12 provision the maximum effect permitted by law unless the provision is held to be absolutely
13 invalid.

14 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
15 the application of any provision of this Act to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
16 any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other
17 provisions or any other application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid
18 provision or application, and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared
19 severable.

20 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
21 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3