START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 68

R4 6lr0792
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Charles
Requested: September 6, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Driver’s Licenses – Driver Skills Examination – Motorcycle Safety Awareness

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Motor Vehicle Administration to include certain
4 questions related to motorcycle safety awareness on the driver skills examination
5 required for the issuance of a driver’s license; and generally relating to driver skills
6 examinations.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Transportation
9 Section 16–110
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Transportation

15 16–110.

16 (a) The Administration shall:

17 (1) Establish qualifications for the safe operation of the various classes,
18 types, sizes, or combinations of vehicles; and

19 (2) Examine each applicant to determine the applicant’s qualifications for
20 the license class applied for.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0068*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 68

1 (b) Except as otherwise provided in this title, the Administration shall examine
2 each applicant for an original driver’s license or for a class of driver’s license higher than
3 that which the applicant currently holds.

4 (c) (1) The examination shall include:

5 [(1)] (I) A test of the applicant’s:

6 [(i)] 1. Vision;

7 [(ii)] 2. Ability to read and understand highway signs regulating,
8 warning, and directing traffic; and

9 [(iii)] 3. Knowledge of the traffic laws of this State and safe driving
10 practices;

11 [(2)] (II) A demonstration of the applicant’s ability to exercise reasonable
12 control in driving a motor vehicle; and

13 [(3)] (III) Any other additional physical or mental examination that the
14 Administration considers necessary to determine an applicant’s fitness to drive a motor
15 vehicle safely.

16 (2) (I) THE EXAMINATION REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
17 SHALL INCLUDE AT LEAST FIVE QUESTIONS RELATED TO MOTORCYCLE SAFETY
18 AWARENESS.

19 (II) THE QUESTIONS REQUIRED BY THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL
20 ADDRESS:

21 1. VISIBILITY OF MOTORCYCLES;

22 2. PROPER LANE POSITIONING AROUND MOTORCYCLES;

23 3. SAFE FOLLOWING DISTANCES AROUND
24 MOTORCYCLES;

25 4. PREVENTING CRASHES WITH MOTORCYCLES; AND

26 5. ANY OTHER TOPIC RELATED TO MOTORCYCLE
27 SAFETY THAT THE ADMINISTRATION DEEMS RELEVANT.

28 (d) If an applicant is qualified to take the required examinations for the license
29 applied for, the applicant shall appear in person for examination at any one of the places
30 in this State that the Administration has designated for this purpose.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 68 3

1 (e) (1) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, for a required
2 driver skills examination or driver road examination, each applicant shall provide a motor
3 vehicle of a type appropriate to test the applicant’s ability to drive all vehicles that may be
4 driven under the license class applied for.

5 (ii) An applicant may not use an autocycle to test the applicant’s
6 ability to drive under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

7 (2) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this subsection, when
8 the holder of a learner’s instructional permit appears for the driving test, the permit holder
9 shall be accompanied by an individual qualified under § 16–105 of this subtitle to
10 accompany the holder of a learner’s permit while driving on a highway. That individual
11 shall have his driver’s license with him.

12 (3) The holder of a Class M (motorcycle) learner’s instructional permit may:

13 (i) Transport a motorcycle to the driving test by truck or other
14 vehicle unaccompanied by another individual, if the permit holder is licensed to drive the
15 truck or other vehicle; or

16 (ii) Be accompanied by a person transporting a motorcycle to the test
17 by truck or other vehicle, if that person is licensed to drive the truck or other vehicle.

18 (4) The holder of a learner’s instructional permit may be driven to the
19 examination station and to the starting point where the examiner begins the test by any
20 individual authorized to drive the class of vehicle in which the test is being given. That
21 individual shall have a valid driver’s license in the individual’s possession.

22 (f) If the applicant does not pass the examination for the license class applied for,
23 the Administration may issue the applicant any license of a lower class for which the
24 applicant qualifies.

25 (g) Except as provided in subsection (h) of this section, the Administration may
26 waive any driver’s license examination provided for under this title if the applicant:

27 (1) Holds a valid driver’s license issued under this subtitle;

28 (2) Is applying for a Class M license and has successfully completed the
29 Administration approved basic motorcycle safety course; or

30 (3) Holds a valid license from:

31 (i) Another state;

32 (ii) A territory or possession of the United States, the District of
33 Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico; or
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 68

1 (iii) A province or territory of Canada.

2 (h) The Administration may not waive a vision examination required under this
3 section unless the applicant:

4 (1) Is applying for a corrected driver’s license under § 16–114.1 of this
5 subtitle; and

6 (2) Has passed a vision examination acceptable to the Administration
7 within the last 12 months.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4