START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 51

F1 6lr1376
SB 665/21 – EHE (PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Folden
Requested: October 28, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Schools – Self–Contained Special Education Classrooms – Use of Video
3 Recording Devices

4 FOR the purpose of requiring each county board of education, beginning in a certain school
5 year, to install and provide notice of the use of certain video recording devices in
6 self–contained special education classrooms, subject to certain requirements;
7 prohibiting a county board from storing a certain video recording for a certain
8 amount of time except under certain circumstances; establishing certain reporting
9 requirements in the event of an interruption of a certain video recording;
10 establishing requirements for the review and dissemination of a certain video
11 recording by certain persons under certain circumstances; requiring a county board
12 to make a reasonable attempt to conceal the identity of a certain student; prohibiting
13 the State Department of Education, a county board, a school, or a principal from
14 using a certain video recording device for a certain purpose; and generally relating
15 to the use of video recording devices in self–contained special education classrooms.

16 BY adding to
17 Article – Education
18 Section 7–455
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
22 Article – Education
23 Section 8–401(a)(1) and (5)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
27 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0051*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 51

1 Article – Education

2 7–455.

3 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
4 INDICATED.

5 (2) “EXCLUSION AREA” MEANS A SUPERVISED AREA TO WHICH A
6 STUDENT WHO RECEIVES INSTRUCTION IN A SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION
7 CLASSROOM IS TAKEN FOR A LIMITED PERIOD OF TIME TO REGAIN SELF–CONTROL.

8 (3) “SPECIAL EDUCATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–401 OF
9 THIS ARTICLE.

10 (4) “SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM” MEANS A CLASSROOM IN A
11 PUBLIC SCHOOL IN WHICH A MAJORITY OF THE REGULARLY ATTENDING STUDENTS
12 ARE PROVIDED SPECIAL EDUCATION INSTRUCTION, INCLUDING STUDENTS WHO ARE
13 CLASSIFIED PRIMARILY AS CERTIFICATE TRACK, ARE PRIMARILY NONVERBAL, AND
14 ARE PARTICIPATING IN LIFE SKILLS OR COMMUNITY–BASED PROGRAMMING.

15 (B) (1) BEGINNING IN THE 2026–2027 SCHOOL YEAR, EACH COUNTY
16 BOARD SHALL INSTALL AT LEAST ONE VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE IN EACH
17 SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM.

18 (2) A VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
19 RECORD:

20 (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
21 SUBSECTION, ALL AREAS OF THE SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION
22 CLASSROOM, INCLUDING ALL EXCLUSION AREAS; AND

23 (II) DURING SCHOOL HOURS AND AT ANY TIME THE
24 SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM OR EXCLUSION AREA IS IN USE.

25 (3) A VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT
26 RECORD INSIDE BATHROOM AREAS OR IN AREAS THAT STUDENTS USE TO CHANGE
27 CLOTHING.

28 (C) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE USE OF A VIDEO
29 RECORDING DEVICE IN A SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM BY:

30 (1) POSTING A SIGN IN A CONSPICUOUS LOCATION OUTSIDE EACH
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 51 3

1 SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM WHERE A VIDEO RECORDING
2 DEVICE IS USED;

3 (2) PROVIDING A WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE PARENT OR LEGAL
4 GUARDIAN OF EACH STUDENT WHO RECEIVES INSTRUCTION IN A SELF–CONTAINED
5 SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM; AND

6 (3) PROVIDING WRITTEN NOTICE IN THE STUDENT HANDBOOK OF
7 THE USE OF VIDEO RECORDING DEVICES.

8 (D) (1) UNLESS A COUNTY BOARD RECEIVES A REQUEST TO VIEW OR
9 STORE A PARTICULAR VIDEO RECORDING, THE COUNTY BOARD MAY NOT STORE A
10 VIDEO RECORDING MADE UNDER THIS SECTION FOR MORE THAN 6 MONTHS AFTER
11 THE DATE OF THE RECORDING.

12 (2) IF A REQUEST IS MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
13 SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL STORE THE VIDEO RECORDING UNTIL THE
14 REASON FOR THE REQUEST IS RESOLVED.

15 (3) IF A VIDEO RECORDING IS TO BE USED AS EVIDENCE TO SUPPORT
16 OR REFUTE A COMPLAINT AGAINST A STUDENT, AN EMPLOYEE, OR A CONTRACTOR,
17 THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL RETAIN THE PORTION OF THE VIDEO RECORDING
18 RELATED TO THE COMPLAINT FOR AT LEAST 1 YEAR AFTER THE DATE THE
19 COMPLAINT IS MADE.

20 (E) (1) IF A PERSON DISCOVERS THAT THE OPERATION OF A VIDEO
21 RECORDING DEVICE HAS BEEN INTERRUPTED, THE PERSON SHALL SUBMIT A
22 WRITTEN REPORT TO THE PRINCIPAL OF THE SCHOOL THAT INCLUDES A
23 DESCRIPTION OF:

24 (I) HOW THE INTERRUPTION WAS DISCOVERED AND THE
25 LENGTH OF THE INTERRUPTION; AND

26 (II) THE REASON FOR THE INTERRUPTION, IF KNOWN.

27 (2) A PRINCIPAL SHALL MAINTAIN A REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER
28 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR 1 YEAR AFTER THE DATE OF THE
29 SUBMISSION OF THE REPORT.

30 (F) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
31 VIDEO RECORDING MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION IS CONFIDENTIAL
32 AND MAY NOT BE VIEWED, SHARED, OR DISSEMINATED IN ANY MANNER.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 51

1 (2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION, THE
2 FOLLOWING PERSONS MAY VIEW A VIDEO RECORDING MADE UNDER THIS SECTION:

3 (I) A MEMBER OF THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION;

4 (II) A SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICER;

5 (III) A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CHILD PROTECTIVE SERVICES;
6 AND

7 (IV) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

8 (G) (1) ON COMPLAINT OR REPORT TO THE SCHOOL, COUNTY BOARD, OR
9 OTHER LEGAL AUTHORITY FROM AN EMPLOYEE, A CONTRACTED EMPLOYEE, A
10 PARENT, OR ANY OTHER INTERESTED PARTY REGARDING AN INCIDENT THAT
11 OCCURRED IN THE SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM WHILE THE
12 VIDEO DEVICE WAS RECORDING, THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION SHALL REVIEW THE
13 VIDEO RECORDING NOT MORE THAN 3 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE COMPLAINT OR
14 REPORT WAS MADE.

15 (2) AFTER REVIEW OF THE VIDEO RECORDING, IF THE SCHOOL
16 ADMINISTRATION OR, IF APPLICABLE, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CHILD
17 PROTECTIVE SERVICES BELIEVES THAT THE VIDEO RECORDING SHOWS POTENTIAL
18 CRIMINAL CONDUCT, THE VIDEO SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE ONLY TO A LAW
19 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY FOR AN INVESTIGATION.

20 (3) AT THE CONCLUSION OF AN INVESTIGATION BY A LAW
21 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AND ON
22 REQUEST OF THE STUDENT OR PARENT OF THE STUDENT TO WHOM THE VIDEO
23 RECORDING DIRECTLY RELATES, THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION SHALL ALLOW THE
24 STUDENT OR PARENT TO INSPECT AND REVIEW THE VIDEO RECORDING.

25 (H) (1) IF A SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OF A SCHOOL
26 OBSERVES AN ACTION THAT COULD BE CONSIDERED THE ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A
27 STUDENT IN A SELF–CONTAINED SPECIAL EDUCATION CLASSROOM OR EXCLUSION
28 AREA, THE SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR OR EMPLOYEE SHALL REPORT THE ACTION IN
29 ACCORDANCE WITH ANY APPLICABLE CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT REPORTING
30 GUIDELINES.

31 (2) ON RECEIVING A REPORT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
32 SUBSECTION, A PRINCIPAL SHALL NOTIFY A PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF THE
33 STUDENT WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE REPORT WITHIN 24 HOURS AFTER
34 RECEIVING THE REPORT.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 51 5

1 (I) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL MAKE A REASONABLE ATTEMPT TO CONCEAL
2 THE IDENTITY OF ANY STUDENT WHO APPEARS IN A VIDEO RECORDING MADE UNDER
3 THIS SECTION WHO IS NOT INVOLVED IN THE INCIDENT FOR WHICH THE VIDEO
4 RECORDING IS BEING VIEWED.

5 (J) THE DEPARTMENT, A COUNTY BOARD, A SCHOOL, OR A PRINCIPAL MAY
6 NOT USE A VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE TO MONITOR THE PERFORMANCE OF SCHOOL
7 EMPLOYEES.

8 (K) A COUNTY BOARD MAY SOLICIT AND ACCEPT GIFTS, GRANTS, AND
9 DONATIONS FROM ANY PERSON TO BE USED TOWARD THE INSTALLATION AND
10 OPERATION OF A VIDEO RECORDING DEVICE UNDER THIS SECTION.

11 (L) ALL VIDEO RECORDING DEVICES UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL COMPLY
12 WITH FEDERAL FIRE AND SAFETY STANDARDS.

13 (M) (1) EACH YEAR, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL COLLECT DATA ON:

14 (I) THE NUMBER OF REQUESTS TO VIEW A VIDEO RECORDING
15 MADE UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

16 (II) THE IDENTITY OF THE PERSON THAT MADE A REQUEST.

17 (2) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2027, AND EACH JANUARY 1
18 THEREAFTER, A COUNTY BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT ON
19 THE DATA COLLECTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR THE
20 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR.

21 (N) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY
22 OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

23 8–401.

24 (a) (1) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

25 (5) “Special education” means specially designed instruction, at no cost to
26 parents, to meet the unique needs of a child with a disability, including:

27 (i) Instruction in the classroom, in the home, in hospitals and
28 institutions, and in other settings; and

29 (ii) Instruction in physical education.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 SENATE BILL 51

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 6