START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 66 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 66 
(Senators West and Bailey) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Manslaughter by Vehicle or Vessel - Increased Penalties (Jamari's Law) 
 
 
This bill increases the maximum incarceration penalties for manslaughter by vehicle or 
vessel (gross negligence) from 10 years to 20 years for a first conviction and from 
15 years to 30 years for a subsequent conviction. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund incarceration expenditures, due 
to the bill’s changes to existing penalties, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence) is a felony, generally 
punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up to $5,000. However, a 
maximum penalty of imprisonment for up to 15 years and/or a fine of up to $10,000 applies 
to a person who has previously been convicted of manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross 
negligence); manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (criminal negligence); homicide by motor 
vehicle or vessel while under the influence or impaired by alcohol, drugs, or a controlled 
dangerous substance (CDS); life-threatening injury by motor vehicle or vessel while under 
the influence or impaired by alcohol, drugs, or a CDS; or drunk or drugged driving under 
§ 21-902 of the Transportation Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 66/ Page 2 
State Expenditures:  While the bill increases the maximum incarceration penalties for 
manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence), in view of current sentencing 
practices, lengthier sentences imposed under the bill are likely to be within the current 
statutory maximum penalties. Given the number of individuals sentenced for this offense, 
any potential corresponding increase in general fund expenditures for the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) is anticipated to be minimal. Further, 
any increase in State incarceration expenditures for individuals who receive sentences 
above the current maximum penalties as a result of the bill are not incurred until beyond 
the five-year scope of this fiscal and policy note. 
 
DPSCS advises that, during fiscal 2025, it received 31 incarcerated individuals with 
convictions for manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence). The data did not 
clearly distinguish between first-time and subsequent offenders; however, the average 
sentence length for these convictions was 7 years. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy (MSCCSP) advises that 
it received information on 38 individuals sentenced to 40 counts for a first-time 
commission of manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence) in the circuit courts 
during fiscal 2025. According to MSCCSP, another 2 individuals were sentenced to  
2 counts for a second or subsequent commission of this offense. The Judiciary previously 
advised that, in fiscal 2024, there were 14 violations (charges) and 0 guilty dispositions 
(convictions) for manslaughter by vehicle or vessel (gross negligence) in the District Court. 
The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts over this offense.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 364 and HB 977 of 2025 and SB 26 and HB 264 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 66/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3