START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 19

J1, J3 6lr1514
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Ellis
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Commission on Women’s Health Advancement – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Commission on Women’s Health
4 Advancement to study the feasibility of establishing a State women’s hospital and a
5 statewide clinical network to advance women’s health; and generally relating to the
6 Maryland Commission on Women’s Health Advancement.

7 BY adding to
8 Article – Health – General
9 Section 13–5901 through 13–5904 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 59.
10 Maryland Commission on Women’s Health Advancement”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Health – General

16 SUBTITLE 59. MARYLAND COMMISSION ON WOMEN’S HEALTH ADVANCEMENT.

17 13–5901.

18 IN THIS SUBTITLE, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND COMMISSION ON
19 WOMEN’S HEALTH ADVANCEMENT.

20 13–5902.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0019*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 19

1 (A) THERE IS A MARYLAND COMMISSION ON WOMEN’S HEALTH
2 ADVANCEMENT.

3 (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO STUDY THE FEASIBILITY OF
4 ESTABLISHING A STATE WOMEN’S HOSPITAL IN SOUTHERN MARYLAND AND A
5 STATEWIDE CLINICAL NETWORK TO ADVANCE WOMEN’S HEALTH BY ENSURING A
6 FULL CONTINUUM OF CARE ADDRESSING THE UNIQUE HEALTH CHALLENGES FACED
7 BY WOMEN ACROSS THEIR LIFESPANS.

8 (C) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

9 (1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
10 PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

11 (2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
12 SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

13 (3) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
14 DESIGNEE; AND

15 (4) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

16 (I) ONE HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL WORKING IN EACH OF
17 THE FOLLOWING:

18 1. OBSTETRICS;

19 2. GYNECOLOGY;

20 3. UROGYNECOLOGY;

21 4. MATERNAL–FETAL HEALTH;

22 5. NURSE MIDWIFERY;

23 6. SOCIAL WORK; AND

24 7. A HOSPITAL SYSTEM;

25 (II) TWO HEALTH CARE EXPERTS FROM THE OFFICE OF THE
26 SECRETARY OF HEALTH, THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE COMMISSION, OR THE
27 MARYLAND RURAL HEALTH ASSOCIATION;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 19 3

1 (III) FIVE PATIENT ADVOCATES WHO FOCUS ON MATERNAL
2 HEALTH AND WOMEN’S WELL–BEING, INCLUDING AT LEAST ONE ADVOCATE WHO IS
3 A MINOR;

4 (IV) ONE INDIVIDUAL WITH EXPERTISE IN RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND
5 SOCIOECONOMIC HEALTH DISPARITIES FROM EACH OF THE FOLLOWING:

6 1. BALTIMORE CITY;

7 2. CENTRAL MARYLAND (ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY,
8 BALTIMORE COUNTY, AND HOWARD COUNTY);

9 3. EASTERN MARYLAND (CAROLINE COUNTY,
10 DORCHESTER COUNTY, KENT COUNTY, QUEEN ANNE’S COUNTY, SOMERSET
11 COUNTY, TALBOT COUNTY, WICOMICO COUNTY, AND WORCESTER COUNTY);

12 4. NORTHERN MARYLAND (CARROLL COUNTY, CECIL
13 COUNTY, FREDERICK COUNTY, AND HARFORD COUNTY);

14 5. SOUTHERN MARYLAND (CALVERT COUNTY,
15 CHARLES COUNTY, PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, AND ST. MARY’S COUNTY); AND

16 6. WESTERN MARYLAND (ALLEGANY COUNTY,
17 GARRETT COUNTY, AND WASHINGTON COUNTY);

18 (V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MARYLAND CHAPTER OF
19 THE NAACP WHO HAS EXPERTISE IN RACIAL, ETHNIC, AND SOCIOECONOMIC
20 HEALTH DISPARITIES;

21 (VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE EACH FROM:

22 1. THE MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
23 COMMUNITY HEALTH AND POLICY; AND

24 2. THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
25 HEALTH;

26 (VII) TWO INSURANCE PROFESSIONALS WHO ARE ABLE TO
27 PROVIDE INSIGHT INTO EQUITABLE FINANCING AND SUSTAINABLE SPENDING FOR
28 HOSPITAL SERVICES;

29 (VIII) ONE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EXPERT; AND
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 19

1 (IX) ONE DATA ANALYST.

2 (D) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
3 SHALL REFLECT THE DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

4 (E) THE GOVERNOR SHALL DESIGNATE A CHAIR FROM AMONG THE
5 MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION.

6 (F) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE COMMISSION
7 JOINTLY SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COMMISSION.

8 (G) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

9 (1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
10 COMMISSION; BUT

11 (2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
12 STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

13 (H) THE TERM OF A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION IS 7 YEARS.

14 13–5903.

15 THE COMMISSION SHALL:

16 (1) ANALYZE THE NEED FOR A CENTRALIZED HOSPITAL FOR WOMEN
17 WITH OUTPATIENT CLINIC LOCATIONS THROUGHOUT THE STATE;

18 (2) EXAMINE EXISTING HEALTH CARE GAPS, INCLUDING IN
19 UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS;

20 (3) IN COLLABORATION WITH THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE
21 COMMISSION:

22 (I) ASSESS THE FINANCIAL VIABILITY FOR A STATE WOMEN’S
23 HOSPITAL AND ASSOCIATED OUTPATIENT CLINICS; AND

24 (II) INITIATE A CERTIFICATE OF NEED FOR A STATE WOMEN’S
25 HOSPITAL AND ASSOCIATED OUTPATIENT CLINICS;

26 (4) INVESTIGATE ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO A SINGLE–SITE
27 HOSPITAL, INCLUDING A HUB NETWORK THAT COORDINATES EXISTING SERVICES
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 19 5

1 ACROSS MULTIPLE LOCATIONS OR USES EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE TO IMPROVE
2 WOMEN’S ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE; AND

3 (5) CONSULT WITH A BROAD RANGE OF STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING
4 HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, PATIENT ADVOCATES, AND COMMUNITY
5 ORGANIZATIONS.

6 13–5904.

7 (A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT TO
8 THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
9 ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AN INITIAL ACTION PLAN, INCLUDING A
10 TIMELINE, MILESTONES, AND SPECIFIC RESEARCH OBJECTIVES FOR THE WORK OF
11 THE COMMISSION.

12 (B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR THROUGH 2032, THE COMMISSION
13 SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
14 STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AN INTERIM REPORT
15 SUMMARIZING THE COMMISSION’S PROGRESS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS.

16 (C) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2032, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT
17 TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
18 GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT ON ITS FINDINGS AND
19 RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE NEED, FUNDING, LOCATION, IMPLEMENTATION PLAN,
20 AND STRUCTURE FOR THE STATE WOMEN’S HOSPITAL AND CLINICAL NETWORK.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
22 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 7 years and, at the end of June 30, 2033,
23 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
24 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 5