START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 66

E1 6lr0980
SB 364/25 – JPR (PRE–FILED)

By: Senators West and Bailey
Requested: September 25, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Manslaughter by Vehicle or Vessel – Increased Penalties
3 (Jamari’s Law)

4 FOR the purpose of increasing the maximum periods of imprisonment for an individual
5 convicted of manslaughter by vehicle or vessel; and generally relating to penalties
6 for manslaughter by vehicle or vessel.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Criminal Law
9 Section 2–209
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
13 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

14 Article – Criminal Law

15 2–209.

16 (a) In this section, “vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, streetcar, locomotive,
17 engine, and train.

18 (b) A person may not cause the death of another as a result of the person’s driving,
19 operating, or controlling a vehicle or vessel in a grossly negligent manner.

20 (c) A violation of this section is manslaughter by vehicle or vessel.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0066*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 66

1 (d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a person who
2 violates this section is guilty of a felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not
3 exceeding [10] 20 years or a fine not exceeding $5,000 or both.

4 (2) (i) A person who violates this section, having previously been
5 convicted under this section, § 2–210, § 2–503, § 2–504, § 2–505, § 2–506, or § 3–211 of this
6 article, or § 21–902 of the Transportation Article, is guilty of a felony and on conviction is
7 subject to imprisonment not exceeding [15] 30 years or a fine not exceeding $10,000 or
8 both.

9 (ii) For the purposes of application of subsequent offender penalties
10 under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, a conviction for a crime committed in another
11 state or federal jurisdiction that, if committed in this State would constitute a violation of
12 this section, § 2–210, § 2–503, § 2–504, § 2–505, § 2–506, or § 3–211 of this article, or §
13 21–902 of the Transportation Article, shall be considered a violation of this section.

14 (e) (1) An indictment or other charging document for manslaughter by vehicle
15 or vessel is sufficient if it substantially states:

16 “(name of defendant) on (date) in (county) killed (name of victim) in a grossly
17 negligent manner against the peace, government, and dignity of the State.”.

18 (2) An indictment or other charging document for manslaughter by vehicle
19 or vessel need not set forth the manner or means of death.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
21 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2