START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 34

C3 6lr1518
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1522

By: Senators Ellis and Feldman
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Certified Public Accountants – Licensure – Qualifications

3 FOR the purpose of altering certain educational and experiential qualifications for a license
4 to practice certified public accountancy; and generally relating to licensure
5 qualifications for certified public accountants.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
8 Section 2–302 and 2–303
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

14 2–302.

15 (a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall be an individual who meets the
16 requirements of this section.

17 (b) The applicant shall be of good character and reputation.

18 (c) The applicant shall be at least 18 years old.

19 (d) The applicant shall meet the educational requirements under § 2–303 of this
20 subtitle.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0034*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 34

1 (e) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant shall pass an
2 examination given by the Board under this subtitle.

3 (f) The applicant for an initial license shall complete practical work experience
4 that is approved by the Board and that:

5 (1) is obtained over a period of:

6 (i) not more than [3] 6 years; and

7 (ii) [1. not less than 6 months if the applicant applies before
8 October 1, 2000; or

9 2.] not less than 1 year [if the applicant applies on or after
10 October 1, 2000];

11 (2) includes providing any type of service or advice involving the use of
12 accounting, attest, management advisory, financial advisory, tax, or consulting skills;

13 (3) is performed under the direction of:

14 (i) a licensed certified public accountant; or

15 (ii) an appropriately qualified professional as determined by the
16 Board;

17 (4) is obtained through employment in government, industry, academia, or
18 public practice; and

19 (5) amounts to:

20 (i) [1,000 hours if the applicant applies before October 1, 2000; or

21 (ii)] 2,000 hours if the applicant [applies on or after October 1, 2000.]
22 SEEKS TO QUALIFY FOR A LICENSE UNDER § 2–303(A)(2)(I) OR (II) OF THIS
23 SUBTITLE; OR

24 (II) 4,000 HOURS IF THE APPLICANT SEEKS TO QUALIFY FOR A
25 LICENSE UNDER § 2–303(A)(2)(III) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

26 2–303.

27 (a) (1) In order to take the examination, an applicant shall [have satisfactorily
28 completed 120 semester hours or their equivalent, and] hold a baccalaureate or higher
29 degree that meets the requirements of this section.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 34 3

1 (2) In order to become licensed, in addition to the other qualifications for a
2 license set forth in this subtitle, an applicant shall have satisfactorily completed [150
3 semester hours or their equivalent, including the attainment of a baccalaureate or higher
4 degree that meets the requirements of this section]:

5 (I) 1. A MASTER’S DEGREE WITH A CONCENTRATION IN
6 ACCOUNTING OR AN EQUIVALENT OF A CONCENTRATION IN ACCOUNTING; AND

7 2. NOT LESS THAN 1 YEAR OF PRACTICAL WORK
8 EXPERIENCE AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–302(F)(5)(I) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

9 (II) 1. A BACCALAUREATE DEGREE AND AN ADDITIONAL 30
10 SEMESTER CREDIT HOURS WITH A CONCENTRATION IN ACCOUNTING OR AN
11 EQUIVALENT OF A CONCENTRATION IN ACCOUNTING; AND

12 2. NOT LESS THAN 1 YEAR OF PRACTICAL WORK
13 EXPERIENCE AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–302(F)(5)(I) OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

14 (III) 1. A BACCALAUREATE DEGREE WITH A CONCENTRATION
15 IN ACCOUNTING OR AN EQUIVALENT OF A CONCENTRATION IN ACCOUNTING; AND

16 2. NOT LESS THAN 2 YEARS OF PRACTICAL WORK
17 EXPERIENCE AS DESCRIBED IN § 2–302(F)(5)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

18 (b) The applicant shall have completed for the BACCALAUREATE OR MASTER’S
19 degree REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, a curriculum that the
20 Board considers to constitute:

21 (1) a major in accounting; or

22 (2) a substantial equivalent to a major in accounting, of which required
23 credits or courses may be taken at any 2– or 4–year regionally accredited institution of
24 higher education.

25 (c) The degree required under this section shall be awarded by a school, college,
26 university, or other institution that:

27 (1) is a member of the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of
28 Business;

29 (2) is a member of the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and
30 Programs;

31 (3) is accredited by or is a constituent unit of an institution accredited by:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 34

1 (i) the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools; or

2 (ii) the equivalent regional accrediting association for other regional
3 areas; or

4 (4) is recognized and approved by the Board.

5 (d) (1) The Board may use the services of any institution that it considers
6 appropriate to determine what constitutes a substantial equivalent to a major in accounting
7 under subsection (b)(2) of this section.

8 (2) If the Board uses an institution to determine curriculum equivalencies,
9 the Board may accept as final the determination of that institution.

10 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
11 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4