START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 37 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 37 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
 
 
Maryland Service Animal Programs - Participant Disqualification - Revisions 
 
   
This bill defines a “direct threat” for the purposes of disqualifying a program participant 
from participating in the Maryland Children’s Service Animal Program or the Maryland 
Veterans Service Animal Program. The bill aligns the circumstances under which a 
nonprofit training program may disqualify a program participant for both programs. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A nonprofit training entity may disqualify a program participant from 
participation in the Maryland Children’s Service Animal Program or the Maryland 
Veterans Service Animal Program if the nonprofit training entity determines that the 
program participant’s involvement in the program:  
 
 
presents a danger to the program participant’s mental or physical well-being;  
 
presents a direct threat to others;  
 
presents a direct threat to the mental or physical well-being of the service dog, 
support dog, or therapy horse; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 37/ Page 2 
 
does not meet the training requirements of the nonprofit training entity. 
 
Current Law: Pursuant to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act, “direct threat” 
means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by 
reasonable accommodation. 
 
Maryland Children’s Service Animal Program 
 
Chapters 247 and 248 of 2020 established the Maryland Children’s Service Animal 
Program and associated fund in the Maryland Department of Health to refer eligible 
children to selected nonprofit entities to be paired with service or support animals or 
interact with therapy horses and facilitate their training or therapy. 
 
A nonprofit training entity may disqualify a program participant from the program if it 
determines that the participant’s involvement in the program (1) presents a danger to the 
participant’s mental or physical well-being; (2) is a direct threat to the health and safety of 
others; (3) presents a direct threat to the mental or physical well-being of the service dog, 
support dog, or therapy horse; or (4) does not meet the training requirements of the 
nonprofit training entity.  
 
Since its inception in 2020 through fiscal 2026, the Maryland Children’s Service Animal 
Program has not been allocated funding in the State budget. 
 
Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program  
 
Chapter 416 of 2017 established the Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program and 
Fund. The program is designed to refer eligible veterans to selected nonprofit training 
organizations to be paired with “service dogs” or “support dogs” and facilitate their 
training. The Department of Veterans and Military Families must select at least 
one nonprofit training entity that meets specified qualifications to carry out elements of the 
program. Chapter 465 of 2019 expanded the program to include nonprofit training entities 
that use trained therapy horses for interaction with veterans. Chapter 268 of 2025 expanded 
eligibility for the program to include an “eligible family member” (a spouse or dependent 
of an eligible veteran). 
 
A nonprofit training entity may disqualify a program participant if it determines that the 
participant’s involvement in the program (1) presents a danger to the program participant's 
mental or physical well-being; (2) has caused or may potentially cause harm to others, an 
animal, or property; (3) presents a danger to the service dog’s, support dog’s, or therapy 
horse’s mental or physical well-being; or (4) does not meet the training requirements of the 
nonprofit.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 37/ Page 3 
The fiscal 2026 budget includes $211,930 in general funds for the Maryland Veterans 
Service Animal Program. 
 
Maryland Disability Service Animal Program 
 
Chapters 6 and 13 of the 2025 Special Session established the Maryland Disability Service 
Animal Program in the Maryland Department of Disabilities to select at least one nonprofit 
training entity to pair eligible individuals with an appropriate service animal. 
 
A nonprofit training entity may disqualify a program participant if it determines that the 
participant’s involvement in the program (1) presents a danger to the program participant's 
mental or physical well-being; (2) presents a direct threat to others, as defined by the federal 
Americans with Disabilities Act; (3) presents a direct threat to the service animal’s mental 
or physical well-being; and (4) does not meet the training requirements of the nonprofit.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3