START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 44 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 44 
(Senator Folden) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Forfeiture of Benefits 
 
 
This bill makes pension benefits payable to almost all members, former members, or 
retirees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) subject to forfeiture if the 
member, former member, or retiree is found guilty of, pleads guilty to, or enters a plea of 
nolo contendere to specified crimes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and does not 
apply to any service earned or crime committed before that date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, there is 
no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. The State Retirement 
Agency (SRA) can likely implement the bill with existing resources, as discussed below. 
No effect on revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, there 
is no discernible effect on pension liabilities or contribution rates for participating 
governmental units. No effect on revenues.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to “public employees,” defined as members, former 
members, and retirees of the:   
 
 
Employees’ Retirement System or Employees’ Pension System (EPS);  
 
Teachers’ Retirement System or Teachers’ Pension System;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 44/ Page 2 
 
State Police Retirement System;  
 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System;  
 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System; and  
 
Judges’ Retirement System.  
 
A “qualifying crime” is first- or second-degree rape, or first- or second-degree attempted 
rape, that is committed in the course of the performance of the public employee’s duties 
and responsibilities.  
 
Benefits may not be forfeited or reduced if the federal Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
determines that the forfeiture or reduction will negatively affect or invalidate the tax 
qualified status of a State or local pension system. If the IRS makes such a determination, 
any forfeiture of benefits that occurred must be reversed.  
 
Only service credit in the State system in which the public employee is a member when the 
qualifying crime is committed is eligible for forfeiture.  
 
The SRPS Board of Trustees must adopt regulations to implement the bill.  
 
Benefit Forfeiture Process 
 
If final adjudication of charges results in conviction of a public employee, the employee’s 
retirement allowance must be forfeited. In general, benefits may not be paid to a public 
employee if the SRPS Board of Trustees finds by clear and convincing evidence that:   
 
 
the public employee was convicted of a qualifying crime;  
 
the public employee was a member of one of the covered pension plans; and  
 
the qualifying crime was committed while the public employee was an active 
member of one of the covered pension plans.  
 
A public employee convicted of a qualifying crime may, within one year after the 
conviction, file a claim in circuit court for a partial payment of the employee’s retirement 
allowance. Notice of the claim must be served on SRA. When considering the claim, the 
court must consider specified factors, including the severity of the crime.  
 
A public employee subject to forfeiture of benefits is entitled to a return of the individual’s 
accumulated contributions on request, as specified.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 44/ Page 3 
Spousal and Dependent Protections 
 
A spouse, former spouse, child, or any other dependent of a convicted public employee 
may, within one year after the conviction, file a claim in circuit court for a partial payment 
of the employee’s retirement allowance for purposes of child support, alimony, or marital 
property rights. Notice of the claim must be served on SRA. The court may enter a domestic 
relations order (DRO) that allows some or all of the forfeited benefits to be paid to a spouse, 
a former spouse, a child, or any other dependents for purposes of child support, alimony, 
or marital property rights. The court must consider whether a spouse, former spouse, 
children, or other dependents were culpable or complicit in the qualifying crime.  
 
The court may not order benefits to be paid to a public employee’s spouse, former spouse, 
child, or other dependent in a manner that is inconsistent with the payment of benefits by 
SRPS. A forfeiture of benefits may not impair or alter an existing DRO providing benefits 
to a public employee’s former spouse. A public employee’s interest in a benefit of a former 
spouse established by DRO, or a benefit payable to a public employee as a beneficiary, 
may not be subject to a forfeiture or reduction under the bill.  
 
Retirees or Employees Eligible for Retirement 
 
If a public employee has retired before being convicted of a qualifying crime, the SRPS 
board may recover the amount of benefits paid before the conviction. The recovery is 
limited to the amount that would have been forfeited had the conviction occurred before 
retirement.  
 
If a public employee is eligible to apply for retirement and submits an application as 
specified, SRA may not process the application unless and until the final adjudication of 
the charge does not result in a conviction.  
 
Overturned Convictions 
 
On receipt of an order that reverses or overturns a conviction of a public employee, the 
SRPS board must rescind the forfeiture of benefits and pay any benefits that are payable. 
Any related DRO is terminated, and the SRPS board or local pension system may not pay 
any benefits under the order. For retired individuals, benefits must be restored back to the 
date the benefits ceased and include any cost-of-living adjustments that would have been 
paid, minus any partial payments made to the employee or payments in accordance with a 
DRO. If a conviction of a public employee who was not a retiree is overturned, the public 
employee may receive full benefits upon retirement.  
 
Current Law:  With the exception of the two provisions described below, pension benefits 
payable to members, former members, or retirees of SRPS are not subject to forfeiture due 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 44/ Page 4 
to convictions for any crimes. Montgomery County has previously advised that its county 
code specifies that an officer’s pension will not be granted when the officer is convicted of 
a crime; otherwise, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) is not aware of any local 
pension systems that allow for the forfeiture of benefits. 
 
State Officials’ Pension Forfeiture 
 
Pension benefits payable by EPS to any of the following six elected or appointed officials 
are subject to forfeiture if the official is found guilty of, pleads guilty to, or enters a plea of 
nolo contendere to a qualifying crime:   
 
 
the Governor;  
 
the Lieutenant Governor;  
 
the Attorney General;  
 
the Comptroller;  
 
the Treasurer; or 
 
the Secretary of State.  
 
“Qualifying crimes” are felonies that (1) are committed in the course of the official’s duties; 
(2) are committed through the use of the official’s authority derived from the position of 
employment; and (3) result in, or are attempted to result in, gain, profit, or advantage for 
the official. The court may order that some or all of the forfeited or reduced benefits be 
paid to a spouse or other dependent under a DRO. 
 
Benefits for these public officials may not be forfeited or reduced if the IRS determines 
that forfeiture or reduction will negatively affect or invalidate the tax qualified status of 
any State retirement or pension system. 
 
General Assembly Pension Forfeiture 
 
Provisions for the forfeiture of pension benefits by active and retired members of the 
General Assembly were enacted by Joint Resolution 4 of 2010, which amended the 
Resolution of the 2010 General Assembly Compensation Commission (GACC). The 
Resolutions of the 2014 GACC, 2018 GACC, and 2022 GACC were enacted with no action 
by the General Assembly and maintained the forfeiture provisions, so they remain in effect. 
Under the terms established by all resolutions, benefits payable by the Legislative Pension 
Plan may not be paid if a member or retiree is convicted of or pleads nolo contendere to 
any crime committed while in office that is either (1) a felony or (2) a misdemeanor related 
to the member’s public duties and responsibilities and involved moral turpitude for which 
the penalty may be incarceration. There are provisions for the restoration of benefits if the 
conviction is overturned or reversed.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 44/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:  SRA notes that, unlike other authorizations for the forfeiture of 
benefits, there is no requirement in this bill that courts or State’s Attorneys offices notify 
the system when a public employee becomes eligible for forfeiture. As a result, SRA 
advises that it may require one or two full-time positions to quarterly check legal records 
to identify members or retirees who qualify for benefit forfeiture.  
 
Although the bill does not require courts and State’s Attorneys to advise SRA or local 
pension systems when a member or retiree becomes eligible for benefit forfeiture, DLS 
believes that SRA can establish a reporting process with courts and local and State law 
enforcement agencies to notify the agency when a member or retiree becomes eligible. In 
some instances, SRA will become aware because of media coverage of a case involving a 
public employee; in other cases, the agency will need to be notified by an employer, 
prosecutor, or court. To the extent that SRA can establish a reporting process with courts, 
it should be able to implement the bill with existing resources. If courts are not fully 
cooperative in reporting convictions to the agency, however, SRA may need part-time staff 
assistance to ensure compliance with the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 388 and HB 98 of 2025; HB 9 of 2024; and HB 790 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5