START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 68 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 68 
(Senator Charles) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Driver's Licenses - Driver Skills Examination - Motorcycle Safety Awareness 
 
 
This bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to include at least 
five questions related to motorcycle safety awareness on the driver skills examination 
required for the issuance of a driver’s license. The questions must address the following 
items:  (1) visibility of motorcycles; (2) proper lane positioning around motorcycles; 
(3) safe following distances around motorcycles; (4) preventing crashes with motorcycles; 
and (5) any other topic related to motorcycle safety that MVA deems relevant. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual may not attempt to drive a motor vehicle on any highway in 
the State unless the person holds a driver’s license, is expressly exempt from licensing 
requirements, or is otherwise specifically authorized to drive the class of vehicle that the 
individual is driving or attempting to drive. 
 
To obtain a driver’s license, an applicant must pass a driver examination. The examination 
tests vision, the ability to read and understand highway signs, knowledge of traffic laws 
and safe driving practices, a demonstration of the applicant’s ability to exercise reasonable 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 68/ Page 2 
control in driving a motor vehicle, and any other additional physical or mental examination 
MVA considers necessary to determine an applicant’s fitness to drive a motor vehicle 
safely. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2