START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 21 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 21 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Natural Resources - State Parks - Maryland Golden Age Pass 
 
 
This bill establishes that a person age 62 or older who possesses a Maryland Golden Age 
Pass issued by the Maryland Park Service (MPS) (1) is entitled to free day-use entry to any 
State park that charges service fees and (2) may launch a boat at any State park without 
paying a boat launch fee. If a per-vehicle fee is in effect at a State park, the free day-use 
entry applies to everyone in the vehicle with the holder of a Maryland Golden Age Pass. 
The bill also expands the existing authorization for a holder of a Maryland Golden Age 
Pass to camp overnight in any State park at one-half of the established fee Monday through 
Thursday (excluding holidays), by making the authorization applicable Sunday through 
Thursday. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies – in statute – a combination of current regulations 
and current practice. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to Department of Natural Resources (DNR) regulations, the State 
park system is administered under the jurisdiction of MPS to preserve and protect the best 
of Maryland’s natural and historic places for the enjoyment and appreciation of its citizens. 
The parks are managed to provide public benefits, including (1) natural resource 
conservation; (2) cultural and historic preservation; (3) watershed protection; (4) education 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 21/ Page 2 
and interpretation; and (5) nature-based outdoor recreation, including trails, picnicking, 
boating, camping, cabins, hunting, fishing, and swimming. DNR regulations establish that 
an individual may not make use of, or gain admittance to, a facility or activity in a State 
park for which there is a fee, unless the fee is paid; however, an individual age 62 or older 
must be admitted to day-use areas free of an admittance charge, if the individual submits 
proof of age and registers with MPS. In addition, under statute, a person age 62 or older 
who possesses a Maryland Golden Age Pass, issued by MPS, may camp overnight in any 
State park at one-half of the established fee Monday through Thursday, excluding holidays. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 312 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2