START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 10 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 10 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
State Highway Administration - Speed Monitoring Systems - Application 
Approval 
 
 
This bill establishes a 90-day timeframe for the State Highway Administration (SHA) to 
approve or deny an application (or return an application as incomplete) when a county 
applies to obtain SHA’s approval to use a speed monitoring system on a State highway at 
a location within a municipal corporation. If SHA does not approve, deny, or return an 
application during that 90-day timeframe, the application is deemed approved. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources; 
SHA’s internal processes already conform to the timeframe established by the bill. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement System – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 10/ Page 2 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives 
a citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems on State Highways 
 
Under certain circumstances, counties are authorized to install and administer speed 
monitoring systems on State highways. However, before a county may use a system on a 
State highway at a location within a municipal corporation, the county must (1) obtain the 
approval of SHA; (2) notify the municipal corporation of SHA’s approval; and (3) grant 
the municipal corporation 60 days from the date of the county’s notice to enact an 
ordinance authorizing the municipal corporation instead of the county to use a speed 
monitoring system at that location. 
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Transportation; Municipal League; Maryland 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 21, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 10/ Page 3 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 10/ Page 4 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4