START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 83

J2 6lr0794
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: July 2, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Occupations – Grounds for Discipline – Federal and Court Actions

3 FOR the purpose of altering the grounds for discipline by certain health occupations boards
4 to include being disciplined by any branch of the uniformed services or the U.S.
5 Department of Veterans Affairs; altering the grounds for discipline of a naturopathic
6 doctor by the State Board of Physicians to include being convicted or disciplined by
7 a court of any state or country; and generally relating to the grounds for discipline
8 by health occupations boards.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Health Occupations
11 Section 2–101(a) and (c), 4–101(a) and (b), 5–101(a) and (b), 11–101(a) and (b),
12 12–101(a) and (d), 13–101(a) and (b), 14–101(a) and (b), 14–5A–01(a) and (c),
13 14–5B–01(a) and (d), 14–5C–01(a) and (c), 14–5D–01(a) and (e), 14–5E–01(a)
14 and (c), 14–5F–01(a) and (d), 14–5G–01(a) and (d), 15–101(a), (c), and (f),
15 16–101(a) and (b), 17–101(a) and (e), 18–101(a) and (b), 19–101(a) and (b), and
16 21–101(a) and (b)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
20 Article – Health Occupations
21 Section 2–314(14), 4–315(a)(21) and (c)(6), 5–311(12), 11–313(20), 12–313(b)(24),
22 13–316(10), 14–404(a)(21), 14–5A–17(a)(17), 14–5B–14(a)(17),
23 14–5C–17(a)(18), 14–5D–14(a)(17), 14–5E–16(a)(18), 14–5G–18(a)(19),
24 15–314(a)(21), 16–311(a)(21), 17–6A–19(10), 18–313(11), 19–311(9), and
25 21–312(b)(7)
26 Annotated Code of Maryland
27 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0083*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 83

1 BY repealing
2 Article – Health Occupations
3 Section 14–5F–18(a)(5)
4 Annotated Code of Maryland
5 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

6 BY adding to
7 Article – Health Occupations
8 Section 14–5F–18(a)(5)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Health Occupations

14 2–101.

15 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

16 (c) “Board” means the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid
17 Dispensers, Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists.

18 2–314.

19 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 2–315 of this subtitle, the Board may deny a
20 license or limited license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee or holder of a limited
21 license, place any licensee or holder of a limited license on probation, or suspend or revoke
22 a license or limited license if the applicant, licensee, or holder:

23 (14) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state
24 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, OR DISCIPLINED
25 BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
26 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under [this
27 section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

28 4–101.

29 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

30 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Dental Examiners.

31 4–315.

32 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 4–318 of this subtitle, the Board may
33 deny a general license to practice dentistry, a limited license to practice dentistry, or a
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 83 3

1 teacher’s license to practice dentistry to any applicant, reprimand any licensed dentist,
2 place any licensed dentist on probation, or suspend or revoke the license of any licensed
3 dentist, if the applicant or licensee:

4 (21) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state
5 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, OR DISCIPLINED
6 BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
7 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the
8 Board’s disciplinary statutes;

9 (c) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 4–318 of this subtitle, the Board may
10 deny a general license to practice dental hygiene, a teacher’s license to practice dental
11 hygiene, or a temporary license to practice dental hygiene to any applicant, reprimand any
12 licensed dental hygienist, place any licensed dental hygienist on probation, or suspend or
13 revoke the license of any licensed dental hygienist, if the applicant or licensee:

14 (6) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state
15 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, OR DISCIPLINED
16 BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
17 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the
18 Board’s disciplinary statutes;

19 5–101.

20 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Dietetic Practice.

22 5–311.

23 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 5–312 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
24 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license to any
25 applicant, reprimand any licensee, or suspend or revoke a license if the applicant or
26 licensee:

27 (12) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state
28 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any other state or country, OR
29 DISCIPLINED BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S.
30 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary
31 action under [this section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

32 11–101.

33 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

34 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Examiners in Optometry.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 83

1 11–313.

2 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 11–315 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
3 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license to any
4 applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke a
5 license if the applicant or licensee:

6 (20) Has had a license to practice optometry denied, suspended or revoked
7 in another state, OR HAS BEEN DISCIPLINED BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED
8 SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act which would
9 be grounds for disciplinary action under [this section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY
10 STATUTES;

11 12–101.

12 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

13 (d) “Board” means the State Board of Pharmacy.

14 12–313.

15 (b) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 12–315 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
16 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license to any
17 applicant for a pharmacist’s license, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on
18 probation, or suspend or revoke a license of a pharmacist if the applicant or licensee:

19 (24) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state or
20 country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, OR DISCIPLINED BY
21 ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
22 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the
23 Board’s disciplinary statutes;

24 13–101.

25 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

26 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners.

27 13–316.

28 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 13–317 of this subtitle, the Board may deny a
29 license or restricted license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee or holder of a
30 restricted license, place any licensee or holder of a restricted license on probation, or
31 suspend or revoke a license or restricted license if the applicant, licensee, or holder:
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 83 5

1 (10) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state or
2 country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any
3 branch of the uniformed services or [Veterans Administration] U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
4 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the
5 Board’s disciplinary statutes;

6 14–101.

7 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

8 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Physicians.

9 14–404.

10 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this subtitle, a disciplinary
11 panel, on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the disciplinary panel, may
12 reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke a license if
13 the licensee:

14 (21) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or convicted or
15 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any branch of the uniformed
16 services or the [Veterans’ Administration] U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS,
17 for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under [this section] THE BOARD’S
18 DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

19 14–5A–01.

20 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (c) “Committee” means the Respiratory Care Advisory Committee established
22 under § 14–5A–05 of this subtitle.

23 14–5A–17.

24 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
25 on the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
26 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
27 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

28 (17) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or is convicted or
29 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or [is] disciplined by any branch of the
30 uniformed services or the [Veterans’ Administration] U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
31 AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the Board’s
32 disciplinary statutes;

33 14–5B–01.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 SENATE BILL 83

1 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (d) “Committee” means the Radiation Therapy, Radiography, Nuclear Medicine
3 Technology, and Radiology Assistance Advisory Committee of the Board.

4 14–5B–14.

5 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
6 on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
7 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
8 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

9 (17) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or is convicted or
10 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or is disciplined by any branch of the
11 uniformed services or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, for an act that would be
12 grounds for disciplinary action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

13 14–5C–01.

14 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

15 (c) “Committee” means the Polysomnography Advisory Committee established
16 under § 14–5C–05 of this subtitle.

17 14–5C–17.

18 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
19 on the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
20 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
21 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

22 (18) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or is convicted or
23 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or is disciplined by any branch of the
24 uniformed services or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, for an act that would be
25 grounds for disciplinary action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

26 14–5D–01.

27 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

28 (e) “Committee” means the Athletic Trainer Advisory Committee established
29 under § 14–5D–04 of this subtitle.

30 14–5D–14.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
SENATE BILL 83 7

1 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
2 on the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
3 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
4 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

5 (17) Is disciplined by a licensing, certifying, or disciplinary authority or is
6 convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or [is] disciplined by any branch
7 of the uniformed services or the [Veterans Administration] U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
8 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under [this
9 section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

10 14–5E–01.

11 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

12 (c) “Committee” means the Perfusion Advisory Committee established under §
13 14–5E–05 of this subtitle.

14 14–5E–16.

15 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
16 on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
17 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
18 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

19 (18) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or is convicted or
20 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or [is] disciplined by any branch of the
21 uniformed services or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, for an act that would be
22 grounds for disciplinary action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

23 14–5F–01.

24 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

25 (d) “Committee” means the Naturopathic Medicine Advisory Committee.

26 14–5F–18.

27 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
28 on the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
29 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
30 suspend or revoke a license of any licensee if the applicant or licensee:

31 [(5) Has a license revoked or suspended, or was otherwise acted against,
32 including the denial of licensure, by the licensing authority of another state;]
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 SENATE BILL 83

1 (5) IS DISCIPLINED BY A LICENSING, CERTIFYING, OR DISCIPLINARY
2 AUTHORITY OR IS CONVICTED OR DISCIPLINED BY A COURT OF ANY STATE OR
3 COUNTRY, OR DISCIPLINED BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE
4 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, FOR AN ACT THAT WOULD BE GROUNDS
5 FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION UNDER THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

6 14–5G–01.

7 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

8 (d) “Committee” means the Genetic Counselors Advisory Committee.

9 14–5G–18.

10 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 14–405 of this title, a disciplinary panel,
11 on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the disciplinary panel, may deny a
12 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or
13 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:

14 (19) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or is convicted or
15 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or [is] disciplined by any branch of the
16 uniformed services or the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, for an act that would be
17 grounds for disciplinary action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

18 15–101.

19 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

20 (c) “Board” means the State Board of Physicians, established under § 14–201 of
21 this article.

22 (f) “Committee” means the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee.

23 15–314.

24 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 15–315 of this subtitle, a disciplinary
25 panel, on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum, may reprimand any physician
26 assistant, place any physician assistant on probation, or suspend or revoke a license if the
27 physician assistant:

28 (21) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority or convicted or
29 disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any branch of the uniformed
30 services or the [Veterans’ Administration] U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS,
31 for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under [this section] THE BOARD’S
32 DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
SENATE BILL 83 9

1 16–101.

2 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

3 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Podiatric Medical Examiners.

4 16–311.

5 (a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 16–313 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
6 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license or a limited
7 license to any applicant, reprimand any licensee or holder of a limited license, impose an
8 administrative monetary penalty not exceeding $50,000 on any licensee or holder of a
9 limited license, place any licensee or holder of a limited license on probation, or suspend or
10 revoke a license or a limited license if the applicant, licensee, or holder:

11 (21) Has been disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state
12 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by
13 any branch of the uniformed services or the [United States Veterans Administration] U.S.
14 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary
15 action under [this section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

16 17–101.

17 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

18 (e) “Board” means the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists.

19 17–6A–19.

20 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 17–6A–21 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
21 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license to any
22 applicant, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke a
23 license of any licensee if the applicant or licensee:

24 (10) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state or
25 country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any
26 branch of the uniformed services or the [United States Veterans Administration] U.S.
27 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary
28 action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

29 18–101.

30 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

31 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Examiners of Psychologists.
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
10 SENATE BILL 83

1 18–313.

2 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 18–315 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
3 affirmative vote of a majority of its members then serving, may deny a license or
4 registration to any applicant, reprimand any licensee or registrant, place any licensee or
5 registrant on probation, or suspend or revoke a license or registration of any licensee or
6 registrant if the applicant, licensee, or registrant:

7 (11) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state or
8 country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, or disciplined by any
9 branch of the uniformed services or the [United States Veterans Administration] U.S.
10 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary
11 action under the Board’s disciplinary statutes;

12 19–101.

13 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

14 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Social Work Examiners.

15 19–311.

16 Subject to the hearing provisions of § 19–312 of this subtitle, the Board may deny a
17 license to any applicant, fine a licensee, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on
18 probation, or suspend or revoke a license if the applicant or licensee:

19 (9) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any state[,] OR
20 country[, or branch of the armed services, or the Veterans’ Administration] OR
21 CONVICTED OR DISCIPLINED BY A COURT OF ANY STATE OR COUNTRY, OR
22 DISCIPLINED BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S.
23 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary
24 action under [this section] THE BOARD’S DISCIPLINARY STATUTES;

25 21–101.

26 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

27 (b) “Board” means the State Board of Environmental Health Specialists.

28 21–312.

29 (b) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 21–313 of this subtitle, the Board, on the
30 affirmative vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, may deny any applicant
31 licensure, reprimand any licensee, or place any individual who is licensed on probation, or
32 suspend or revoke a license, if the applicant or licensee:
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
SENATE BILL 83 11

1 (7) Is disciplined by a licensing or disciplinary authority of any other state
2 or country or convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country, OR DISCIPLINED
3 BY ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
4 VETERANS AFFAIRS, for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary action under the
5 Board’s disciplinary statutes;

6 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
7 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 11