START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 82 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 82 
(Senator Watson, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Law - Counterfeiting and Possession of Counterfeit Lease - Penalty 
 
 
This bill adds leases and rental agreements to the list of documents subject to the 
prohibitions and penalties under § 8-601 of the Criminal Law Article (counterfeiting of 
private instruments and documents). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
expanded application of existing penalty provisions, as discussed below. The bill is not 
expected to materially affect expenditures for the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) and 
the Judiciary, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s expanded 
application of existing penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Section 8‑601 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person form 
engaging in specified counterfeit‑related activities involving specified types of documents. 
 
Prohibitions and Penalties Under § 8-601 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Under current law, a person, with intent to defraud another, may not counterfeit, cause to 
be counterfeited, or willingly aid or assist in counterfeiting any of the types of documents 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 82/ Page 2 
listed below. Violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
10 years and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
A person is also prohibited from knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent 
possessing a counterfeit of any of the types of documents listed below. Violators are guilty 
of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to three years and/or a 
$1,000 maximum fine. 
 
A prosecution for an alleged violation of these prohibitions or an alleged violation of a 
crime based on an act that establishes a violation of these prohibitions may be commenced 
in any county in which (1) an element of the crime occurred; (2) the deed or other alleged 
counterfeit instrument is recorded in the county land records, filed with the clerk of the 
circuit court, or filed with the register of wills; (3) the victim resides; or (4) if the victim 
is not an individual, the victim conducts business. 
 
Types of Documents Subject to Provisions of § 8-601 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
The prohibitions described above apply to the following types of documents:   
 
 
bonds; 
 
checks; 
 
deeds; 
 
drafts; 
 
endorsements or assignments of a bond, draft, check, or promissory note; 
 
entries in an account book or ledger; 
 
letters of credit; 
 
negotiable instruments;  
 
powers of attorney; 
 
promissory notes; 
 
releases or discharges for money or property; 
 
titles to a motor vehicle;  
 
waivers or releases of mechanics’ lien; or  
 
wills or codicils. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
monetary penalty provisions from cases heard in the District Court. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 82/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:   
 
Incarceration Costs  
 
General fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s incarceration 
penalties due to more people being committed to State correctional facilities and increased 
payments to counties for reimbursement of costs for incarcerated individuals. The number 
of people convicted of this proposed crime is expected to be minimal.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,838 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Office of the Public Defender  
 
OPD advises that the bill may result in an increase caseload for public defenders across the 
State, requiring the equivalent of one attorney. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) advises that additional staffing needs for OPD cannot be reliably determined absent 
actual experience under the bill. Regardless, DLS assumes that initial caseloads are 
insufficient to justify immediate additional staffing. To the extent OPD’s case volume 
increases meaningfully as a direct result of the bill, OPD can request additional resources 
through the annual budget process. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary advises that it does not anticipate a significant fiscal or operational impact 
from the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 82/ Page 4 
Local Revenues:  Revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s monetary penalty 
provisions from cases heard in the circuit courts.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people in their 
facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention 
facilities have ranged from approximately $140 to $350 per incarcerated individual in 
recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4