START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 10

R5 6lr1240
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator A. Washington
Requested: October 17, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Highway Administration – Speed Monitoring Systems – Application
3 Approval

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Highway Administration to approve, deny, or
5 return as incomplete an application for the use of a certain speed monitoring system
6 within a certain number of days; providing that if the Administration does not
7 approve, deny, or return the application in accordance with this Act, the application
8 is deemed approved; and generally relating to applications for the use of speed
9 monitoring systems.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Transportation
12 Section 21–809(a)(1) and (9)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
16 Article – Transportation
17 Section 21–809(b)(1)(ii)
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Transportation

23 21–809.

24 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0010*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 10

1 (9) “Speed monitoring system” means a device with one or more motor
2 vehicle sensors producing recorded images of motor vehicles traveling at speeds at least 12
3 miles per hour above the posted speed limit.

4 (b) (1) (ii) 1. Before a county may use a speed monitoring system on a
5 State highway at a location within a municipal corporation, the county shall:

6 [1.] A. Obtain the approval of the State Highway
7 Administration;

8 [2.] B. Notify the municipal corporation of the State
9 Highway Administration’s approval of the use of a speed monitoring system at that
10 location; and

11 [3.] C. Grant the municipal corporation 60 days from the
12 date of the county’s notice to the municipal corporation to enact an ordinance authorizing
13 the municipal corporation instead of the county to use a speed monitoring system at that
14 location.

15 2. A. WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF AN
16 APPLICATION FOR THE USE OF A SPEED MONITORING SYSTEM UNDER THIS
17 SUBPARAGRAPH, THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL APPROVE OR DENY
18 THE APPLICATION OR RETURN THE APPLICATION AS INCOMPLETE.

19 B. IF THE ADMINISTRATION DOES NOT APPROVE, DENY,
20 OR RETURN AN APPLICATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSUBSUBPARAGRAPH A OF
21 THIS SUBSUBPARAGRAPH, THE APPLICATION SHALL BE DEEMED APPROVED.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2