START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 19 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 19 
(Senator Ellis) 
Finance 
 
 
Maryland Commission on Women's Health Advancement - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Commission on Women’s Health Advancement to study 
the feasibility of establishing (1) a State women’s hospital in Southern Maryland and  
(2) a statewide clinical network to advance women’s health by ensuring a continuum of 
care that addresses the unique health challenges faced by women across their lifespans. 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) must jointly staff the commission. The commission must submit (1) an initial 
action plan by January 1, 2027; (2) annual interim reports by July 1 of each year; and  
(3) a final report of its findings and recommendations on the need, funding, location, 
implementation plan, and structure for the State women’s hospital and clinical network by 
December 1, 2032. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2033. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by at least $211,800 in FY 2027 
for staff and contractual services, as discussed below. Future years reflect ongoing costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
211,800 
201,500 
207,200 
213,000 
218,800 
Net Effect 
($211,800) 
($201,500) 
($207,200) 
($213,000) 
($218,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 19/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Commission Membership 
 
The commission comprises a member of the Senate of Maryland, a member of the House 
of Delegates, the Attorney General (or their designee), as well as patient advocates and 
health care professionals and experts, among others. The Governor must designate a chair 
from among the members. 
 
A commission member serves for a seven-year term. Commission members may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State 
travel regulations. 
 
Commission Responsibilities 
 
The commission must: 
 
 
analyze the need for a centralized hospital for women with outpatient clinic 
locations throughout the State; 
 
examine existing health care gaps;  
 
in collaboration with MHCC, (1) assess its financial viability for a State women’s 
hospital and associated outpatient clinics, and (2) initiate a certificate of need for 
the hospital and clinics; 
 
investigate other approaches to a single-site hospital, including a hub network; and 
 
consult with a broad range of stakeholders, including providers, patient advocates, 
and community organizations. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Commission for Women in the Department of Human 
Services works to advance solutions and to expand social, political, and economic 
opportunities for all women. The commission must: 
 
 
stimulate and encourage study and review of the status of women in the State; 
 
strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems confronting women 
as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers; 
 
recommend methods of overcoming discrimination against women in public and 
private employment; 
 
encourage women to become candidates for public office; 
 
promote more effective methods for enabling women to develop their skills, 
continue their education, and to be retrained; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 19/ Page 3 
 
secure appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and contributions to 
the State; 
 
work to develop healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s 
responsibilities; and 
 
inform the Executive and Legislative branches on issues concerning women, 
including offering testimony on these issues. 
 
MHCC is an independent commission within MDH with a mission to plan for health 
system needs, promote informed decision making, increase accountability, and improve 
access in a rapidly changing health care environment by providing timely and accurate 
information on availability, cost, and quality of services to policymakers, purchasers, 
providers, and the public. MHCC’s special fund consists of user fees assessed on health 
care payors, hospitals, nursing homes, and health care practitioners. User fees must be used 
exclusively to cover the actual documented direct costs of fulfilling the statutory and 
regulatory duties of MHCC, including administrative costs incurred by MDH on behalf of 
the commission. The total user fees assessed by MHCC are currently capped by statute at 
$20.0 million annually. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Office of the Attorney General, the Morgan State University 
School of Community Health and Policy, and the University of Maryland School of Public 
Health can serve on the commission with existing budgeted resources. 
 
MDH advises that the requirement for MDH and MHCC to jointly staff the commission 
requires additional personnel from both MHCC and MDH’s Prevention and Health 
Promotion Administration (PHPA). Additionally, the commission’s work of analyzing 
gaps, conducting financial assessments, and preparing reports requires contractual services. 
Under these assumptions, MDH advises that general/special fund expenditures increase by 
$323,500 in fiscal 2027 to hire one health policy analyst and one MHCC program 
administrator to staff the commission, as well as $100,000 in annual contractual services. 
Out-year expenditures range from $302,059 to $333,611. 
 
While the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs that additional staff and 
contractual services are needed, DLS disagrees that both MHCC and PHPA need additional 
staff to support the commission. Instead, DLS advises that MDH general fund expenditures 
increase by at least $211,750 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s  
July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one health policy analyst 
in PHPA to staff the commission and $100,000 in annual contractual services for required 
data analyses and financial assessments. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 19/ Page 4 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$101,915 
Annual Contractual Services 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
9,835 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$211,750 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent that more resources are needed at MHCC to support the commission, special 
fund expenditures increase for personnel and potentially additional contractual services 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027. MHCC advises that its fiscal 2027 budget fully expends 
all available funds collected by the commission through user fees and that its current user 
fee cap amount does not provide room to fund additional large-scale efforts such as 
proposed under this bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4