START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 129 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 129 
(Senator Folden) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Domestic Violence - Warrantless Arrests and Victims 
 
 
This bill authorizes a police officer to arrest a person without a warrant if the police officer 
has probable cause to believe that the person battered another person with whom the person 
has had a sexual relationship within the past year, subject to additional requirements in 
existing statute. The bill also expands the definition of a “victim of domestic violence” to 
include an individual who has received (or is in fear of) physical injury, as specified, from 
another individual with whom the individual has had a sexual relationship within the 
past year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Warrantless Arrests for Domestic Abuse 
 
A police officer may arrest a person without a warrant if the police officer has probable 
cause to believe that (1) the person battered the person’s spouse or another person with 
whom the person resides; (2) there is evidence of physical injury; and (3) unless the person 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 129/ Page 2 
is arrested immediately, the person may not be apprehended, may cause physical injury or 
property damage to another, or may tamper with, dispose of, or destroy evidence. A report 
to the police must have been made within 48 hours of the alleged incident. 
 
If the police officer has probable cause to believe that mutual battery occurred and arrest 
is necessary under the circumstances specified above, the police officer must consider 
whether one of the persons acted in self-defense when determining whether to arrest the 
person whom the police officer believes to be the primary aggressor. 
 
Victims of Domestic Violence 
 
Statute requires the establishment of a program within the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) to help victims of domestic violence and their children in 
each region of the State. Specifically, the program’s purpose is to provide temporary shelter 
or help in obtaining shelter, counseling, information, referral, and rehabilitation. GOCPP 
is responsible for, among other tasks, supervising the program, setting standards of care 
and admission policies, and monitoring the operation of the program and annually 
evaluating its effectiveness.  
 
Under provisions in the Family Law Article applicable to the aforementioned program, a 
“victim of domestic violence” is defined as an individual who has received deliberate, 
severe, and demonstrable physical injury, or is in fear of imminent deliberate, severe, and 
demonstrable physical injury from a current or former spouse, or a current or former 
cohabitant. “Cohabitant” means a person who has had a sexual relationship with the 
respondent and resided with the respondent in the home for a period of at least 90 days 
within one year before the filing of the petition.  
 
Provisions in the Family Law Article that govern eligibility for domestic violence 
protective orders are based on an individual’s status as a “person eligible for relief.” A 
person eligible for relief includes an individual who has had a sexual relationship with the 
respondent within one year before the filing of a petition. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 739 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 129/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2026 
 
gj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3