START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 198

F4 6lr1431
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator A. Washington
Requested: October 29, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Prince George’s Community College – Aerospace Technology Studies Program

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Board of Community College Trustees for Prince George’s
4 County, in consultation with the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the
5 Department of Commerce, and the Prince George’s County Economic Development
6 Corporation, to establish an Aerospace Technology Studies Program at Prince
7 George’s Community College; and generally relating to Prince George’s Community
8 College.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 16–420
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 16–420.

18 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
19 INDICATED.

20 (2) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF COMMUNITY COLLEGE
21 TRUSTEES FOR PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0198*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 198

1 (3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
2 PROGRAM.

3 (B) THE BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE COMMISSION, THE
4 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, AND THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY ECONOMIC
5 DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, SHALL ESTABLISH AN AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY
6 STUDIES PROGRAM.

7 (C) (1) THE BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH INDUSTRY EXPERTS, SHALL
8 DEVELOP THE PROGRAM CURRICULUM TO INCLUDE:

9 (I) AEROSPACE SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY;

10 (II) AVIONICS AND ELECTRONICS;

11 (III) ADVANCED MANUFACTURING; AND

12 (IV) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN AEROSPACE.

13 (2) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE:

14 (I) WORKFORCE–BASED LEARNING, INCLUDING INTERNSHIPS
15 AND APPRENTICESHIPS; AND

16 (II) A PATHWAY FROM HIGH SCHOOL TO COLLEGE AND
17 CAREERS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH AN INTEREST IN PURSUING A CAREER IN
18 AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY.

19 (D) THE BOARD SHALL ENTER INTO MEMORANDA OF UNDERSTANDING TO
20 ESTABLISH FORMAL INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIPS WITH AT LEAST ONE AEROSPACE
21 AND TECHNOLOGY EMPLOYER IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

22 (E) THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PROGRAM AT PRINCE GEORGE’S
23 COMMUNITY COLLEGE IS SUBJECT TO PROGRAM APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSION
24 UNDER TITLE 11, SUBTITLE 2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

25 (F) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 15, 2026, AND EACH DECEMBER 15
26 THEREAFTER UNTIL THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED, THE BOARD SHALL
27 SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSION, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
28 EXECUTIVE, THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION, AND, IN
29 ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
30 ASSEMBLY ON THE STATUS OF ESTABLISHING THE PROGRAM.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 198 3

1 (2) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 OF EACH YEAR AFTER THE
2 PROGRAM’S ESTABLISHMENT, THE BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE
3 COMMISSION, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY EXECUTIVE, THE MARYLAND
4 AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
5 THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON INDUSTRY
6 PLACEMENT AND OUTCOMES OF THE PROGRAM IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
7 ACADEMIC YEAR.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3