START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 174

F1 6lr1552
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senators Carozza, Bailey, and Gallion
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Board of Education – Enforcement Procedures – Alteration

3 FOR the purpose of requiring an appeals process established by the State Board of
4 Education not to exceed a certain number of days for appeals of actions taken by a
5 county board of education for removal of the county superintendent or a member of
6 the county board of education, subject to certain exceptions; and generally relating
7 to enforcement procedures of the State Board of Education.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Education
10 Section 2–205(a) and (d)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Education
15 Section 2–205(e)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Education

21 2–205.

22 (a) In addition to the other powers granted and duties imposed under this article,
23 the State Board has the powers and duties set forth in this section.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0174*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 174

1 (d) The State Board may institute legal proceedings to enforce:

2 (1) The provisions of this article that are within its jurisdiction; and

3 (2) The bylaws, rules, and regulations adopted by the Board.

4 (e) (1) Without charge and with the advice of the Attorney General, the State
5 Board shall explain the true intent and meaning of the provisions of:

6 (i) This article that are within its jurisdiction; and

7 (ii) The bylaws, rules, and regulations adopted by the Board.

8 (2) Except as provided in paragraph [(4)] (5) of this subsection and in Title
9 6, Subtitles 4 and 5 of this article, the Board shall decide all controversies and disputes
10 under these provisions.

11 (3) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
12 PARAGRAPH, AN APPEALS PROCESS ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE BOARD MAY NOT
13 EXCEED 90 DAYS FOR THE APPEAL OF AN ACTION TAKEN BY A COUNTY BOARD
14 REGARDING THE REMOVAL OF:

15 1. THE COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT; OR

16 2. A MEMBER OF THE COUNTY BOARD.

17 (II) THE APPEALS PROCESS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
18 PARAGRAPH MAY EXCEED 90 DAYS IF:

19 1. DUE PROCESS DEMANDS THE EXTENSION; OR

20 2. THE STATE BOARD DETERMINES THAT AN
21 EXTENSION IS NECESSARY FOR THE IMMEDIATE PRESERVATION OF THE PUBLIC
22 HEALTH OR SAFETY.

23 [(3)] (4) The decision of the Board is final.

24 [(4)] (5) (i) The Public Employee Relations Board shall decide any
25 controversy or dispute arising under Title 6, Subtitle 4 or Subtitle 5 of this article.

26 (ii) A decision of the Public Employee Relations Board is final.

27 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
28 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2