START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 123 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
 
 
Oversight Committee on Quality of Care in Nursing Homes and Assisted Living 
Facilities - Membership 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Oversight Committee on Quality of Care in Nursing 
Homes and Assisted Living Facilities by (1) removing one member of the Senate 
Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs Committee (now known as the Senate 
Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee) and (2) reducing from two to one the 
number of members from the House Health and Government Operations Committee (now 
known as the House Health Committee).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, the oversight committee evaluates progress in improving the 
quality of nursing homes and assisted living facilities in the State, including consideration 
of (1) standards for the identification of specified diseases and conditions; (2) staffing 
patterns and standards; (3) policies and procedures for inspecting facilities and responding 
to quality of care complaints; (4) the rights of residents; and (5) data on resident 
satisfaction.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 123/ Page 2 
The oversight committee consists of one member of the Senate Finance Committee; 
one member of the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs Committee; 
two members of the House Health and Government Operations Committee; the Secretaries 
of Aging, Health, Human Services, and Disabilities (or their designee); the Director of the 
Office of Health Care Quality (or their designee); the Deputy Secretary for Behavioral 
Health (or their designee); the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman; two representatives of 
areas agencies on aging; one representative of a local long-term care ombudsman entity; 
three consumer members; three representatives from the assisted living industry; and 
several representatives from specified organizations.  
 
Additional Comments:  The House Health and Government Operations Committee was 
divided into the Health Committee and the Government, Labor, and Elections Committee 
during the 2025 Special Session. This analysis assumes that one member of the 
Health Committee will serve on the oversight committee.  
 
The Senate Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee (commonly known as 
EEE) was reorganized and renamed in December 2022 from the Senate Education, Health, 
and Environmental Affairs Committee. As part of this reorganization, all health matters 
previously overseen by EEE were transferred to the Senate Finance Committee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 153 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2