START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 181 
(Senator Lewis Young) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Hunting - Lead and Lead-Based Ammunition - Phase-Out 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to phase in a requirement 
that nonlead ammunition be used for hunting of all game species, by July 1, 2029 (with the 
phase-in period beginning July 1, 2027), subject to a requirement that the department 
authorize the use of lead ammunition for muzzleloaders, handguns, rifles, and shotguns if 
nonlead ammunition is not commercially available for the specific weapon. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund and federal fund revenues may decrease in future years, as 
discussed below. Expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By July 1, 2029, DNR must require the use of nonlead ammunition for 
the hunting of all game species, subject to a requirement that the department authorize the 
use of lead ammunition for muzzleloaders, handguns, rifles, and shotguns if nonlead 
ammunition is not commercially available for the specific weapon. The department must 
adopt regulations to carry out these requirements, including regulations that phase in the 
nonlead ammunition requirement by requiring the use of nonlead ammunition: 
 
 
for hunting pen-raised birds on regulated shooting areas, by July 1, 2027; 
 
for hunting upland game birds, webless migratory game birds, and wild turkey, by 
July 1, 2028; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 181/ Page 2 
 
for muzzleloaders, rifles, and shotguns used for hunting deer, by July 1, 2029; and 
 
for hunting any other game species, by July 1, 2029. 
 
“Nonlead ammunition” includes (1) ammunition in which there is less than 1% lead content 
and (2) any federally approved nontoxic ammunition. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Hunting in Maryland – Generally 
 
With certain exceptions, a person must have a Maryland resident or nonresident hunting 
license to hunt or attempt to hunt all legal game birds and mammals during the appropriate 
season in the State. In general, a person must obtain a certificate of competency in firearms 
and hunter safety before obtaining a hunting license by successfully completing a course 
of instruction in conservation and in competency and safety in the handling of firearms. In 
addition to a hunting license, a stamp is required for a hunter to use certain types of 
equipment or hunt certain kinds of game. 
 
More information on hunting licenses and stamps can be found in the Department of 
Legislative Services’ Maryland Fishing and Hunting Licenses, Permits, and Stamps report. 
 
Department of Natural Resources Regulation of Means or Weapons for Hunting 
 
DNR must prescribe by regulation the means or weapons for hunting designated wildlife 
and set forth any restrictions relating to weapons used to hunt designated wildlife, including 
the amount and size of ammunition for designated game birds or mammals. 
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the phase-in of nonlead ammunition requirements under 
the bill reduces the number of hunting licenses sold in the State, special fund revenues 
(hunting license and stamp fee revenues deposited in the Wildlife Management and 
Protection Fund), and federal fund revenues (federal wildlife conservation grant funding 
that is based on the amount of hunting license fee and stamp revenue DNR spends on 
conservation-related work), decrease. 
 
The extent of any reduction in revenues cannot be reliably estimated. DNR indicates that 
(1) the extent to which nonlead ammunition will be consistently available to hunters, and 
the extent to which they will adapt to using it, is uncertain, particularly once the nonlead 
requirement becomes broadly applicable (by July 1, 2029), and (2) any reduction in special 
and federal fund revenue may be more likely to result from a reduction in nonresident 
hunting license sales (which generate more revenue than resident license sales due to higher 
fees) if nonresident hunters choose to hunt in another state (including their home state) as 
a result of the nonlead ammunition requirement. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 181/ Page 3 
During the 2024-2025 license year, the department sold approximately 80,800 resident 
hunting licenses and 29,400 nonresident hunting licenses, generating approximately  
$2.2 million and $3.4 million in special fund revenues, respectively (not including stamp 
fee revenues).  
 
DNR advises that federal wildlife conservation grant funding is awarded at a 1:3 ratio; for 
every $1 that DNR’s Wildlife and Heritage Services (WHS) receives in fee revenue and 
spends on eligible conservation-related work, WHS receives $3 in federal grant funding 
through the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act. DNR applies for the  
federal grant funding at the end of each fiscal year, so any decrease in fee revenues in a 
given fiscal year results in a decrease in federal fund revenues in the following fiscal year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses affected by hunting in the State – including  
(1) those that provide ammunition or other goods or services to hunters and (2) farmers 
subject to wildlife crop damage mitigated by hunting – may be meaningfully impacted by 
the bill if it results in a reduction in the level of hunting in the State. 
 
The 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation 
conducted by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) indicated that the average hunter 
in the State spent $49 per hunting day on trip-related expenditures (food and lodging, 
transportation, and other trip costs) in 2011, and hunters in the State spent  
$50.2 million total on trip-related expenditures and $264 million on hunting overall in 2011 
(including trip-related, equipment, and any other expenditures). While FWS’s more recent 
surveys, in 2016 and 2022, have not included state-specific spending/cost information, if 
it is assumed that hunting spending/costs in Maryland increased by a similar or greater 
amount between 2011 and 2022 compared to the increase in national spending/costs during 
that period, hunters spent at least $67 per hunting day on trip-related expenditures in 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years.  See SB 634 and HB 741 of 2025 and SB 983 and HB 1473 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 181/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4