START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 161

M1 6lr0655
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: July 24, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Natural Resources – State Park Entry Fee – Exemptions

3 FOR the purpose of altering the individuals and vehicles that may enter a State park
4 without paying a certain fee on presentation of an accepted entrance document; and
5 generally relating to exemptions from paying State park entry fees.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Natural Resources
8 Section 5–1015
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Natural Resources

14 5–1015.

15 (a) IN THIS SECTION, “ACCEPTED ENTRANCE DOCUMENT” MEANS A VALID
16 VETERAN IDENTIFICATION CARD, A DRIVER’S LICENSE OR OTHER STATE–ISSUED
17 LICENSE OR IDENTIFICATION CARD THAT INDICATES THE HOLDER IS A VETERAN, OR
18 ANY OTHER FORM OF IDENTIFICATION ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT THAT
19 ESTABLISHES THE HOLDER’S:

20 (1) VETERAN STATUS; OR

21 (2) FORMER MARYLAND NATIONAL GUARD STATUS IF THE HOLDER
22 WAS DISCHARGED OR RELEASED UNDER CONDITIONS OTHER THAN DISHONORABLE.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0161*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 161

1 (B) On presentation of [a valid veteran identification card, a driver’s license that
2 indicates the license holder is a veteran, or any other form of identification accepted by the
3 Department that establishes the holder’s veteran status] AN ACCEPTED ENTRANCE
4 DOCUMENT BY AN INDIVIDUAL:

5 (1) [A veteran] THE INDIVIDUAL may enter a State park without paying
6 any day–use entry fee that has been established; and

7 (2) A vehicle of which [a veteran] THE INDIVIDUAL is an occupant may
8 enter a State park without paying any per–vehicle fee that has been established.

9 [(b)] (C) This section does not exempt [a veteran or other] AN individual from
10 paying any other facility use services fees not described in subsection [(a)] (B) of this
11 section.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2