START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 150

C2, M3, J2 6lr0621
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: July 4, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment and Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Notation of Veteran Status – Public Profiles

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing the Department of the Environment, the Department of
4 General Services, and units in the Maryland Department of Labor to include a
5 notation on certain public profiles indicating that an individual is a veteran; and
6 generally relating to the notation of veteran status on public profiles.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Business Regulation
9 Section 2.5–103
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Environment
14 Section 1–206
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Health Occupations
19 Section 1–707
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
23 Article – State Finance and Procurement
24 Section 4–211
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0150*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 150

1 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
2 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

3 Article – Business Regulation

4 2.5–103.

5 (a) This section applies only to a unit that establishes a process under subsection
6 (b) of this section.

7 (b) Each unit may establish a process to include a notation indicating veteran
8 status on a license OR PUBLIC PROFILE.

9 (c) (1) An application for an initial license or renewal license issued by a unit
10 shall allow the applicant to:

11 (i) request that a notation of the applicant’s veteran status be
12 included on the license OR PUBLIC PROFILE; and

13 (ii) provide affirmative consent to being contacted by appropriate
14 Executive Branch agencies regarding the applicant’s eligibility for State or federal
15 veterans’ benefits.

16 (2) An applicant for an initial license or a renewal license shall submit to
17 the unit one of the following as certification of veteran status:

18 (i) a certification of veteran status obtained from the Department of
19 Veterans and Military Families in accordance with § 9–905 of the State Government
20 Article;

21 (ii) a federal Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty
22 (DD Form 214); or

23 (iii) any other documentation acceptable to the unit.

24 (d) If an applicant for an initial license or a renewal license submits the
25 documentation required under subsection (c)(2) of this section, the unit shall include a
26 notation of veteran status on the license OR PUBLIC PROFILE.

27 (e) In accordance with §§ 4–304 through 4–325 of the General Provisions Article
28 and any other applicable law, and on request by an Executive Branch agency, a unit shall
29 electronically transmit to the Executive Branch agency appropriate information about each
30 applicant for an initial license or a renewal license who consents to being contacted under
31 subsection (c)(1) of this section.

32 Article – Environment
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 150 3

1 1–206.

2 (a) The Department may establish a process in collaboration with one or more
3 boards under the Department’s direction and control that requires a board to include a
4 notation indicating veteran status on a professional license [or], certificate, OR PUBLIC
5 PROFILE.

6 (b) If the Department establishes the process described in subsection (a) of this
7 section, an application for a professional license or certificate shall allow an applicant to:

8 (1) Present a certification of veteran status obtained from the Department
9 of Veterans and Military Families in accordance with § 9–905 of the State Government
10 Article, a DD Form 214, or other documentation acceptable to the board certifying veteran
11 status; and

12 (2) Indicate that the applicant consents to:

13 (i) Having a notation on the applicant’s professional license [or],
14 certificate, OR PUBLIC PROFILE indicating that the applicant is a veteran; and

15 (ii) Being contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies
16 regarding the applicant’s eligibility for State or federal veterans benefits.

17 (c) If an applicant presents the required documentation and consents in
18 accordance with subsection (b) of this section, a board shall:

19 (1) Include on the applicant’s professional license [or], certificate, OR
20 PUBLIC PROFILE a notation indicating that the applicant is a veteran; and

21 (2) In accordance with §§ 4–304 through 4–325 of the General Provisions
22 Article and any other applicable law, and on request from an Executive Branch agency,
23 electronically transmit to the Executive Branch agency appropriate information about the
24 applicant.

25 (d) The Department and applicable boards may adopt regulations to carry out the
26 provisions of this section.

27 Article – Health Occupations

28 1–707.

29 (a) Each health occupations board may establish a process to include a notation
30 indicating veteran status on a license, certificate, registration, or public profile.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 150

1 (b) If a health occupations board establishes the process described in subsection
2 (a) of this section, an application for a license, certificate, OR registration[, or public profile]
3 shall allow an applicant to:

4 (1) Present a certification of veteran status obtained from the Department
5 of Veterans and Military Families in accordance with § 9–905 of the State Government
6 Article, a DD Form 214, or other documentation acceptable to the health occupations board
7 certifying veteran status; and

8 (2) Indicate that the applicant consents to:

9 (i) Having a notation on the applicant’s license, certificate,
10 registration, or public profile indicating that the applicant is a veteran; and

11 (ii) Being contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies
12 regarding the applicant’s eligibility for State or federal veterans benefits.

13 (c) If an applicant presents the required documentation and consents in
14 accordance with subsection (b) of this section, a health occupations board shall:

15 (1) Include on the applicant’s license, certification, registration, or public
16 profile a notation indicating that the applicant is a veteran; and

17 (2) In accordance with §§ 4–304 through 4–325 of the General Provisions
18 Article and any other applicable law, and on request from an Executive Branch agency,
19 electronically transmit to the Executive Branch agency appropriate information about the
20 applicant.

21 (d) Each health occupations board may adopt regulations to carry out the
22 provisions of this section.

23 Article – State Finance and Procurement

24 4–211.

25 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

26 (2) “Executive agency” means a unit of the Executive Branch of State
27 government.

28 (3) “Identification card” means a security card issued by the Department
29 to a State employee or other individual authorized by the Secretary, including a contractor,
30 regulated lobbyist, media personnel, local government official, or volunteer.

31 (b) (1) The Department may include a notation on an identification card OR
32 PUBLIC PROFILE indicating that the holder is a veteran if the individual issued the
33 identification card presents a certification of veteran status obtained from the Department
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 150 5

1 of Veterans and Military Families in accordance with § 9–905 of the State Government
2 Article, a DD Form 214, or other documentation acceptable to the Department.

3 (2) The Department may limit the notation authorized by paragraph (1) of
4 this subsection to a certain category or categories of identification card holders.

5 (c) (1) If the Department provides an option for a notation on an identification
6 card OR PUBLIC PROFILE that indicates that the holder is a veteran, the Department shall
7 include on the application for the identification card the option for the applicant to:

8 (i) indicate that the applicant is a veteran; and

9 (ii) consent to being contacted by appropriate executive agencies
10 regarding the individual’s eligibility for State or federal veterans’ benefits.

11 (2) (i) In accordance with Title 4, Subtitle 3 of the General Provisions
12 Article and any other applicable law, and on request by an executive agency, the
13 Department shall transmit to the executive agency appropriate information about each
14 identification card holder who has given consent under paragraph (1)(ii) of this subsection.

15 (ii) Unless otherwise authorized or required by law, the Department
16 may not transmit information obtained on an application for an identification card that
17 relates to the applicant’s status as a veteran unless the applicant has given consent under
18 paragraph (1)(ii) of this subsection.

19 (d) The Department may adopt regulations to carry out this section.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
21 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5