START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 198 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 198 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Prince George's Community College - Aerospace Technology Studies Program 
 
   
This bill requires the Board of Community College Trustees for Prince Geroge’s County, 
in consultation with Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC), the Maryland 
Department of Commerce, and the Prince George’s County Economic Development 
Corporation, to establish an Aerospace Technology Studies Program at Prince George’s 
Community College (PGCC), subject to program approval by MHEC. By  
December 15, 2026, and each December 15 thereafter until the program has been 
established, the board of trustees must submit a report to MHEC, the Prince George’s 
County Executive, the Maryland Aerospace Technology Commission, and the 
General Assembly on the status of establishing the program. By October 1 of each year 
after the program’s establishment, the board of trustees must submit a report to those same 
entities on industry placements and outcomes of the program. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $71,900 in FY 2027 and $81,700 in 
FY 2028 for MHEC to retain contractual support to assist PGCC in establishing the 
program and to provide technical expertise needed to make program approval 
determinations. Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  PGCC expenditures increase significantly, as discussed below, to establish 
and implement an Aerospace Technology Studies Program. PGCC revenues increase to 
offset some of this cost following the establishment of the program from tuition and fees 
paid by program enrollees and from any grants awarded or donations made to the new 
program. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 198/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Board of Community College Trustees for Prince Geroge’s County, 
in consultation with industry experts, must develop program curriculum to include 
aerospace systems technology, avionics and electronics, advanced manufacturing, and 
artificial intelligence in aerospace. The program must provide work-based learning and a 
pathway from high school to college and careers as specified. The Board of Community 
College Trustees for Prince George’s County must enter a memorandum of understanding 
to establish formal industry partnerships with at least one aerospace and technology 
employer in Prince George’s County.  
 
Current Law:  PGCC currently does not offer a program of study in aerospace technology, 
though it does offer degrees in related fields, like its Associate of Science Degree in 
Engineering.  
 
Generally, MHEC must coordinate the overall growth and development of postsecondary 
education in the State. With respect to community colleges, MHEC must, among other 
things, ensure courses and programs offered are within the scope and mission of 
community colleges. In regards to program approval specifically, MHEC must review 
program proposals for public institutions of higher education and approve or disapprove 
program proposals for new programs and substantial modifications to existing programs. 
These processes are generally outlined in Maryland regulations (COMAR 13B.02.03). 
 
Processes for Implementing New Academic Programs 
 
There are two main processes for implementing new academic programs at institutions of 
higher education:  one for new programs that can be implemented with existing resources; 
and another for new programs that will require additional resources. The processes are 
overseen by MHEC, and MHEC’s determinations about program approval are not subject 
to judicial review or administrative appeal.   
 
Chapter 963 of 2024 also requires MHEC to develop and implement a third program review 
process for new proposed programs that are offered online only. Chapter 143 of 2025 also 
restructured the process for graduate-level academic program approval and institutional 
mission statements based on identifying State and regional workforce needs.  
 
Institutions of higher education seeking to implement new programs with new resources 
must submit proposals for the new programs to MHEC, and MHEC must approve or 
disapprove the programs or, in the case of private nonprofit and for-profit institutions of 
higher education, recommend that the programs be implemented or not implemented. If 
MHEC fails to act within 60 days of the date of submission of a completed proposal, the 
proposal is automatically deemed approved.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 198/ Page 3 
When a public or private nonprofit institution of higher education determines that it can 
implement a new program with existing resources, the president of the institution must 
submit the proposal to the institution’s governing board and to MHEC, and MHEC must 
distribute the proposal to other institutions. MHEC or another institution may file an 
objection to the proposal based on (1) inconsistency with the mission of the institution 
proposing the program; (2) a lack of need for the program; (3) unreasonable program 
duplication that could cause harm to another institution; or (4) violation of the State’s equal 
educational opportunity obligations (known as unnecessary program duplication). Based 
on those factors, MHEC must determine if an institution’s objection is justified. If MHEC 
determines that an objection is justified, it must negotiate with the institution’s governing 
board and president to modify the proposal. If the objection cannot be resolved within 
30 days of receipt of an objection, MHEC must make a final determination about the 
approval of the proposed program for a public institution of higher education or a 
final recommendation on implementation for a private nonprofit institution of 
higher education. 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission – Program Evaluation Unit 
 
Current law requires MHEC to establish a program evaluation unit, to evaluate new 
programs and substantial modifications, with at least 10 staff members. The unit 
established must assist MHEC in reviewing and evaluating proposals for new academic 
programs and substantial modifications of existing academic programs in accordance with 
law. The Governor must include in the annual operating budget an amount sufficient to 
employ the 10 staff members.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $71,869 in fiscal 2027 and 
$81,731 in fiscal 2028, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s  
July 1, 2026 effective date and assumes MHEC approves a final Aerospace Technology 
Studies Program by the end of fiscal 2028. 
 
MHEC has determined that one regular full-time position is needed to implement this bill. 
Specifically, MHEC advises that the new, permanent position may be required for both the 
initial program approval for the PGCC Aerospace Technology Studies Program and to 
expand MHEC’s core team of “lighthouse sector” analysts that can use the program 
potentially established under the bill as a pilot to create standardized workforce reporting 
and curriculum-alignment protocols. However, the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) advises that the added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent 
and, thus, may be performed by contractual employees. While DLS concurs that MHEC 
may require technical support to consult on the initial development and approval of the 
Aerospace Technology Studies Program, the bill does not require ongoing support for any 
programs beyond the PGCC Aerospace Technology Studies Program. Therefore, this 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual workforce policy analyst to consult with 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 198/ Page 4 
PGCC on the development of its new program and ensure MHEC has sufficient technical 
expertise to review the program once created. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one‑time 
start‑up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This analysis also assumes that PGCC 
independently retain subject matter experts in the development of the Aerospace 
Technology Studies Program to also support the development of the program (discussed 
below in Local Expenditures). 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$62,728 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$71,869 
 
Fiscal 2028 expenditures reflect full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This analysis also assumes 
MHEC provides final approval to a PGCC Aerospace Technology Studies Program by the 
end of fiscal 2028 and that MHEC can handle the bill’s reporting requirements once the 
program is established without the need for highly technical support staff. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Revenues:  PGCC’s revenues increase to the extent students enroll in the newly 
established Aerospace Technology Studies Program. Exact revenues depend on the size 
and scope of the program offerings and the number of students enrolling.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, PGCC estimates revenues of approximately $168,000 in 
fiscal 2028 for the first year of program operation. This estimate assumes the college offers 
a (1) 16 credit-hour Manufacturing Technology Certificate; (2) 33 credit-hour Avionics 
Technician Certificate (completed at a rate of 16.5 credit hours each year); and  
(3) 48 credit-hour Aviation Maintenance Certificate (completed at a rate of 24 credit hours 
each year). It further assumes 25 students enroll in each of the three programs in the 
first year and a $119 per credit hour tuition. Future year revenues depend on number of 
additional students enrolling and the cost per credit hour charged by the college. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Creation of an Aerospace Technology Studies Program 
meaningfully affects the operations of and increases expenditures for PGCC. The bill 
requires that initial creation of the program occur with coordination between the college 
and various State and local entities. On top of regular efforts required to develop a 
curriculum, the college must also execute memoranda of understanding with local industry 
partners and prepare regular reports on program progress.   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 198/ Page 5 
In the first year of program development, PGCC estimates needing to hire one program 
coordinator and consulting with a subject-matter expert to develop the program curriculum. 
PGCC estimates cost to hire a program coordinator at approximately $101,250 in 
fiscal 2025, which represents a $75,000 starting salary with $26,250 in fringe benefits 
(35% of salaries). PGCC also contemplates requiring over $300,000 in consultant costs for 
the development of the program curriculum. These costs are in addition to any operational 
burdens on existing staff, who may need to shift focus to help establish the new program.  
 
Once the program is in place, PGCC estimates, in addition to the continuation of the 
program coordinator position to manage marketing, enrollment, assessment, program 
review, and other duties associated with the new program, needing to hire two full‑time 
faculty and three adjunct faculty members to provide instruction on the new curriculum. 
PGCC estimates salary for a full-time faculty member at $75,000 and adjunct faculty 
salaries at $45,000 annually, though actual costs may be higher given the technical nature 
of the coursework. 
 
In addition to the staffing requirements, PGCC advises that an Aerospace Technology 
Program likely requires expansion of the college’s existing facilities. PGCC anticipates as 
much as $3.0 million in expenditures in fiscal 2027 to construct and equip appropriate lab 
space and hangar space to appropriately provide instruction in aerospace technology. DLS 
advises that actual capital costs needed to establish the program can vary greatly to the 
extent existing facilities can be repurposed and are ultimately unknown without a finalized 
academic program plan.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5