START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 117 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 117 
(Senator Folden) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Property Tax - Credit for Surviving Spouse of Fallen Public Safety Officer or 
Judicial Officer - Alteration 
 
 
This bill expands the local option property tax credit for the surviving spouse of a disabled 
or fallen public safety or judicial officer to include a surviving spouse who has remarried. 
Under current law, a surviving spouse may not be remarried and claim the property tax 
credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling owned by (1) a disabled public safety or judicial officer; (2) a surviving spouse 
of a fallen public safety or judicial officer; or (3) a cohabitant, provided specified 
conditions are met. Public safety officer includes a correctional officer, a law enforcement 
officer, or a member of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical service. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 117/ Page 2 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit. The amount of the decrease depends on the number of eligible taxpayers and the 
assessed value of each residential property that is eligible for the property tax credit, neither  
of which can be reliably estimated at this time.  
 
At present, Baltimore City and the following 14 counties have authorized the property tax 
credit – Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, Harford, 
Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Wicomico. 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2