START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 195

R5 6lr1026
SB 397/25 – JPR (PRE–FILED)

By: Senator McKay
Requested: September 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Motorcycles – Protective Headgear Requirement – Exception
3 (In Remembrance of Gary “Pappy” Boward)

4 FOR the purpose of establishing an exception to the prohibition against operating or riding
5 on a motorcycle without certain protective headgear for an individual at least a
6 certain age who has been licensed to operate a motorcycle for a certain period of time
7 or has completed a certain motorcycle safety course and for the individual’s
8 passenger; and generally relating to the requirement that protective headgear be
9 worn by operators and riders of motorcycles.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Transportation
12 Section 21–1306
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – Transportation

18 21–1306.

19 (a) This section does not apply to any person riding in an enclosed cab.

20 (b) (1) [An] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
21 SUBSECTION, AN individual may not operate or ride on a motorcycle unless the individual
22 is wearing protective headgear that meets the standards established by the Administrator.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0195*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 195

1 (2) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST
2 21 YEARS OLD WHO:

3 (I) HAS BEEN LICENSED TO OPERATE A MOTORCYCLE FOR AT
4 LEAST 2 YEARS;

5 (II) HAS COMPLETED A MOTORCYCLE RIDER SAFETY COURSE
6 APPROVED BY THE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE MOTORCYCLE SAFETY FOUNDATION;
7 OR

8 (III) IS A PASSENGER ON A MOTORCYCLE OPERATED BY AN
9 INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEM (I) OR (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

10 (c) A person may not operate a motorcycle unless:

11 (1) [He] THE PERSON is wearing an eye–protective device of a type
12 approved by the Administrator; or

13 (2) The motorcycle is equipped with a windscreen.

14 (d) The Administrator:

15 (1) May approve or disapprove protective headgear and eye–protective
16 devices required by this section;

17 (2) May adopt and enforce regulations establishing standards and
18 specifications for the approval of protective headgear and eye–protective devices; and

19 (3) Shall publish lists of all APPROVED protective headgear and
20 eye–protective devices [that he approves], by name and type.

21 (e) (1) The failure of an individual to wear protective headgear required under
22 subsection (b) of this section may not:

23 (i) Be considered evidence of negligence;

24 (ii) Be considered evidence of contributory negligence;

25 (iii) Limit liability of a party or an insurer; or

26 (iv) Diminish recovery for damages arising out of the ownership,
27 maintenance, or operation of a motorcycle.

28 (2) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (3) of this subsection, a party,
29 witness, or counsel may not make reference to protective headgear during a trial of a civil
30 action that involves property damage, personal injury, or death if the damage, injury, or
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 195 3

1 death is not related to the design, manufacture, supplying, or repair of protective headgear.

2 (3) (i) Nothing contained in this subsection may be construed to
3 prohibit the right of a person to institute a civil action for damages against a dealer,
4 manufacturer, distributor, factory branch, or other appropriate entity or person arising out
5 of an incident that involves protective headgear alleged to be defectively designed,
6 manufactured, or repaired.

7 (ii) In a civil action described under subparagraph (i) of this
8 paragraph in which 2 or more parties are named as joint tort–feasors, interpleaded as
9 defendants, or impleaded as defendants, and at least 1 of the joint tort–feasors or
10 defendants is not involved in the design, manufacture, supplying, or repair of protective
11 headgear, a court shall order on a motion of any party separate trials to accomplish the
12 ends of justice.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3