START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 194 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 194 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Income and Property Tax Incentives - Members and Veterans of the Space Force 
- Application 
 
 
This bill establishes a uniform definition of “active military, naval, air, or space service” 
and makes conforming changes to sections of law relating to the job creation tax credit and 
property tax benefits for disabled veterans, disabled active‐duty service members, and 
surviving spouses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. Provisions relating to the job 
creation tax credit apply to tax year 2026 and beyond. Provisions relating to property 
tax benefits apply to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is assumed that the bill does not materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that the bill does not materially affect local finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In 2025, the State enacted several pieces of legislation 
establishing uniform definitions of various military-related terms under State Government 
Article § 9-901, as shown in Exhibit 1.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 194/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Uniform Military Definitions Under State Government Article § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 194/ Page 3 
The bill further amends § 9-901 to define “active military, naval, air, or space service” by 
reference to 38 U.S.C. § 101. Thus, “active military, naval, air, or space service” includes 
(1) active duty; (2) any period of active duty for training during which the individual 
concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of 
duty; and (3) any period of inactive duty training during which the individual concerned 
was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty or from an acute 
myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident occurring during such 
training. 
 
Additionally, the bill makes conforming changes to provisions of the Economic 
Development and Tax-Property articles that reference “active military, naval, or air 
service” (as referenced and defined in prior 38 U.S.C. § 101, before the U.S. Space Force 
was established). These provisions are listed and described below.   
 
Economic Development § 6-301 (Job Creation Tax Credit)  
 
The Job Creation Tax Credit Program offers nonrefundable tax credits against the income 
tax or the insurance premiums tax to a business that establishes or expands a facility in the 
State that is primarily engaged in an eligible industry and creates a specified number of 
qualifying positions within a 24-month period. Chapter 191 of 2021 established an 
enhanced job creation tax credit for the hiring of qualified veteran employees and extended 
program eligibility to small businesses that hire at least one qualified veteran employee for 
a full-time position in the State.  
 
The Department of Commerce may certify up to $4.0 million in job creation tax credits 
annually. The program is scheduled to terminate January 1, 2027, after which a business 
entity may be considered for eligibility for the tax credit based on positions filled before 
this termination date, and tax credits earned may be carried forward.  
 
Tax-Property § 7-208 (Property Tax Exemption for Disabled Veterans, Disabled 
Active‑Duty Service Members, and Surviving Spouses)  
 
Subject to specified requirements, a dwelling house owned by a disabled veteran with a 
permanent 100% service-connected disability, a disabled active-duty service member, or a 
surviving spouse of a 100% service-disabled veteran or individual who died in the line of 
duty is exempt from State, county, and municipal property tax.  
 
Tax-Property § 9-265 (Property Tax Credit for Disabled Veterans)  
 
A county or municipality may grant, by law, a credit against the property tax imposed on 
a dwelling house owned by a disabled veteran if the disabled veteran’s federal adjusted 
gross income for the immediately preceding taxable year does not exceed $100,000 and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 194/ Page 4 
other requirements are met. To be eligible for the credit, an individual must have a 
permanent service-connected disability of at least 50% or a nonpermanent 
service‑connected disability of 100%, as specified. The property tax credit must equal 
25% of the county or municipal property tax imposed, or 50% if the disabled veteran’s 
service‑connected disability rating is at least 75% and the disabled veteran does not qualify 
for a property tax exemption under Tax-Property Article § 7-208. A county or municipality 
may, by law, continue to provide the property tax credit to the surviving spouse of a 
qualifying disabled veteran, as specified.  
 
Tax-Property § 9-323(g) (Washington County Property Tax Credit for Disabled Veterans) 
 
Washington County may grant, by law, a credit against the county property tax imposed 
on a dwelling house owned by a veteran with a permanent service-connected disability or 
an eligible surviving spouse, subject to specified requirements. The credit must equal a 
percentage of the property tax imposed that is equal to the percentage of the disabled 
veteran’s service-connected disability rating.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4