START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 175 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 175 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
City of Cumberland - Speed Monitoring Systems - Tractor Trailers on Interstate 
68 
 
   
This bill authorizes the City of Cumberland to install and use speed monitoring systems 
(i.e., speed cameras) on any portion of Interstate 68 for which the maximum posted speed 
limit is 45 miles per hour. The cameras, however, may only be used to enforce the speed 
limit for Class F (tractor) vehicles operated in combination with Class G (trailer) freight 
trailers or semitrailers. Existing requirements and specifications that apply to other speed 
monitoring systems generally apply to the speed monitoring systems authorized by the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues from contested cases in the District Court may 
increase minimally as early as FY 2027 to the extent that additional speed cameras are 
installed, as discussed below. General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be 
materially affected, as discussed below.    
  
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for the City of Cumberland increase to the extent 
that any speed cameras are installed pursuant to the bill’s authority, as discussed below.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  From the fines collected by the City of Cumberland as a result of violations 
enforced by speed monitoring systems placed on Interstate 68 in accordance with the bill, 
any balance remaining after cost recovery must be used to fund public safety programs, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 175/ Page 2 
transportation improvements, and maintenance within the Interstate 68 corridor in the  
City of Cumberland.  
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control 
systems. Generally, pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who 
receives a citation, may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court.  
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems.  
 
State Revenues:  Assuming that speed cameras are installed by the City of Cumberland 
pursuant to the bill’s authority, the total number of speed camera citations issued may 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027. As a result of this potential increase in citations, 
the number of individuals opting for a trial in District Court may increase.  
 
Accordingly, general fund revenues may increase minimally as fine revenues paid by 
individuals convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. For context, the 
Judiciary advises that there were 6,479 requests for trial based on citations issued from 
speed monitoring systems in fiscal 2025. 
 
State Expenditures:  It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s 
requirements does not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court.  
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an IT upgrade to automate the process at 
approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be incurred.   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 175/ Page 3 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that the City of Cumberland chooses to implement a 
speed camera program pursuant to the bill’s expanded authority:  
 
 
expenditures increase to install the speed cameras and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the speed camera 
program (e.g., mailing or contractual costs);  
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the city; 
and  
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
However, because the bill only authorizes the speed monitoring systems to be used to 
enforce speed limits in limited circumstances (specifically for tractors pulling trailers), any 
increase in revenues, if realized, is anticipated to be minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 175/ Page 4 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County.  
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m.  
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system;  
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program;  
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 175/ Page 5 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5