START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 194

Q1, C8, P1 6lr0616
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: June 27, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Budget and Taxation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Income and Property Tax Incentives – Members and Veterans of the Space
3 Force – Application

4 FOR the purpose of applying certain provisions of law relating to the job creation tax credit
5 and certain property tax credits and exemptions for certain members, veterans, and
6 surviving spouses of certain members and veterans of the military, naval, or air
7 service to certain members, veterans, and surviving spouses of certain members and
8 veterans of the space force; and generally relating to income and property tax
9 incentives for members, veterans, and surviving spouses of members and veterans
10 of the space force.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – State Government
13 Section 9–901
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Economic Development
18 Section 6–301(a)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
22 Article – Economic Development
23 Section 6–301(e)
24 Annotated Code of Maryland
25 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

26 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0194*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 194

1 Article – Tax – Property
2 Section 1–101(a), 9–265(a)(1), and 9–323(g)(1)(i)
3 Annotated Code of Maryland
4 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

5 BY adding to
6 Article – Tax – Property
7 Section 1–101(a–2)
8 Annotated Code of Maryland
9 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

10 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
11 Article – Tax – Property
12 Section 1–101(a–2), 7–208(a) and (d)(1), 9–265(a)(2) and (d)(1), and 9–323(g)(1)(ii)
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
16 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

17 Article – State Government

18 9–901.

19 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

20 (b) “Active duty” has the meaning stated in 37 U.S.C. § 101.

21 (c) “ACTIVE MILITARY, NAVAL, AIR, OR SPACE SERVICE” HAS THE MEANING
22 STATED IN 38 U.S.C. § 101.

23 (D) “Active service member” means an individual who is:

24 (1) an active duty member of the uniformed services; or

25 (2) serving in a reserve component of the uniformed services on active duty
26 orders.

27 [(d)] (E) “Armed forces” has the meaning stated in 10 U.S.C. § 101.

28 [(e)] (F) “Board” means the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust.

29 [(f)] (G) “Department” means the Department of Veterans and Military
30 Families.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 194 3

1 [(g)] (H) “Military family” includes the spouse and dependent children of a
2 service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or adoption.

3 [(h)] (I) “Reserve component” has the meaning stated in 37 U.S.C. § 101.

4 [(i)] (J) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families.

5 [(j)] (K) “Service member” means an individual who is a member of:

6 (1) the uniformed services; or

7 (2) a reserve component of the uniformed services.

8 [(k)] (L) “Trust” means the Maryland Veterans Trust.

9 [(l)] (M) “Uniformed services” has the meaning stated in 37 U.S.C. § 101.

10 [(m)] (N) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, “veteran” has the
11 meaning stated in 38 U.S.C. § 101.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
13 as follows:

14 Article – Economic Development

15 6–301.

16 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

17 (e) “Qualified veteran employee” means an individual who:

18 (1) is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances
19 from active military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service as defined in [38 U.S.C. § 101] §
20 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE; and

21 (2) is a qualified veteran as defined under § 51(d)(3)(A) of the Internal
22 Revenue Code for purposes of the federal Work Opportunity Tax Credit.

23 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
24 as follows:

25 Article – Tax – Property

26 1–101.

27 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 194

1 (A–2) “ACTIVE MILITARY, NAVAL, AIR, OR SPACE SERVICE” HAS THE MEANING
2 STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

3 [(a–2)] (A–3) “Active service member” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the
4 State Government Article.

5 7–208.

6 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

7 (2) “Disabled active duty service member” means an individual in active
8 [service of the] military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service [as defined in 38 U.S.C. § 101]
9 who has a service connected physical disability that:

10 (i) is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the service
11 member; and

12 (ii) was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the service member.

13 (3) (i) “Disabled veteran” means an individual who:

14 1. is honorably discharged or released under honorable
15 circumstances from active military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service [as defined in 38
16 U.S.C. § 101]; and

17 2. has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans
18 Affairs to have a permanent 100% service connected disability that results from blindness
19 or other disabling cause that:

20 A. is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran;
21 and

22 B. was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran.

23 (ii) “Disabled veteran” includes an individual who qualifies
24 posthumously for a 100% service connected disability.

25 (4) “Dwelling house”:

26 (i) means real property that is:

27 1. the legal residence of a disabled active duty service
28 member, disabled veteran, or surviving spouse; and

29 2. occupied by not more than 2 families; and
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 194 5

1 (ii) includes the lot or curtilage and structures necessary to use the
2 real property as a residence.

3 (5) “Individual who died in the line of duty” means an individual who died
4 while in the active military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service [of the United States] as a
5 result of an injury or disease that is deemed under 38 U.S.C. § 105 to have been incurred
6 in the line of duty.

7 (6) “Surviving spouse” means an individual who has not remarried and
8 who:

9 (i) is the surviving spouse of a disabled veteran;

10 (ii) is the surviving spouse of an individual who died in the line of
11 duty; or

12 (iii) receives Dependency and Indemnity Compensation from the U.S.
13 Department of Veterans Affairs.

14 (d) (1) A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran shall
15 apply for an exemption under this section by providing to the supervisor:

16 (i) a copy of the disabled veteran’s discharge certificate from active
17 military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service; and

18 (ii) 1. on the form provided by the Department, a certification of
19 the disabled veteran’s disability from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; or

20 2. a rating decision of the disabled veteran’s disability from
21 the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs that includes the effective date of the rating
22 decision.

23 9–265.

24 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

25 (2) “Disabled veteran” means an individual who:

26 (i) is honorably discharged or released under honorable
27 circumstances from active military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service [as defined in 38
28 U.S.C. § 101]; and

29 (ii) 1. has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans
30 Affairs to have a permanent service–connected disability of at least 50% that results from
31 blindness or any other disabling cause that:
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 SENATE BILL 194

1 A. is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran;
2 and

3 B. was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran;
4 or

5 2. has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans
6 Affairs to have a nonpermanent service–connected disability of 100% that results from
7 blindness or any other disabling cause that was not caused or incurred by misconduct of
8 the veteran.

9 (d) (1) A disabled veteran shall apply for the property tax credit under this
10 section by providing to the county or municipal corporation:

11 (i) a copy of the disabled veteran’s discharge certificate from active
12 military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service; and

13 (ii) on the form provided by the county or municipal corporation, a
14 certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the U.S. Department of Veterans
15 Affairs.

16 9–323.

17 (g) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
18 indicated.

19 (ii) 1. “Disabled veteran” means an individual who:

20 A. is honorably discharged or released under honorable
21 circumstances from active military, naval, [or] air, OR SPACE service [as defined in 38
22 U.S.C. § 101]; and

23 B. has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veterans
24 Affairs to have a permanent service–connected disability that results from blindness or
25 other disabling cause that:

26 I. is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran;
27 and

28 II. was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran.

29 2. “Disabled veteran” includes an individual who qualifies
30 posthumously for a service–connected disability.

31 SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall be
32 applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
SENATE BILL 194 7

1 SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 3 of this Act shall be
2 applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026.

3 SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
4 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7