START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 101

F2 6lr1046
(PRE–FILED) CF 6lr1732

By: Senator Bailey
Requested: October 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Loan Repayment and Scholarships for Correctional Officers

3 FOR the purpose of adding correctional officers as eligible recipients in the Maryland Loan
4 Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers and Probation Agents and the
5 Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program; and generally
6 relating to loan repayment and scholarships for correctional officers.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Education
9 Section 18–3701 and 18–3702 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 37.
10 Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers, Probation
11 Agents, and Correctional Officers”; and 18–3801 through 18–3804 and
12 18–3807 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 38. Maryland Police
13 Officers, Probation Agents, and Correctional Officers Scholarship Program”
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 Subtitle 37. Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers [and],
20 Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS.

21 18–3701.

22 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0101*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 101

1 (B) “CORRECTIONAL OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–201 OF
2 THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

3 [(b)] (C) “Eligible employment” means to work as:

4 (1) A police officer OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER in the State for at least
5 2 years; or

6 (2) A parole and probation agent, supervisor, or regional director in the
7 State for at least 2 years.

8 [(c)] (D) “Higher education loan” means a loan that is obtained for tuition for
9 undergraduate study.

10 [(d)] (E) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety
11 Article.

12 [(e)] (F) “Probation agent” means an individual serving as a parole and
13 probation agent, supervisor, or regional administrator for the Department of Public Safety
14 and Correctional Services.

15 [(f)] (G) “Program” means the Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program
16 for Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS.

17 18–3702.

18 (a) There is a Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers
19 [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS in the State.

20 (b) The Office shall distribute funds from the Program to assist in the repayment
21 of a higher education loan owed by a police officer [or], probation agent, OR
22 CORRECTIONAL OFFICER who:

23 (1) Receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a
24 public college or university in the State;

25 (2) Obtains eligible employment; and

26 (3) Satisfies any other criteria established by the Office.

27 Subtitle 38. Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL
28 OFFICERS Scholarship Program.

29 18–3801.

30 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 101 3

1 (B) “CORRECTIONAL OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–201 OF
2 THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

3 [(b)] (C) “Eligible institution” means:

4 (1) A public senior higher education institution in the State; or

5 (2) A community college in the State.

6 [(c)] (D) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety
7 Article.

8 [(d)] (E) “Probation agent” means an individual serving as a parole and
9 probation agent, supervisor, or regional administrator for the Department of Public Safety
10 and Correctional Services.

11 [(e)] (F) “Service obligation” means to work as a police officer [or], probation
12 agent, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER in the State not less than 5 years during the 8–year
13 period after graduation.

14 18–3802.

15 (a) There is a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
16 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship Program.

17 (b) The purpose of the program is to provide tuition assistance for students who
18 are:

19 (1) Attending an eligible institution and enrolled in a degree program that
20 would further the student’s intent to become a police officer [or], probation agent, OR
21 CORRECTIONAL OFFICER after graduation; or

22 (2) Employed as a police officer [or], probation agent, OR CORRECTIONAL
23 OFFICER, attending an eligible institution, and enrolled in a degree program that would
24 further the police officer’s [or], probation officer’s, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER’S career.

25 (c) The Office shall publicize the availability of the Maryland Police Officers
26 [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship.

27 18–3803.

28 (a) Each year, the Office shall select eligible students and offer a scholarship to
29 each student selected to be used at an eligible institution of the student’s choice.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 101

1 (b) A recipient of the Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
2 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship shall:

3 (1) Be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a Maryland high
4 school;

5 (2) Be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible institution
6 as a full–time or part–time undergraduate or graduate student pursuing a course of study
7 or program that would further the recipient’s career;

8 (3) Sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of
9 the recipient’s required studies; and

10 (4) Satisfy any additional criteria the Commission may establish.

11 (c) A current police officer [or], probation agent, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER
12 shall be eligible for a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
13 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship if they meet the eligibility criteria under
14 subsection (b) of this section.

15 18–3804.

16 The recipient of a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
17 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship shall repay the Commission the funds received
18 as set forth in § 18–112 of this title if the recipient does not:

19 (1) Satisfy the degree requirements of the eligible course of study or
20 program or fulfill other requirements as provided in this subtitle; or

21 (2) Perform the service obligation to work as a police officer [or], probation
22 agent, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER for at least 5 years during the 8–year period after
23 graduation.

24 18–3807.

25 The Office shall:

26 (1) Publicize the availability of Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation
27 Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarships; and

28 (2) To the extent practicable, award scholarships under this subtitle in a
29 manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
31 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4