START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 120 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 120 
(Senator Ellis) 
Finance 
 
 
Health Insurance - Required Benefits for Dental Preventive Care - Frequency 
Limitation Interval (Healthy Moms and Family Smiles Act) 
 
 
This bill reduces the frequency limitation on dental preventive care that may be imposed 
by an insurer, nonprofit health service plan, health maintenance organization, or dental plan 
organization (collectively carriers) from 120 days to 90 days during a plan year. The bill 
takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit 
plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues in FY 2027 for the Maryland 
Insurance Administration from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Review of filings can 
likely be handled with existing resources. No effect on the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on local government 
finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  “Dental preventive care” means a preventive dental visit, 
screening, oral examination, teeth cleaning, fluoride treatment, or routine preventive 
service that is a covered benefit under a policy or contract issued or delivered by a carrier. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 120/ Page 2 
Under current law, a carrier that provides dental benefits on an expense-incurred basis may 
not impose a frequency limitation that requires such care be provided at an interval greater 
than 120 days during a plan year. Thus, a carrier may require that dental preventive care 
be limited to no more than once every four months. Under the bill, such care may be limited 
to once every three months.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Department of Budget and Management advises that, although 
not subject to the bill’s requirements, the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare 
Benefits Program does not impose a limitation on the interval (number of days) between 
the allowed preventive dental care visits during a plan year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2