START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 105 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 105 
(Senators Folden and McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Real Time for Violent Crime Act (Geri's Law) 
 
 
This bill prohibits (1) the earning of diminution credits to reduce the term of confinement 
of an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree murder 
in a State or local correctional facility (pre-sentence or post-sentence) and (2) the 
application of diminution credits that equal more than 10% of an incarcerated individual’s 
aggregate sentence for crimes of violence. The bill also prohibits a judicial officer from 
authorizing the pretrial release of a defendant who is charged with a crime of violence if 
the defendant (1) has a pending charge for a crime of violence in Maryland (or a crime in 
another jurisdiction that would be a crime of violence if committed in Maryland) or 
(2) within the previous 10 years, was convicted in Maryland of a crime of violence (or in 
any other jurisdiction of a crime that would be a crime of violence if committed in 
Maryland). The bill’s provisions apply prospectively only. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances in the near 
term. In the future, general fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly over time, 
for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services as individuals serve longer 
terms of confinement under the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local finances are not anticipated to be materially affected, as discussed 
below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 105/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Diminution Credits:  Generally, incarcerated individuals sentenced to a State correctional 
facility are entitled to earn diminution of confinement credits to reduce the lengths of their 
incarcerations. Individuals sentenced for a “crime of violence” earn diminution credits at a 
lower rate than other incarcerated individuals. The following types of incarcerated 
individuals may not earn diminution credits:   
 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree rape 
against a victim younger than 16; 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first- or second‑degree 
sexual offense, as the offenses existed before October 1, 2017, against a victim 
younger than 16; 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a subsequent conviction of 
third-degree sexual offense against a victim younger than 16; 
 
an incarcerated individual imprisoned for a lifetime sexual offender supervision 
violation; and 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first-degree rape that 
occurred on or after October 1, 2024.  
 
Diminution credits are deducted from an incarcerated individual’s “term of confinement,” 
which is defined as (1) the length of the sentence, for a single sentence or (2) the period 
from the first day of the sentence that begins first through the last day of the sentence that 
ends last, for concurrent sentences, partially concurrent sentences, consecutive sentences, 
or a combination of concurrent and consecutive sentences. 
 
Diminution credits are made for good conduct, work tasks, education, and special projects 
or programs. For additional information on diminution credits, see the Maryland 
Diminution Credit System report published by the Department of Legislative Services in 
December 2025. 
 
Pretrial Release:  Under Maryland Rule 4-102, a “judicial officer” means a judge or a 
District Court commissioner. 
 
In most cases, pretrial release determinations are made at a defendant’s initial appearance 
before a District Court commissioner. A commissioner may not, however, authorize the 
release of certain defendants. Pretrial release of such defendants may be authorized only 
by a judge, and only on suitable bail, on any other conditions that will reasonably ensure 
that the defendant will not flee or pose a danger to others, or on both bail and such other 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 105/ Page 3 
conditions. In most instances, there is a rebuttable presumption that these defendants will 
flee and pose a danger to another person or the community. 
 
In particular, a District Court commissioner may not authorize the pretrial release of a 
defendant charged with a crime of violence (as defined under § 14-101 of the Criminal 
Law Article), if the defendant has been previously convicted of a crime of violence under 
the laws of this State, has been convicted under the laws of another state of a crime 
classified as a crime of violence in Maryland, or has been convicted of specified 
weapons‑related offenses. Also, a District Court commissioner may not authorize the 
pretrial release of a defendant charged with committing a crime of violence while the 
defendant was released on bail or personal recognizance for a pending prior charge of 
committing a crime of violence. 
 
A defendant who is denied pretrial release by a District Court commissioner or who for 
any reason remains in custody after a District Court commissioner has determined 
conditions of release under the Maryland Rules must be presented to a District Court judge 
immediately if the court is in session or, if the court is not in session, at the next session of 
the court. 
 
Crime of Violence:  Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of 
violence” as (1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, 
except involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; 
(9) robbery; (10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree 
sexual offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of 
violence, except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance;  
(13) child abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified 
circumstances; (15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; 
(17) an attempt to commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual 
conduct with a child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, 
rape, rob, or commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill does not materially affect State finances over 
the five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note, general fund incarceration 
expenditures increase in the future as individuals serve longer terms of confinement due to 
the bill’s changes. 
 
Diminution Credits:  Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in 
State correctional facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, 
including overhead, is estimated at $5,838 per month. Excluding overhead, the average 
cost of housing a new State incarcerated individual (including health care costs) is about 
$1,942 per month. Excluding all health care (which is a fixed cost under the current 
contract), the average variable costs total $324 per month. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 105/ Page 4 
For context, in fiscal 2025, the Division of Correction reports that there were 
234 individuals sentenced for first- or second-degree murder offenses. Although a reliable 
estimate of the total increase in State incarceration costs cannot be made, the impact could 
eventually be significant considering the cumulative impact over time as individuals 
sentenced for applicable offenses after October 1, 2026, remain in State facilities for longer 
terms of confinement due to the bill’s changes regarding diminution credits. 
 
Offenders sentenced for violent crimes typically are not sentenced to local correctional 
facilities; therefore, local finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Pretrial Release:  Given the nature of the criteria defendants must meet in order to be 
prohibited from being released before trial by a judicial officer under the bill and the 
existing statutory restrictions on pretrial release of these defendants, this estimate assumes 
that defendants affected by the bill are not released before trial on a frequent basis. Thus, 
the bill’s prohibitions relating to pretrial release are not expected to materially affect State 
or local finances or operations, including pretrial detention costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 735 of 2025 and HB 310 and SB 44 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4