START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 162 
(Senator West) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Motion to Reduce Duration of Sentence - Repeal of 
Sentencing Date Limitation 
 
   
This bill expands eligibility for sentencing relief available under provisions enacted 
pursuant to Chapter 61 of 2021, also known as the Juvenile Restoration Act (JRA). Under 
current law, an individual who wishes to file a motion for a sentence reduction under JRA 
must have been sentenced for the offense before October 1, 2021. The bill removes this 
sentencing date limitation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Given the other requirements under JRA (e.g., an individual must have 
served at least 20 years for the offense), any impact on State finances or operations resulting 
from the bill is unlikely to occur until the out‐years and beyond the five-year scope of this 
fiscal and policy note. 
  
Local Effect:  Any impact on State’s Attorneys’ offices under the bill is unlikely to be 
experienced until well into the future. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual convicted of a crime who wishes to have the sentence 
reduced has multiple alternatives. One option is under JRA, which authorizes an individual 
who was convicted as an adult for an offense committed when the individual was a minor 
to file a motion with the court to reduce the duration of the individual’s sentence if the 
individual (1) was sentenced for the offense before October 1, 2021 and (2) has been 
imprisoned for at least 20 years for the offense.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 162/ Page 2 
The court must conduct a hearing on the motion. The individual must be present at the 
hearing, unless the individual waives that right. This requirement may be satisfied if the 
hearing is conducted by video conference. At the hearing, the individual may introduce 
evidence in support of the motion, and the State may introduce evidence in support of or 
in opposition to the motion. The victim or the victim’s representative (1) must be given 
notice of the hearing in accordance with §§ 11-104 and 11-503 of the Criminal Procedure 
Article; (2) may submit a victim impact statement, as specified; and (3) may not be 
cross‑examined during presentation of the victim impact statement. 
 
After a hearing, the court may reduce the duration of the sentence imposed if the court 
determines that the individual is not a danger to the public, and the interests of justice will 
be better served by a reduced sentence. The court must consider specified factors when 
determining whether to reduce the duration of a sentence, including (1) the individual’s 
age at the time of the offense; (2) the nature of the offense and the history and 
characteristics of the individual; (3) whether the individual has completed an educational, 
vocational, or other program; (4) whether the individual has demonstrated maturity, 
rehabilitation, and fitness to reenter society sufficient to justify a sentence reduction; 
(5) any statement offered by a victim or a victim’s representative; (6) the individual’s 
family and community circumstances at the time of the offense, including any history of 
trauma, abuse, or involvement in the child welfare system; (7) the extent of the individual’s 
role in the offense and, if the individual was a minor, whether and to what extent an adult 
was involved in the offense; and (8) the diminished culpability of a juvenile as compared 
to an adult, including an inability to fully appreciate risks and consequence. 
 
The court must issue a written decision that addresses the specified factors. The court must 
order an individual to stay away from the victim and the victim’s family if the individual 
is released, unless the victim requests otherwise. The court may impose any other 
conditions of release necessary to promote victim safety and peace of mind. 
 
If the court denies or grants, in part, a motion to reduce the duration of the sentence, the 
individual may not file a second motion for at least three years. If the court denies or grants, 
in part, a second motion, the individual may not file a third motion for at least three years. 
With regard to any specific sentence, an individual may not file a fourth motion to reduce 
the duration of the sentence.  
  
Chapter 96 of 2025 expanded application of JRA to allow an individual convicted of an 
offense committed when the individual was at least age 18 but younger than age 25 to file 
a motion to reduce a sentence under the Act’s provisions and procedures if the individual 
meets other specified eligibility criteria.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 162/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3