START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 199

O1, O3 6lr1273
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: October 21, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Individuals With Disabilities and Service–Disabled Veterans Boating Fund –
3 Eligible Companions

4 FOR the purpose of requiring a grant from the Individuals With Disabilities and
5 Service–Disabled Veterans Boating Fund to provide opportunities to participate in
6 certain water–dependent activities for eligible companions of individuals with
7 disabilities or service–disabled veterans; and generally relating to the Individuals
8 With Disabilities and Service–Disabled Veterans Boating Fund.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Human Services
11 Section 7–1101 and 7–1102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Human Services

17 7–1101.

18 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

19 (b) “Department” means the Department of Disabilities.

20 (c) “ELIGIBLE COMPANION” MEANS AN ACCOMPANYING FAMILY MEMBER
21 OR DIRECT SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL OF AN INDIVIDUAL WITH DISABILITIES OR OF

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0199*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 199

1 A SERVICE–DISABLED VETERAN PARTICIPATING IN SAILING, BOATING, KAYAKING,
2 CANOEING, PADDLEBOARDING, OR SURFING ACTIVITIES.

3 (D) “Fund” means the Individuals With Disabilities and Service–Disabled
4 Veterans Boating Fund.

5 [(d)] (E) (1) “Individuals with disabilities” means individuals considered
6 disabled in accordance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C.
7 § 12102.

8 (2) “Individuals with disabilities” includes individuals with learning
9 disabilities.

10 [(e)] (F) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Disabilities.

11 [(f)] (G) “Service–disabled veteran” means a veteran with a disability that is
12 service–connected, as defined in 38 U.S.C. § 101(16).

13 7–1102.

14 (a) There is an Individuals With Disabilities and Service–Disabled Veterans
15 Boating Fund.

16 (b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide sailing, boating, kayaking, canoeing,
17 paddleboarding, and surfing opportunities for individuals with disabilities [and],
18 service–disabled veterans, AND THEIR ELIGIBLE COMPANIONS.

19 (c) The Department shall administer the Fund.

20 (d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
21 the State Finance and Procurement Article.

22 (2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
23 Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

24 (e) The Fund consists of:

25 (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

26 (2) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
27 Fund.

28 (f) The Fund may be used only for:

29 (1) providing State grants under this section; and
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 199 3

1 (2) administrative expenses of the Department in administering the Fund.

2 (g) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Department may
3 provide a grant of not more than $40,000 in a fiscal year to a grantee to provide sailing,
4 boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, or surfing opportunities for individuals with
5 disabilities AND THEIR ELIGIBLE COMPANIONS or service–disabled veterans AND THEIR
6 ELIGIBLE COMPANIONS.

7 (2) The Department may provide grants under this section only to a
8 nonprofit organization in good standing that:

9 (i) is qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;

10 (ii) has been in operation for at least 3 years, notwithstanding a
11 cessation of operations during a national or public health emergency issued:

12 1. by the President of the United States under § 201, § 202(d),
13 or § 301 of the federal National Emergencies Act; or

14 2. by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the
15 federal Public Health Service Act; and

16 (iii) has engaged individuals with disabilities or service–disabled
17 veterans in sailing, boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, or surfing activities on
18 State waters at least 25 times in each of the past 3 years.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3