START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 162

E2 6lr1299
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator West
Requested: October 22, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Procedure – Motion to Reduce Duration of Sentence – Repeal of
3 Sentencing Date Limitation

4 FOR the purpose of repealing a certain sentencing date limitation for an individual
5 convicted as an adult of an offense committed when the individual was a minor to
6 file a motion to reduce the duration of the sentence; and generally relating to a
7 motion to reduce duration of sentence.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – Criminal Procedure
10 Section 8–110(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Criminal Procedure
15 Section 8–110(b)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2025 Replacement Volume)

18 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
19 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

20 Article – Criminal Procedure

21 8–110.

22 (a) This section applies only to an individual who:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0162*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 162

1 (1) (i) was convicted as an adult for an offense committed when the
2 individual was a minor[;

3 (ii) was sentenced for the offense before October 1, 2021]; and

4 [(iii)] (II) has been imprisoned for at least 20 years for the offense;
5 or

6 (2) (i) was convicted of an offense committed when the individual was
7 at least 18 years old but younger than 25 years old;

8 (ii) was not sentenced to life without the possibility of parole;

9 (iii) is not a sex offender, as defined in § 11–701 of this article;

10 (iv) has been imprisoned for at least 20 years for the offense; and

11 (v) was not convicted of murder involving a victim who was a first
12 responder, as defined in § 18–213.2 of the Health – General Article, who was killed in the
13 line of duty.

14 (b) (1) An individual described in subsection (a) of this section may file a
15 motion with the court to reduce the duration of the sentence.

16 (2) A court shall conduct a hearing on a motion to reduce the duration of a
17 sentence.

18 (3) (i) The individual shall be present at the hearing, unless the
19 individual waives the right to be present.

20 (ii) The requirement that the individual be present at the hearing is
21 satisfied if the hearing is conducted by video conference.

22 (4) (i) The individual may introduce evidence in support of the motion
23 at the hearing.

24 (ii) The State may introduce evidence in support of or in opposition
25 to the motion at the hearing.

26 (5) (i) Notice of the hearing under this subsection shall be given to the
27 victim or the victim’s representative as provided in §§ 11–104 and 11–503 of this article.

28 (ii) A victim or victim’s representative may submit a victim impact
29 statement to the court regarding the impact of the crime and the proposed sentence
30 reduction.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 162 3

1 (iii) A victim may not be cross–examined when presenting a victim
2 impact statement under this section.

3 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
4 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3