START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 156

K3 6lr1521
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Ellis
Requested: October 30, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Railroads – Required Crew for Movement of Freight

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a railroad train used in connection with the movement of
4 freight from being operated in the State unless it has a certain number of crew
5 members; and generally relating to safety requirements for railroads.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Labor and Employment
8 Section 5.5–101(a), (d), and (e)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2025 Replacement Volume)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Labor and Employment
13 Section 5.5–110(e)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2025 Replacement Volume)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
17 Article – Transportation
18 Section 21–101(a) and (r)
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Labor and Employment

24 5.5–101.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0156*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 156

1 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (d) (1) “Railroad” includes each common carrier by rail and all branches,
3 bridges, cars, extensions, ferries, plants, spurs, stations, subways, switches, terminal
4 facilities, tracks, tunnels, and all equipment used on or in connection with them.

5 (2) “Railroad” does not include a rapid rail transit system or light rail
6 system operating in the State.

7 (e) “Railroad company” means:

8 (1) the operator of a railroad operating in the State; and

9 (2) the State or any political subdivision of the State, while operating a
10 railroad.

11 5.5–110.

12 (E) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “RAILROAD TRAIN” HAS THE MEANING STATED
13 IN § 21–101 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

14 (2) (I) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A RAILROAD TRAIN USED IN
15 CONNECTION WITH THE MOVEMENT OF RAILROAD FREIGHT THAT SHARES THE SAME
16 RAIL CORRIDOR AS A HIGH–SPEED PASSENGER OR COMMUTER TRAIN.

17 (II) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A RAILROAD TRAIN
18 USED IN CONNECTION WITH THE MOVEMENT OF RAILROAD FREIGHT INVOLVING:

19 1. HOSTLER SERVICE; OR

20 2. UTILITY EMPLOYEES IN YARD SERVICE.

21 (3) A RAILROAD TRAIN USED IN CONNECTION WITH THE MOVEMENT
22 OF RAILROAD FREIGHT MAY NOT BE OPERATED IN THE STATE UNLESS THE
23 RAILROAD TRAIN HAS A CREW OF AT LEAST TWO INDIVIDUALS.

24 (4) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
25 PERSON WHO WILLFULLY VIOLATES THIS SUBSECTION IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL
26 PENALTY ASSESSED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF:

27 1. EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM 2 OF THIS
28 SUBPARAGRAPH, A FINE NOT TO EXCEED $10,000; OR
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 156 3

1 2. IF THE PERSON PREVIOUSLY COMMITTED A WILLFUL
2 VIOLATION WITHIN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 3 YEARS, A FINE NOT TO EXCEED
3 $25,000.

4 (II) A RAILROAD COMPANY SHALL BE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE
5 FOR THE ACTIONS OF THE AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES OF THE RAILROAD COMPANY
6 THAT VIOLATE THIS SUBSECTION.

7 Article – Transportation

8 21–101.

9 (a) In this title and Title 25 of this article the following words have the meanings
10 indicated.

11 (r) “Railroad train” means any locomotive or any other car, rolling stock,
12 equipment, or other device that, alone or coupled to others, is operated on stationary rails.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

14 (a) Section 1 of this Act shall take effect contingent on the enacting of
15 substantially similar legislation in the State of New York, the Commonwealth of
16 Pennsylvania, and the Commonwealth of Virginia.

17 (b) The Maryland Department of Labor shall notify the Department of Legislative
18 Services within 10 days after the contingency described in subsection (a) of this section is
19 met.

20 (c) If the Department of Legislative Services receives notice under subsection (b)
21 of this section on or before October 1, 2056, Section 1 of this Act shall take effect on the date
22 notice is received.

23 (d) If the Department of Legislative Services does not receive notice under
24 subsection (b) of this section on or before October 1, 2056, Section 1 of this Act, with no
25 further action required by the General Assembly, shall be null and void.

26 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 2 of this
27 Act, this Act shall take effect October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3