START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 187 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 187 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Correctional Services - Comprehensive Rehabilitative Prerelease Services - 
Female Incarcerated Individuals 
 
 
This emergency bill (1) alters the specifications for the prerelease unit for women within 
the Division of Correction; (2) establishes requirements for the Department of General 
Services (DGS) relating to proposals for construction of the facility; (3) establishes 
requirements for the contract awarded to build the prerelease unit; (4) alters the 
requirements and timeline for the comprehensive rehabilitative services that must be made 
available for female incarcerated individuals; and (5) requires progress reports to be 
provided to specified legislative committees on compliance with the bill and the 
construction of the prerelease unit for women. By December 1, 2026, the Office of the 
Correctional Ombudsman (OCO) must review and verify the Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services’ (DPSCS) progress and submit a report, including findings and 
recommendations, to specified legislative committees. DPSCS must fully cooperate with 
OCO and provide all information, data, and facility access requested to complete the 
required review. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect anticipated in FY 2026. While DPSCS, DGS, and OCO 
can likely implement the bill with existing staff, the bill likely results in a significant delay 
in the completion of the prerelease unit as well as a significant increase in project costs. 
While there is no effect on total capital spending, funding for other capital projects is 
reduced or delayed due to the increase in project costs resulting from the bill. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 187/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Location and Facility Requirements 
 
The prerelease unit for women must be (1) located in Baltimore City on a site that is at 
least three acres in land area and not located within a one-mile radius of any existing 
correctional facility and (2) able to accommodate the administration, housing, 
programming, and required services, as specified, for not fewer than 1.25 times the number 
of women at the Maryland Correctional Institution for Women (MCI-W) who were eligible 
for prerelease status in calendar 2024, as reported by DPSCS in its October 2024 report to 
the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and the House Appropriations Committee. 
 
Requirements for Proposals and the Awarded Contract 
 
Upon request by DPSCS, by June 1, 2026, DGS must review and evaluate any proposals 
currently in possession of DPSCS for compliance with the facility requirements in statute, 
as altered by the bill. If no current proposal satisfies those requirements, DGS must, by 
August 1, 2026, issue an expedited request for proposals for the planning, design, and 
construction of a prerelease unit for women. DGS must (1) review and evaluate proposals 
in consultation with DPSCS and (2) award a contract to a provider as soon as practicable. 
 
A request for proposals issued under the bill must accurately and completely describe, to 
the extent practicable, the location, uses, and timeline for deliverables toward completion 
of the project. In addition, the contract awarded to build a prerelease unit for female 
incarcerated individuals must (1) comply with facility requirements in statute, as altered 
by the bill and (2) include specified housing units, rooms, spaces, facilities, offices, and 
amenities. 
 
Comprehensive Rehabilitative Prerelease Services 
 
The required evidence-based and gender-responsive services – as expanded by the 
bill – must be provided to eligible individuals before the final construction and occupation 
of the required prerelease unit for women. By September 1, 2026, DPSCS must develop a 
plan to provide comprehensive gender-responsive services to eligible individuals on-site at 
MCI-W. In addition, the Commissioner of Correction must make evidence-based and 
gender-responsive services available to female incarcerated individuals with prerelease 
status. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 187/ Page 3 
Progress Reports 
 
By July 1, 2026, DPSCS must provide a preliminary report to specified legislative 
committees on the progress the department has made to comply with the bill, as specified. 
By September 1, 2026, DPSCS and DGS must provide an update to specified legislative 
committees on the progress of the design and construction of the prerelease unit.  
 
Definitions 
 
The bill establishes definitions for “eligible individual,” and “gender-responsive services.” 
“Eligible individual” means an incarcerated individual with prerelease status at MCI-W. 
“Gender-responsive services” means programs that recognize the specific needs of 
incarcerated women in prerelease status regarding their psychological development, 
socialization, culture, exposure to trauma, and life experiences to reduce criminogenic risks 
and support successful reentry, recovery, and recidivism reduction.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Prerelease Unit for Women:  Chapter 16 of 2021 requires the Commissioner of Correction 
within DPSCS to operate a comprehensive rehabilitative prerelease unit for women that is 
a separate structure in which specified services are provided, has security features for 
specified female incarcerated individuals, and matches security level on a validated 
gender-responsive risk measure. DPSCS was required by statute to (1) identify a location, 
as specified, acquire property, and design a site plan for the unit by June 1, 2021; (2) begin 
construction or renovation of the facility by September 1, 2021; and (3) begin operating 
and providing services in the facility by June 1, 2023. In determining where to place a 
prerelease unit for women, the Commissioner must determine into which area, defined by 
zip codes, the largest percentage of incarcerated individuals will likely be released. The 
prerelease unit must be located in or adjacent to the zip codes identified. 
 
An incarcerated individual assigned to a prerelease unit for women may have access to the 
community for the purpose of (1) engaging in or seeking employment; (2) participating in 
educational programs or vocational training, community or civic activities, volunteer work, 
athletic competition; or (3) making personal or family visits. 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must make evidence-based and gender-responsive 
services available to female incarcerated individuals at the prerelease unit for women. The 
comprehensive rehabilitative prerelease services must utilize evidence-based programs and 
practices and innovative programs and practices to:   
 
 
assist female incarcerated individuals in improving their education, upgrading 
vocational skills, and obtaining suitable employment through classes to earn 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 187/ Page 4 
industry certification or community college credits, workforce training, and job 
placement; 
 
provide female incarcerated individuals with the opportunity to strengthen family 
and community relationships through extended family leave, parenting workshops, 
and family reunification assistance; 
 
provide integrative and gender-responsive services, including medical treatment, 
trauma-informed counseling, mental health treatment, and substance use disorder 
treatment to address overall health, and trauma needs and help female incarcerated 
individuals achieve stable and productive roles in society; and 
 
develop individualized and comprehensive reentry plans involving community 
provider partnerships for female incarcerated individuals to reduce barriers to 
obtaining housing, jobs, education, health care, child care and child welfare, 
transportation, legal advocacy, case management, and other needs. 
 
“Evidence-based programs and practices” means programs proven by scientific research 
to reliably produce reductions in recidivism. “Innovative programs and practices” means 
programs that do not meet the standard of evidence-based practices, but which preliminary 
research or data indicates will reduce the likelihood of offender recidivism. 
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning:  The Maryland Department of Labor’s 
(MD Labor) Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees 
Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State correctional facilities. DWDAL’s 
Office of Correctional Education (OCE) provides career training opportunities “behind the 
fence.” Offerings vary by institution but include training in automotive skills, barbering, 
construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead to a portable, industry-recognized 
credential that contributes to an incarcerated individual’s employability after release. In 
addition to occupational programming, OCE oversees academic and transitional courses 
throughout Maryland’s correctional facilities. Academic programming includes GED 
preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high school diploma and English as a second 
language courses. Prior to release, incarcerated individuals may complete transitional 
courses to ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include classes in parenting, 
employment readiness, financial literacy, and life skills. 
 
MD Labor provides services to returning citizens through the Re-entry Navigator Initiative. 
Re-entry Navigators are a team of employment specialists located within the American Job 
Centers across the State who connect justice-involved job seekers with businesses by 
planning with prerelease individuals and supporting postrelease job seekers. The 
navigators also continually establish a network of employer contacts who are interested in 
hiring their clients. More information on the Re-entry Navigator Initiative can be found on 
MD Labor’s website. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 187/ Page 5 
Required Documents:  The Commissioner of Correction must issue an ID card to an 
incarcerated individual before release from confinement in a State correctional facility. The 
ID card must meet the requirements for secondary identification for the purpose of an 
ID card issued by the Motor Vehicle Administration under § 12-301 of the Transportation 
Article. In addition, pursuant to Chapter 514 of 2020, the Commissioner of Correction must 
obtain an incarcerated individual’s birth certificate and Social Security card after taking 
custody of an incarcerated individual (unless the incarcerated individual does not consent). 
 
Expedited Procurement:  Generally with specified exceptions, a State agency’s 
procurement officer, with the approval of the head of the agency and the Board of Public 
Works (BPW), may make a procurement on an expedited basis if the head of the agency 
and BPW find that (1) urgent circumstances require prompt action; (2) an expedited 
procurement best serves the public interest; and (3) the need for the expedited procurement 
outweighs the benefits of making the procurement on the basis of competitive sealed bids 
or competitive sealed proposals. The procurement officer must attempt to obtain as much 
competition as reasonably possible. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Background:  As noted above, Chapter 16 required DPSCS to (1) identify a location, as 
specified, acquire property, and design a site plan for the prerelease unit by June 1, 2021; 
(2) begin construction or renovation of the facility by September 1, 2021; and (3) begin 
operating and providing services in the facility by June 1, 2023. The bill does not alter 
those deadlines. The project is significantly behind schedule for several reasons, including 
changes to the site location, DPSCS not utilizing its appropriations in a timely manner, and 
continuing conversations with stakeholders. As a result, the prerelease center for women 
remains in the planning and design phase. According to DPSCS, to date, the State has spent 
approximately $350,000 on architectural and engineering services for the project. 
Approximately $9.0 million ($2.0 million in general funds and $7.0 million in general 
obligation bonds) had been allocated for the project in the fiscal 2026 capital budget; 
however, the fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced proposes to deauthorize those funds. 
 
Although the planned facility has been delayed, DPSCS is still required to provide 
evidence-based and gender-responsive services to incarcerated women in its custody. 
Project FRESH is the temporary prerelease program for women at MCI-W. The program 
provides a dedicated housing unit with privileges and programming aimed at preparing 
incarcerated females for reentry into society. Participants have access to educational and 
vocational training, trauma-informed therapy, parenting workshops, and substance use 
treatment, among other opportunities. Community partners also play a significant role in 
running the program through legal assistance, financial literacy training, and employment 
support. Project FRESH also offers limited work release due to the operational challenges 
associated with running a prerelease program out of a high security facility. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 187/ Page 6 
Capital Expenditures:  DPSCS advises that the current planned location for the facility 
does not meet the bill’s requirements of being located on a site in Baltimore City that is not 
less than three acres in land area. Therefore, under the bill, DPSCS needs to restart the 
planning and design phase for the facility, which further delays the completion of the 
project and increases costs. 
 
Construction for the currently planned prerelease center is scheduled to begin in 
fiscal 2031. The current cost estimate is $107.8 million. Because the location, design, and 
infrastructure of the facility need to change as a result of the bill, costs increase, likely 
significantly, beginning as early as fiscal 2027. A reliable estimate of any such increase 
cannot be made at this time; however, DGS estimates that property acquisition, demolition, 
environmental remediation, and site development for a new site could total millions of 
dollars and delay the completion of the project by at least three to four years. DGS further 
advises that any delay in construction likely results in an increase in project costs. 
 
Although the bill has no effect on total capital spending, which is established annually by 
the Governor and the General Assembly through the capital budget process, funding for 
other capital projects is reduced or delayed due to the increase in capital expenditures 
incurred to acquire property, redesign, and construct the prerelease unit for women in 
accordance with the bill’s requirements. 
 
Operating Expenditures:  DPSCS can likely implement the bill’s changes with existing 
staff. With respect to the programming and services required by the bill, DPSCS advises 
that the programming and services it currently offers likely meet all of the bill’s 
requirements. In addition, DPSCS can complete the required plan and progress reports 
using existing budgeted resources. 
 
DGS has expended considerable staff resources on the current project design and plan. As 
a result of the bill’s changes, DGS likely needs to reallocate staff resources from other 
projects, which affects the department’s ability to manage other State projects efficiently. 
However, DGS can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing staff. To the extent 
existing staff prove insufficient, DGS may request additional resources through the annual 
budget process. 
 
OCO can likely review and verify DPSCS’s progress and submit the required report with 
existing staff. To the extent existing staff prove insufficient, OCO may request additional 
resources through the annual budget process. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 187/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 632 and HB 1198 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7