START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 167 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 167 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Department of Natural Resources - Licenses, Permits, Registrations, and Public 
Profiles - Notation of Veteran Status 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to establish a process to 
include a notation indicating veteran status on a license, permit, registration, or public 
profile. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DNR can implement the process authorized by the bill using existing 
budgeted resources. The bill is not anticipated to otherwise materially impact State 
operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If DNR establishes the process authorized by the bill, an application for a 
license, permit, or registration must allow the applicant to request that a notation of the 
applicant’s veteran status be included on the license, permit, registration, or public profile. 
An applicant requesting a notation must indicate consent to (1) having a notation of veteran 
status on the applicant’s license, permit, registration, or public profile and (2) being 
contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies about eligibility for State or federal 
veterans’ benefits. 
 
An applicant requesting notation of veteran status must submit (1) a certification of veteran 
status obtained from the Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF);  
(2) a federal certificate of release or discharge from active duty; or (3) any other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 167/ Page 2 
documentation certifying veteran status acceptable to DNR. If an applicant submits 
appropriate documentation and consents to contact, the department must include a notation 
of veteran status on the license, permit, registration, or public profile. On request from an 
Executive Branch agency, and in accordance with the Maryland Public Information Act, 
DNR must electronically transmit appropriate information about the applicant. DNR may 
adopt regulations relevant to the bill. 
 
Current Law:  DNR is responsible for issuing numerous licenses, permits, and 
registrations, including for hunting, fishing, vessels, and off-road vehicles. DNR’s  
MD Outdoors online licensing and registration system facilitates many transactions; 
individuals may also obtain various licenses/permits by visiting a DNR service center or 
various sports license agent locations throughout the State. 
 
Chapters 247, 248, 249, and 250 of 2025 similarly authorized the Department of  
General Services, Maryland Department of Health, Maryland Department of the 
Environment, and Maryland Department of Labor, respectively, to establish processes 
related to veteran status notations. 
 
DVMF exists as a principal department of State government and is responsible for, among 
other duties, delivering services and programs to assist the State’s veterans, their families, 
and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in recognition 
for their service. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill’s provisions may facilitate additional 
veterans applying and being deemed eligible for certain benefits, any associated impact is 
not anticipated to materially affect State or local finances or operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2