START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 127

C9 6lr1120
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Salling
Requested: October 8, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore County Food Desert Study

3 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development to
4 conduct a study and make recommendations on reducing the number of food deserts
5 in Baltimore County; and generally relating to food deserts.

6 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
7 That:

8 (a) In this section, “food desert” has the meaning stated in § 6–301 of the Housing
9 and Community Development Article.

10 (b) The Department of Housing and Community Development shall:

11 (1) study food deserts in Baltimore County; and

12 (2) make recommendations:

13 (i) to reduce the number of food deserts in Baltimore County; and

14 (ii) regarding available funding sources for fresh food financing
15 initiatives and programs in the State.

16 (c) In conducting the study and making the recommendations, the Department
17 shall:

18 (1) review food desert projects located in Baltimore County funded under §
19 6–308.3 of the Housing and Community Development Article;

20 (2) analyze the location of food deserts in Baltimore County;

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0127*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 127

1 (3) determine the impact of food deserts on the Baltimore County
2 population and economy;

3 (4) develop strategies to attract grocery stores and supermarket retailers
4 to food deserts in Baltimore County, including identifying and analyzing anticipated costs;
5 and

6 (5) review existing incentives and available financing programs to
7 encourage the establishment of grocery stores and supermarket retailers in identified food
8 deserts in Baltimore County.

9 (d) On or before November 30, 2026, the Department shall submit a report of its
10 findings and recommendations, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
11 Article, to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment, the Senate
12 Finance Committee, and the House Environment and Transportation Committee.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
14 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2027, this
15 Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
16 further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2