START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 177 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 177 
(Senator West) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Law - Interference With Access to or Egress From a Religious Facility - 
Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person, acting alone or with others, from intentionally preventing 
another from entering or exiting a “religious facility” by physically detaining the other or 
obstructing, impeding, or hindering the other’s passage. Violators are guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
The bill’s provisions do not prohibit speech, and the bill does not apply to (1) the chief 
executive officer of the religious facility or their designee; (2) an agent of the religious 
facility; or (3) a law enforcement officer.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Religious facility” means real property that is owned, leased, or used by 
a religious entity or for any religious purpose. Religious facility includes (1) a place of 
worship; (2) a cemetery; (3) a religious school, educational facility, or community center; 
and (4) the grounds adjacent to them. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 177/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
 
Disturbing the Peace and Disorderly Conduct – § 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article  
 
Section 10-201 of the Criminal Law Article contains a variety of prohibitions that 
constitute disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct. 
 
Generally, a person may not (1) willfully and without lawful purpose obstruct or hinder the 
free passage of another in a public place or on a public conveyance; (2) willfully act in a 
disorderly manner that disturbs the public peace; or (3) willfully fail to obey a reasonable 
and lawful order that a law enforcement officer makes to prevent a disturbance to the public 
peace. 
 
A person who enters the land or premises of another or a beach, as specified, may not 
willfully act in a disorderly manner or disturb the peace of persons on the land, premises, 
or beach by making an unreasonably loud noise. Additionally, a person from any location 
may not, by making an unreasonably loud noise, willfully disturb the peace of another on 
the other’s land or premises, in a public place, or on a public conveyance. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 60 days 
and/or a maximum fine of $500. 
 
“Public place” means a place to which the public or a portion of the public has access and 
a right to resort for business, dwelling, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. Places of 
public worship, educational institutions, and public streets, sidewalks, and rights of way 
are specifically included as public places under § 10-201. 
 
“Public conveyance” means a conveyance to which the public or a portion of the public 
has access to and a right to use for transportation, including specified modes of 
transportation. For purposes of a prosecution, a public conveyance or a public place need 
not be devoted solely to public use. 
 
Interference with Access to or Egress from a Medical Facility – § 10-204 of the Criminal 
Law Article  
 
An individual may not intentionally act, alone or with others, to prevent another from 
entering or exiting a medical facility by physically detaining the other or obstructing, 
impeding, or hindering the other’s passage. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and 
subject to imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
The prohibition does not apply to (1) the chief executive officer of the medical facility or 
their designee; (2) an agent of the medical facility; or (3) a law enforcement officer. These 
provisions do not prohibit speech or picketing in connection with a labor dispute, as 
specified. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 177/ Page 3 
Obstruction of Entry to or Exit from a Funeral, Burial, Etc. – § 10-205 of the Criminal 
Law Article  
 
A person may not knowingly obstruct, hinder, impede, or block another person’s entry to 
or exit from a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession. A person also may 
not address speech to a person attending a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral 
procession that is likely to incite or produce an imminent breach of the peace. 
Section 10-205 also prohibits a person from engaging in picketing activity within 500 feet 
of a funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession that is targeted at one or more 
persons attending the funeral, burial, memorial service, or funeral procession. These 
provisions do not apply to a person who conducts a funeral, burial, memorial service, or 
funeral procession. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for 
up to 90 days and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 287 and HB 305 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2026 
 
gj/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3