START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 195 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 195 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Motorcycles - Protective Headgear Requirement - Exception (In Remembrance 
of Gary "Pappy" Boward) 
 
 
This bill exempts, from the requirement to wear specified protective headgear while 
operating or riding on a motorcycle, an individual age 21 or older who (1) has been licensed 
to operate a motorcycle for at least two years; (2) has completed an approved motorcycle 
rider safety course; or (3) is a passenger on a motorcycle operated by a rider who meets 
either of these criteria. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues from traffic citations decrease minimally beginning 
in FY 2027. Any impact on Medicaid expenditures is assumed to be negligible, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual may not operate or ride on a motorcycle unless the individual 
is wearing protective headgear that meets the standards established by the Motor Vehicle 
Administration administrator. The administrator is authorized to approve or disapprove of 
the protective headgear required for motorcycle operators and may adopt and enforce 
regulations that establish protective headgear standards. An individual who is riding in an 
enclosed cab is exempt from the protective headgear requirement. An individual may not 
operate a motorcycle unless the individual is wearing an eye-protective device approved 
by the administrator or the motorcycle is equipped with a windscreen. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 195/ Page 2 
“Protective helmet or headgear” means a device primarily intended to protect the upper part 
of the wearer’s head against a blow or impact. The Federal Motor Vehicle Safety 
Standard 218, Motorcycle Helmets, 49 CFR § 571.218 (1991), which is incorporated by 
reference in Maryland regulations, is adopted as the minimum standard for helmets 
required to be worn by operators and passengers on motorcycles. The protective headgear 
must be worn on the head with the chin strap properly fastened and in contact with the chin 
or jaw by both operator and passenger at all times that the motorcycle is in motion. 
 
A violation of the protective headgear or eye-protective device/windscreen requirement is 
a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum fine of $500. The prepayment penalty assessed by 
the District Court is $110. The failure of an individual to wear required protective headgear 
may not be considered evidence of negligence or contributory negligence; limit liability of 
a party or an insurer; or diminish recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, 
maintenance, or operation of a motorcycle.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund fine revenues decrease minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2027 due to a reduction in the number of citations issued for failure to wear a helmet 
while riding on or operating a motorcycle. In fiscal 2025, 218 citations were issued 
statewide (with 56 guilty dispositions). The citation carries a prepayment penalty of $110, 
including court costs. The actual decrease in general fund fine revenues cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time and depends on the number of individuals who qualify for the 
exemptions under the bill. 
 
Medicaid expenditures (federal and general funds) could increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027 to the extent that the exemption from the protective headgear requirement 
results in a reduction in helmet use and an associated increase in more serious head injuries 
to crash-involved motorcyclists not otherwise covered by insurance. Federal fund revenues 
would increase correspondingly. However, any impact on Medicaid expenditures and 
federal fund revenues is assumed to be negligible.  
 
For context, the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems reports that 
Maryland’s trauma centers treated 1,019 patients involved in motorcycle crashes during 
fiscal 2025, 860 of whom were age 21 or older. Of these patients:   
 
 
243 sustained a head injury, all of whom required treatment and 17 subsequently 
died; 
 
more than one-third (84) of the patients with head injuries were admitted; 9 had 
hospital stays of just 1 day, but 12 had stays of more than 28 days; and 
 
about 40% (96) of the 243 riders who sustained head injuries were not wearing a 
helmet; the other riders were. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 195/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years. See SB 397 of 2025, SB 503 and HB 639 of 2024, and SB 933 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   First Reader - January 26, 2026 
jg/aad  
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3