START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 174 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 174 
(Senator Carozza, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
State Board of Education - Enforcement Procedures - Alteration 
 
 
This bill requires that appeals to the State Board of Education regarding the removal of a 
local superintendent or a local board member be concluded within 90 days. However, the 
State board is authorized to extend the appeals process if required by due process or if 
necessary to protect public health or safety. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Education can limit the appeals process regarding the 
removal of a local superintendent or a local board member to 90 days using existing 
resources. The Office of Administrative Hearings’ (OAH) caseload is not materially 
affected. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system revenues and expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Education is authorized to bring legal action to enforce 
provisions of the Education Article within its jurisdiction, as well as the Board’s bylaws, 
rules, and regulations. In addition, without charge and with the advice of the 
Attorney General, the State board must explain the intent and meaning of the statutes, 
bylaws, rules, and regulations it administers. 
 
Except for matters involving collective bargaining for certificated and noncertificated 
personnel under Title 6, Subtitles 4 and 5 of the Education Article, the State board must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 174/ Page 2 
decide all controversies and disputes arising under these provisions. The decision of the 
State Board is final. 
 
The Public Employee Relations Board must decide any controversy or dispute arising 
under Title 6, Subtitle 4 or 5 of the Education Article. The decision of the Public Employee 
Relations Board is final. 
 
Power to Stay Acts of Local Boards of Education 
 
According to regulations, the State Superintendent of Schools may order a temporary stay 
of any action taken by a local board of education, either on request of the State Board 
President or on the superintendent’s own initiative. The stay must be issued within 
five days of notice of the local board’s action. A stay may last up to 60 days, but if the local 
board’s action is appealed to the local board or the State board, the stay may continue until 
the State Board issues a final decision. The superintendent or the State board may dissolve 
the stay at any time. 
 
Appeals to the State Board 
 
The State board must transfer to OAH for review by an administrative law judge any 
(1) appeal of a school consolidation, school redistricting, or school closing; (2) appeal of a 
certificated employee’s suspension or dismissal; or (3) appeal in which the State board 
finds that there is a genuine dispute of material fact. The Maryland State Department of 
Education advises that the board transfers appeals involving the removal of local board 
members to OAH, where proceedings may take more than 90 days. It is assumed that, in 
such instances, the State board exercises its discretion under the bill to extend the deadline. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 174/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3