START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 136 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 136 
(Senators Kramer and Bailey) 
Finance 
 
 
Collective Bargaining - Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission - Police 
Officers 
 
   
This bill expands the applicability of the State employees collective bargaining law to 
include police officers of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) who 
in an official capacity are authorized to make arrests and are not a supervisory, managerial, 
or confidential employee.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional expenditures resulting from the bill are presumed to be 
minimal and can be absorbed within ATCC’s existing budget, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) oversees collective 
bargaining for certain public employees in Maryland. For information on State employees 
and the collective bargaining process, please see Appendix – State Employees and 
Collective Bargaining.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 136/ Page 2 
Establishment of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission and Its Predecessor 
 
Chapter 12 of 2019 established the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission (ATC, the 
predecessor to ATCC), beginning June 1, 2020, (Chapter 359 of 2020 delayed the effective 
date to January 1, 2021) and transferred personnel, powers, duties, and responsibilities that 
relate to the regulation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco from the Comptroller 
(specifically the Field Enforcement Division (FED)) to ATC. Chapter 12 specified that all 
duties and responsibilities associated with FED’s alcoholic beverages and tobacco 
regulation functions must continue under ATC. Additionally, Chapter 12 stated that 
employees transferred retain any merit system and retirement status they may have on the 
date of transfer and must be transferred without any change or loss of pay, working 
conditions, benefits, rights, or status. Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 (Cannabis Reform Act) 
reconstituted ATC as ATCC and clarified the powers and duties of ATCC related to 
alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis regulation and enforcement. 
 
After Chapters 581 and 582 of 2012 extended collective bargaining rights to the 
Comptroller’s Office, sworn law enforcement officers in FED were represented by the 
State Law Enforcement Officers Labor Alliance (SLEOLA). However, as current law does 
not explicitly apply collective bargaining rights to employees of ATCC, ATCC police 
officers hired after the FED transfer to ATC are not eligible for collective bargaining. These 
ATCC police officers stopped being represented by SLEOLA beginning in fiscal 2026 
when the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) informed ATCC that these 
employees are not eligible for collective bargaining. 
 
State Expenditures:  Authorizing up to 30 ATCC police officers to be covered by 
SLEOLA minimally increases the number of bargaining eligible members of SLEOLA. 
PERB can accredit eligible ATCC police officers into SLEOLA with existing resources. 
Once ATCC police officers join SLEOLA, they are eligible for the SLEOA medical 
insurance benefits plans, likely beginning with the anticipated plan year effective  
January 1, 2027. DBM reports that as these officers were inadvertently treated as SLEOLA 
members until recently, there would be minimal fiscal impact on the State and there would 
be minimal impact on the operations of bargaining with SLEOLA. ATCC notes that 
salaries and increments of ATCC police officers have been comparable to SLEOLA 
members. Thus, any impact can be absorbed within ATCC’s existing budget. Additionally, 
the Office of Administrative Hearings can hear any additional grievances stemming from 
the bill with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 136/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Budget and Management; Public Employee Relations Board; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 136/ Page 4 
Appendix – State Employees and Collective Bargaining 
 
 
Title 3 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes statutory collective 
bargaining rights for a large number of State employees. Title 3 authorizes the State, State 
institutions of higher education, and the Maryland Environmental Service (MES) to meet 
and confer with exclusive employee representatives about negotiable terms. 
 
Except for the collective bargaining process for uniformed fire employees of the 
Baltimore‑Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport Fire and Rescue 
Department (BWI Fire/Rescue), Title 3 does not provide for binding arbitration but does 
allow fact finding in the event of an impasse. Employees, employers, and exclusive 
representatives subject to Title 3 are also subject to the provisions of the Maryland Public 
Employee Relations Act. 
 
Maryland’s collective bargaining law generally applies to employees of the principal 
Executive Branch departments, the Maryland Insurance Administration, the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation, the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, 
the University System of Maryland (USM), the Office of the Comptroller, the Maryland 
Transportation Authority (MDTA) (for those who are not police officers), the State 
Retirement Agency, the Maryland State Department of Education, MES, the Office of 
Public Defender, the Maryland School for the Deaf, Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC), along with specified firefighters for the Martin State Airport and all full-time 
MDTA police officers at the rank of first sergeant and below. 
 
The State’s collective bargaining law does not apply to: 
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) employees; 
 
Legislative and Judicial Branch personnel; 
 
elected and appointed officials; 
 
the Governor’s and Lieutenant Governor’s staff; 
 
an employee assigned to, or with access to records of, the Public Employee 
Relations Board; 
 
special appointees and executive service personnel in the State Personnel 
Management System (SPMS); 
 
senior administrators, faculty members, student employees, and other designated 
employees of USM, MSU, SMCM, or BCCC; 
 
the chief, deputy, or assistant administrator of a unit with an independent personnel 
system; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 136/ Page 5 
 
temporary or contractual employees in SPMS; 
 
temporary, contractual, or emergency employees in a unit of the Executive Branch 
with an independent personnel system; 
 
an employee who is entitled to participate in collective bargaining under another 
law; 
 
an employee whose participation in a labor organization is contrary to the State’s 
ethics laws; 
 
any managerial or confidential employee of specified units of State Government as 
defined by regulation; and 
 
any supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee of USM, MSU, SMCM, or 
BCCC. 
 
Bargaining Process 
 
The parties must meet at reasonable times and engage in collective bargaining in good 
faith, as specified. The parties must make every reasonable effort to conclude negotiations 
in a timely manner for inclusion by the principal unit in its budget request to the Governor, 
and they must conclude negotiations by January 1 for any item requiring an appropriation 
of funds for the fiscal year that begins on the following July 1. The Governor must include 
in the annual budget bill submitted to the General Assembly any amounts in the budgets of 
the principal units required to accommodate any additional cost resulting from the 
negotiations for the fiscal year beginning the following July 1, including the actuarial 
impact of any required legislative changes to any of the State pension or retirement 
systems, if the legislative changes have been negotiated to become effective in that 
fiscal year. 
 
Generally, if the parties do not conclude negotiations for the next fiscal year before 
October 25, either party may request that a fact finder be employed to resolve the issues. 
The fact finder must be employed no later than November 1 and must be a neutral party 
appointed by alternative striking from a list provided by the Federal Mediation Conciliation 
Service or under the Labor Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association. The 
fact finder may give notice and hold hearings in accordance with the Administrative 
Procedure Act, administer oaths and take testimony and other evidence, and issue 
subpoenas. Before November 20, the fact finder must make written recommendations 
regarding wages, hours, and working conditions and any other terms or conditions of 
employment that may be in dispute. The written recommendations of the fact finder must 
be delivered to the Governor, the exclusive representative, the President of the Senate, and 
the Speaker of the House of Delegates by December 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 136/ Page 6 
Memoranda of Understanding 
 
All matters of agreement reached by the parties must be incorporated into a memorandum 
of understanding (MOU). No MOU is valid if it extends for less than one year or longer 
than three years. An MOU is not effective until it is ratified by the Governor (or, in the 
case of a State higher education institution or MES, ratified by the higher education 
institution’s governing board or the Board of Directors of MES, respectively) and a 
majority of the votes cast by employees in the bargaining unit. Any matters in the MOU 
that require legislative changes are subject to the approval of the General Assembly. 
 
Matters to Be Negotiated 
 
Collective bargaining must include any matters relating to wages, hours, and terms and 
conditions of employment. The State is not required to negotiate any matter that is 
inconsistent with State law; however, the State may negotiate such matters as long as the 
parties understand that the item cannot become effective until the General Assembly takes 
action. The General Assembly, however, is not bound by the agreement. 
 
Binding Arbitration – Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport 
Fire and Rescue and Maryland Transit Administration 
 
Chapters 653 and 654 of 2025 altered the collective bargaining process for uniformed fire 
employees of BWI Fire/Rescue by establishing binding arbitration in the event of an 
impasse in negotiations, though an arbitrator’s decision related to wages is subject to the 
limitations of the State budget. 
 
Additionally, § 7-602 of the Transportation Article provides for binding arbitration in 
disputes between MTA and MTA employees relating to wages, salaries, hours, or other 
working conditions; benefits; grievances; or collective bargaining agreements, as specified. 
If a labor dispute between MTA and employees represented by an accredited representative 
does not result in agreement, MTA must submit the dispute to a three-member arbitration 
board. A majority determination of the board is final and binding on all disputed matters. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6