START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 124

J1 6lr1392
SB 911/24 – FIN (PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Benson
Requested: October 28, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics – Gene Structure– and Function–Modifying
3 Products – Labeling

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from offering for sale in the State a gene
5 structure– or function–modifying product unless the product is labeled in a certain
6 manner; and generally relating to labeling of gene structure– and
7 function–modifying products.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Health – General
10 Section 21–2G–01 through 21–2G–04 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 2G. Gene
11 Structure– and Function–Modifying Products”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health – General

17 SUBTITLE 2G. GENE STRUCTURE– AND FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCTS.

18 21–2G–01.

19 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
20 INDICATED.

21 (B) “GENE STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT” MEANS A
22 PRODUCT THAT HAS BEEN PRODUCED USING MODERN BIOTECHNOLOGY METHODS

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0124*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 124

1 DESIGNED TO ALTER THE STRUCTURE OR FUNCTION OF ONE OR MORE GENES IN THE
2 PRODUCT AND WHICH LEADS TO THE PRODUCT CONTAINING ARTIFICIALLY
3 ENGINEERED ELEMENTS THAT MAY MODIFY THE STRUCTURE OR FUNCTION OF ONE
4 OR MORE GENES IN A CONSUMER.

5 (C) (1) “MODERN BIOTECHNOLOGY METHODS” MEANS A RECENTLY
6 DISCOVERED METHOD OF APPLICATION OF BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES FOR
7 INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER PURPOSES.

8 (2) “MODERN BIOTECHNOLOGY METHODS” INCLUDES:

9 (I) GENE EDITING;

10 (II) RNA INTERFERENCE; AND

11 (III) TRANSGENESIS.

12 21–2G–02.

13 (A) A PERSON MAY NOT OFFER FOR SALE IN THE STATE A GENE
14 STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT UNLESS THE GENE
15 STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT IS LABELED IN ACCORDANCE
16 WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

17 (B) A GENE STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT OFFERED
18 FOR SALE IN THE STATE SHALL BE LABELED, IN A PROMINENT AND CONSPICUOUS
19 MANNER, WITH:

20 (1) THE WORDS “GENE STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING
21 PRODUCT”; AND

22 (2) ALL POTENTIAL RISKS, SIDE EFFECTS, ADVERSE EFFECTS, AND
23 OTHER REASONABLY POSSIBLE EFFECTS THAT THE GENE STRUCTURE– OR
24 FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT MAY HAVE ON AN INDIVIDUAL WHO USES THE
25 GENE STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT, OR ON AN INDIVIDUAL
26 WHO MAY COME INTO CONTACT WITH THE INDIVIDUAL WHO USES THE
27 GENE STRUCTURE– OR FUNCTION–MODIFYING PRODUCT.

28 21–2G–03.

29 (A) A PERSON THAT VIOLATES THIS SUBTITLE:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 124 3

1 (1) IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT
2 TO:

3 (I) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $10,000 OR
4 IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 1 YEAR; AND

5 (II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, A FINE NOT
6 EXCEEDING $25,000 OR IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 3 YEARS;

7 (2) IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 IN AN
8 ACTION IN A DISTRICT COURT; AND

9 (3) MAY BE ENJOINED FROM CONTINUING THE VIOLATION.

10 (B) EACH DAY ON WHICH A VIOLATION OCCURS AFTER CONVICTION FOR A
11 FIRST OFFENSE IS A SEPARATE VIOLATION UNDER THIS SECTION.

12 21–2G–04.

13 THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE CONSTRUED LIBERALLY TO CARRY OUT ITS
14 PURPOSE.

15 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
16 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3