START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 199 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 199 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
 
 
Individuals With Disabilities and Service-Disabled Veterans Boating Fund - 
Eligible Companions 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose of the Individuals with Disabilities and Service-Disabled 
Veterans Boating Fund to include providing boating opportunities for an “eligible 
companion” of an individual with disabilities or a service-disabled veteran. The Maryland 
Department of Disabilities (MDOD) may provide grants for boating opportunities for 
individuals with disabilities or service-disabled veterans and their eligible companions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Eligible companion” means an accompanying family member or direct 
support professional of an individual with disabilities or of a service-disabled veteran 
participating in sailing, boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, or surfing activities. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 193 and 194 of 2024 established the Individuals with Disabilities 
and Service-Disabled Veterans Boating Fund, administered by MDOD, to provide sailing, 
boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, and surfing opportunities for individuals 
with disabilities and service-disabled veterans. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 199/ Page 2 
MDOD may use the fund for administrative expenses and to provide a grant of up to 
$40,000 in a fiscal year to a grantee to provide specified boating opportunities for 
individuals with disabilities or service-disabled veterans. The fund is a special, nonlapsing 
fund that consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund and any other 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Interest accrues to the 
general fund. 
 
MDOD may only provide grants to a nonprofit organization in good standing that: 
 
 
is qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
 
has been in operation for at least three years, notwithstanding a cessation of 
operations during a national or public health emergency, as specified; and 
 
has engaged individuals with disabilities or service-disabled veterans in sailing, 
boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, or surfing activities on State waters 
at least 25 times in each of the past three years. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDOD advises that the Individuals with Disabilities and 
Service-Disabled Veterans Boating Fund has not yet received funding and no grants have 
been provided. Should funding be provided, MDOD notes that grants should not be 
affected by allowing the inclusion of eligible companions for individuals with disabilities 
and service-disabled veterans as grants will not be allocated on a per person basis but rather 
as a lump sum to the grantee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2