START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 151 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 151 
(Senator Folden) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Income Tax - Credit for Individuals Residing With and Caring for Elderly 
Parents 
 
 
This bill establishes a refundable personal income tax credit equal to $3,000 for an 
individual who resides with and provides care for a qualifying parent (an individual  
age 70 or older who is a biological or adoptive parent of the taxpayer) for at least six months 
during the tax year, meets a specified income threshold, and is not a dependent of another 
taxpayer. Income eligibility thresholds under the bill mirror those under the State child and 
dependent care credit. An individual may claim the credit for more than one parent. The 
credit may not be claimed by multiple individuals in the same household with respect to 
the same parent. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2026 and 
beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease significantly, potentially by tens of millions 
of dollars annually, beginning in FY 2027. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the 
tax credit with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State does not offer a personal income tax credit for caregivers of 
elderly parents, specifically. However, the State child and dependent care credit offers 
income tax relief to taxpayers who incur certain eligible expenses for the care of adult 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 151/ Page 2 
dependents, as discussed below. As also discussed below, Chapter 161 of 2024 established 
an expense grant program within the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) for family 
caregivers who pay or incur qualified expenses for the care of a qualified family member. 
 
Maryland Child and Dependent Care Credit 
 
The State child and dependent care credit offers a partially refundable personal income tax 
credit for resident taxpayers who qualify for and claim the federal child and dependent care 
credit and who meet certain income eligibility limits. A taxpayer may be eligible for the 
federal child and dependent care credit if the taxpayer has earned income and paid eligible 
expenses for the care of one or more qualifying individuals if the expenses are incurred to 
enable the taxpayer to work or look for work. Generally, a qualifying individual is a 
dependent of the taxpayer who is younger than age 13 or a spouse or dependent of the 
taxpayer who is incapable of self-care and who lived with the taxpayer for more than 
one-half of the year. 
 
The maximum value of the State credit is 32% of the federal child and dependent care 
credit allowed for the tax year. For tax year 2024, the maximum value of the State credit is 
$336 for taxpayers with one qualifying dependent and $672 for taxpayers with two or more 
qualifying dependents. For tax year 2024, the State credit begins to phase out for taxpayers 
with federal adjusted gross income (AGI) above $30,000 ($50,000 if married filing jointly), 
fully phases out for taxpayers with federal AGI above $109,300 ($169,900 if married filing 
jointly), and is refundable for taxpayers with federal AGI of up to $59,400 ($89,100 if 
married filing jointly). For tax year 2026 and beyond, the maximum value of the State 
credit is $480 for taxpayers with one qualifying dependent and $960 for taxpayers with 
two or more qualifying dependents due to enhancements to the federal child and dependent 
care credit under the One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025. 
 
Caregiver Expense Grant Program 
 
The Caregiver Expense Grant Program within MDOA was created to award grants for 
qualified expenses paid or incurred by an individual who provides care to a qualified family 
member and whose federal AGI does not exceed $75,000 ($150,000 if a joint tax filer). A 
qualified family member is an individual who requires assistance with one or more daily 
living activities, as certified by a licensed physician, physician assistant, or registered nurse 
practitioner, and (1) is at least 60 years old or has Alzheimer’s Disease or a related disorder 
and is cared for by an adult relative or informal caregiver who is at least 18 years old or 
(2) is a child or an adult with developmental or functional disabilities and is cared for by a 
parent, grandparent, or other relative that is at least 55 years old. 
 
Subject to available funding, an eligible caregiver may apply for a grant equal to 30% of 
the amount of qualified expenses that exceed $2,000, up to a maximum grant of $2,500 per 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 151/ Page 3 
fiscal year. While the Act specifies that the Governor may include up to $5.0 million for 
the program in the annual budget bill, there is no requirement that funding be provided. 
Funds for caregiver expense grants were not provided in the fiscal 2026 budget. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease significantly beginning in fiscal 2027 
due to credits claimed against the personal income tax. Due to data limitations, the potential 
number of claimants is unknown; thus, a precise estimate of the bill’s effect on State 
revenues is not feasible at this time. However, analysis by the Comptroller’s Office of 
similar prior-year legislation suggests that resulting general fund revenue losses may be in 
the magnitude of tens of millions of dollars annually. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that it can implement the tax credit 
with existing budgeted resources. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that 
the Comptroller’s Office has previously advised DLS in response to similar prior-year 
legislation that a number of the contemplated tax credit eligibility requirements cannot be 
validated at the time a return is filed (for example, whether the taxpayer provided care for 
the qualifying parent). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 104 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3