START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 168 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 168 
(Senator Watson) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Blockchain-Based Real 
Property Title Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Blockchain‑Based Real Property Title Pilot Program administered 
by the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to (1) explore the use of 
such technology for securely recording and verifying real property ownership and 
(2) assess its potential use by law enforcement and the courts in resolving real property 
disputes involving “squatting.” By December 31, 2028, SDAT, in coordination with the 
Judiciary, the Department of State Police (DSP), local law enforcement agencies, and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG), must report to the Governor and General Assembly 
on the results of the program and related recommendations. The bill takes effect 
October 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $3.4 million in FY 2027 
for contractual staff and significant one‑time contractual programming costs. Future year 
expenditures reflect annualization, inflation, and termination of the pilot program after 
FY 2029. Revenues are not directly affected.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
3.4 
0.8 
0.8 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($3.4) 
($0.8) 
($0.8) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although local government finances are not directly affected, local 
governments selected for participation in the pilot program may experience operational 
impacts.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 168/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions          
 
“Blockchain” means a distributed ledger technology that provides a secure, immutable, and 
transparent method of recording and storing data.  
 
“Digital title” means a cryptographically secured token or smart contract that represents 
ownership of real property in the State.  
 
“Squatting” means the unauthorized occupation of real property by an individual who does 
not have legal title, a lease, or the right of possession. 
 
Blockchain – Based Real Property Title Pilot Program 
 
The pilot program must begin by January 1, 2027. SDAT, in coordination with the 
Judiciary, DSP, local law enforcement agencies, and OAG must (1) create a blockchain 
registry to record and verify digital titles; (2) authorize property owners in pilot 
jurisdictions to opt in to having their property titles mirrored on the blockchain as digital 
titles; (3) provide a secure application programming interface for law enforcement and 
courts to validate the status of digital titles in real time; (4) test smart contract capabilities 
for title transfers and escrow functions; and (5) educate consumers, law enforcement, and 
courts on how to use the blockchain registry. To facilitate the creation of this registry, 
SDAT is authorized to contract with third‑party vendors and required to abide by existing 
standards related to procurement.  
 
Current Law:  Clerks of the circuit courts are responsible for the recording of land records. 
Generally, the Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act – Title 3, 
Subtitle 7 of the Real Property Article – establishes that requirements for documents to be 
signed as a condition for recording are met by an electronic document or electronic 
signature under specific circumstances. The Act also requires the clerks of the circuit courts 
and SDAT to coordinate with appropriate entities on procedures and processes to facilitate 
the electronic satisfaction of prior approvals and conditions precedent to recording 
documents or the electronic payment of fees or taxes.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SDAT advises that the department (1) does not currently perform title 
searches or verify property titles once a deed is recorded in the land records and 
(2) maintains its internal ownership records based on land records (which may have errors 
or incomplete information). The proposed pilot program therefore necessitates the creation 
of a dedicated office and development of comprehensive policy regulations and operational 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 168/ Page 3 
procedures to govern the title/ownership verification process. OAG and the Judiciary 
likewise anticipate the need for additional staff and programming costs, respectively, in 
order to ensure sufficient oversight and integration with the pilot program. SDAT further 
advises that although statute includes a requirement for counties to share in the costs for 
certain information technology expenses, the anticipated expenses for the bill are not 
covered by the reimbursement provisions. Accordingly, general funds are required and 
there is no assumption that counties share in the specific costs.  
 
Accordingly, total general fund expenditures increase by $3,366,003 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date and reflects the staff and programming 
costs needed to implement the pilot program. The Department of Legislative Services notes 
that because the pilot program concludes at the end of fiscal 2029, it is assumed that 
contractual staff are used and that associated expenditures terminate after fiscal 2029. 
Additional information regarding the fiscal impact for the specific entities affected is 
below.  
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation  
 
General fund expenditures increase by $3,101,968 in fiscal 2026, which reflects the cost of 
hiring one program manager, one administrator, three office supervisors, and seven office 
clerks. The estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one‑time start‑up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses; the estimate also accounts for contractual costs associated with 
procuring a vendor to develop the necessary information technology system. 
 
Contractual Positions 
           12.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
   $492,279 
Contractual Programming 
  2,500,000 
One‐time Start‐Up Costs 
       84,696 
Operating Expenses 
       24,993 
Total FY 2027 SDAT Expenditures 
$3,101,968 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses through fiscal 2029.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal  
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
OAG requires one assistant Attorney General to provide legal advice, review and revise 
documents, and support potential litigation. Consequently, general fund expenditures for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 168/ Page 4 
OAG increase by $116,135 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 
effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual assistant 
Attorney General. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$106,994 
One-time Start‐Up Costs 
7,058 
Operating Expenses 
     2,083 
Total FY 2027 OAG Expenditures 
$116,135 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses through fiscal 2029.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal  
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund expenditures increase by at least $147,900 in fiscal 2027 only for 
programming changes. The Judiciary advises that costs may rise further if the blockchain 
title system developed by SDAT requires modifications exceeding the Judiciary’s initial 
estimate. While the Judiciary anticipates these changes will facilitate data sharing and 
collaboration with law enforcement and other partners, the need for increased coordination 
and system integration may expand staff workloads.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Office of the Attorney 
General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 168/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5