START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 161 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Natural Resources - State Park Entry Fee - Exemptions 
 
   
This bill expands an exemption from State park entry fees applicable to veterans by making 
the exemption also applicable to former Maryland National Guard members discharged or 
released under conditions other than dishonorable. The bill also clarifies the acceptable 
forms of identification that may be presented by a veteran to gain entry to State parks 
without paying a fee.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. The Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR) indicates that the bill’s changes are consistent with the 
department’s current practice of allowing current and former members of the military and 
Maryland National Guard to enter State parks without paying a fee, with sufficient 
identification. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes that a former Maryland National Guard member, that 
is discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable, may enter a State park 
without paying a day-use entry fee or per-vehicle fee if the individual presents 
identification accepted by DNR that establishes the holder’s former Maryland National 
Guard status, similar to an existing privilege established in statute for veterans, active 
service members, and members of the Maryland National Guard.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 161/ Page 2 
The bill also clarifies the forms of identification that may be presented by a veteran to enter 
a State park without paying a day-use entry fee or a per-vehicle fee. Among other forms of 
identification – such as a driver’s license that indicates the license holder is a veteran – that 
are currently identified in statute as sufficient to enter a State park without paying a day‑use 
entry fee or per-vehicle fee, the bill establishes that a State-issued license other than a 
driver’s license, or a State-issued identification card, that indicates the holder’s veteran 
status is sufficient to enter a State park without paying a day-use entry fee or per-vehicle 
fee. The bill identifies the acceptable forms of identification that may be presented by a 
veteran or former Maryland National Guard member as “accepted entrance documents.” 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 265 and 266 (Recreational Equality for Service Members Act) of 
2025 established that a veteran may enter a State park without paying a day-use entry fee, 
and a vehicle of which a veteran is an occupant may enter a State park without paying a 
per-vehicle fee, if the veteran presents a valid veteran identification card, a driver’s license 
that indicates the license holder is a veteran, or any other form of identification accepted 
by DNR establishes the holder’s veteran status.  
 
Chapters 265 and 266 created a similar exemption from State park entry fees for active 
service members and members of the Maryland National Guard, upon presentation of a 
valid uniformed services identification card. 
 
The entrance fee exemptions do not exempt an individual from paying any other park 
facility use services fees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2