START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 193 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 193 
(Senator Corderman) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Washington County - Sales and Use Tax Exemption - Target Redevelopment 
Area 
 
 
This bill provides a State sales and use tax exemption over a 10‑year period for the sale of 
specified construction material or warehousing equipment purchased by a person solely for 
use in a target redevelopment area in Washington County. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2036. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount in FY 2027 through 
2036. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A target redevelopment area is defined as real property in  
Washington County that is known as the Mount Aetna Technology Park and accessible 
from Robinwood Drive, Mount Aetna Road, and Yale Drive and is located in an office, 
research, and industry zoning district. 
 
Construction material is defined as an item of tangible personal property that is used to 
construct or renovate a building, a structure, or an improvement on land and that typically 
loses its separate identity as personal property once incorporated into the real property. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 193/ Page 2 
Construction material includes building materials, building systems equipment, 
landscaping materials, and supplies. 
 
Warehousing equipment is defined as equipment used for material handling and storage, 
including racking systems, conveying systems, and computer systems and equipment. 
 
Current Law:  
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.1 billion in fiscal 2026 and $6.2 billion in fiscal 2027, 
according to the December 2025 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on‑the‑premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties, and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County,  
York County, and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal 
hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 193/ Page 3 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) the following percentage of 
the remaining sales and use tax revenues: 
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out‑of‑state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
Target Redevelopment Area in Baltimore County 
 
Chapters 603 and 604 of 2016 exempt from the State sales and use tax a sale of construction 
material or warehousing equipment if the material or equipment is purchased by a person 
solely for use in a specified target redevelopment area in Baltimore County, and the buyer 
provides the vendor with evidence of eligibility for the exemption issued by the 
Comptroller. 
 
A target redevelopment area is any real property owned or leased by a person in  
Baltimore County that (1) was previously owned at any time by Bethlehem Steel 
Corporation or any of its subsidiaries and (2) was, as of January 1, 2016, the subject of an 
approved application for participation in a specified voluntary cleanup program under 
provisions of the Environment Article. 
 
Construction material is defined as an item of tangible personal property that is used to 
construct or renovate a building, a structure, or an improvement on land and that typically 
loses its separate identity as personal property once incorporated into the real property. 
Construction material includes building materials, building systems equipment, 
landscaping materials, and supplies. 
 
Warehousing equipment is defined as equipment used for material handling and storage, 
including racking systems, conveying systems, and computer systems and equipment. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 193/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues decrease by an indeterminant 
amount in fiscal 2027 through 2036. The amount of the revenue decrease in any year 
depends on the value of eligible construction material and warehousing equipment that is 
purchased for use in the Mount Aetna Technology Park, which is designated as the target 
redevelopment area in Washington County. 
 
The Mount Aetna Technology Park is comprised of over 150 acres in the Hagerstown area 
and is situated between Hagerstown Community College, Robinwood Medical Center, and 
Meritus Health System. 
 
In fiscal 2022, the State collected $937.2 million in sales and use taxes from various 
building and construction related categories, including $20.7 million from businesses that 
filed a sales and use tax return with an address in Washington County.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses located in the area designated under the bill will 
potentially benefit from decreased costs for materials and equipment. Conversely, any 
small businesses that are competitors of these businesses and do not qualify for the sales 
and use tax exemption designation will be at a competitive disadvantage due to higher 
material and equipment costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 698 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4