START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 183

E4 6lr1550
SB 5/20 – EHE (PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Hester
Requested: October 31, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Maryland Cyber Reserve – Established

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Cyber Reserve within the Military
4 Department to provide educational and technical support to prevent and resolve
5 certain cyber attacks; and generally relating to the Maryland Cyber Reserve.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Public Safety
8 Section 13–101, 13–203(b), 13–206(a), and 13–210
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Public Safety
13 Section 13–5A–01 through 13–5A–08 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 5A.
14 Maryland Cyber Reserve”
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Public Safety

20 13–101.

21 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

22 (b) “Department” means the Military Department.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0183*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 183

1 (c) “MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE” MEANS THE MILITARY FORCE
2 ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBTITLE 5A OF THIS TITLE.

3 (D) “Maryland Defense Force” means the military force established under Subtitle
4 5 of this title.

5 [(d)] (E) “National Guard” means the Maryland Army National Guard and
6 Maryland Air National Guard.

7 [(e)] (F) (1) “State active duty” means military duty performed in service of
8 the State by a unit or member of the militia under orders issued by the Governor under
9 Article II, § 8 of the Maryland Constitution or § 13–702 of this title.

10 (2) Unless the Governor specifically provides otherwise, “State active duty”
11 does not include drill periods, preparation for drill periods, annual training, or other
12 equivalent training or duty conducted under orders issued under Title 10 or Title 32 of the
13 United States Code.

14 13–203.

15 (b) The organized militia of the State consists of:

16 (1) the National Guard;

17 (2) the Inactive National Guard; [and]

18 (3) the Maryland Defense Force; AND

19 (4) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

20 13–206.

21 (a) An individual enlisting in the organized militia shall take and subscribe to the
22 following oath of enlistment:

23 “I do hereby acknowledge to have voluntarily enlisted this ....... day of .........., 20 .....,
24 in the (National Guard) (Maryland Defense Force) (MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE) of the
25 State of Maryland for the period of ...... year(s), under the conditions prescribed by law,
26 unless sooner discharged by proper authority. I, ..........., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that
27 I will bear true faith and allegiance to the United States of America and to the State of
28 Maryland; that I will serve them honestly and faithfully against all their enemies
29 whomsoever; and that I will obey the orders of the President of the United States and the
30 Governor of Maryland and the orders of the officers appointed over me, according to law
31 and regulations.”

32 13–210.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 183 3

1 (a) (1) This subsection applies to the period of time that an employee is ordered
2 by the Governor to active military duty in the organized militia of the State for service
3 during:

4 (i) a civil disorder;

5 (ii) a natural disaster;

6 (iii) a labor disorder; [or]

7 (iv) A CYBER ATTACK; OR

8 (V) any other activity requiring support of the State militia.

9 (2) The Adjutant General shall secure compensation under the Maryland
10 Workers’ Compensation Act for each officer and enlisted individual of the organized militia
11 by maintaining an insurance policy with the Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company
12 or with a stock corporation or mutual association authorized to transact the business of
13 workers’ compensation insurance in the State.

14 (3) (i) An officer, enlisted individual, or employee of the Department is
15 not entitled to the benefits of this section if the officer, enlisted individual, or employee is
16 injured in the course of employment and has insurance coverage through the federal
17 government that is equal to or better than the coverage provided by this title.

18 (ii) If a benefit provided by the federal government is less than that
19 provided by the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act, the State and its insurer shall
20 furnish the additional benefit necessary to make up the difference between the benefit
21 provided by the federal government and the similar benefit required under the Maryland
22 Workers’ Compensation Act.

23 (4) The insurance provided under this subsection shall only cover incidents
24 that occur after July 1, 1979.

25 (b) In addition to the benefits under subsection (a) of this section, the Adjutant
26 General shall maintain workers’ compensation insurance for members of the Maryland
27 Defense Force AND MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE during training.

28 (c) The Adjutant General shall pay the premiums for the insurance policy
29 required under this section from appropriations for the militia that the Governor includes
30 in the State budget.

31 SUBTITLE 5A. MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

32 13–5A–01.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 183

1 (A) (1) THERE IS ESTABLISHED IN THE STATE A MARYLAND CYBER
2 RESERVE WITHIN THE MILITARY DEPARTMENT.

3 (2) THE GOVERNOR IS THE COMMANDER–IN–CHIEF OF THE
4 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

5 (3) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE IS UNDER THE OPERATIONAL
6 CONTROL OF THE ADJUTANT GENERAL.

7 (4) THERE IS A COMMANDING GENERAL OF THE MARYLAND CYBER
8 RESERVE WHO IS APPOINTED BY THE ADJUTANT GENERAL AND SERVES AT THE
9 PLEASURE OF THE ADJUTANT GENERAL.

10 (B) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE IS A COMPONENT OF THE ORGANIZED
11 MILITIA OF THE STATE IN ADDITION TO AND SEPARATE FROM THE NATIONAL
12 GUARD.

13 (C) (1) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SHALL HAVE THE PRIMARY
14 MISSION OF PROVIDING EDUCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO PREVENT AND
15 RESOLVE CYBER ATTACKS AGAINST:

16 (I) STATE, COUNTY, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES; AND

17 (II) CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE WITHIN THE STATE.

18 (2) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SHALL ALSO HAVE OTHER
19 DUTIES AND MISSIONS AS IT MAY BE ASSIGNED FROM TIME TO TIME BY COMPETENT
20 AUTHORITY, INCLUDING PROVIDING TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO:

21 (I) CORPORATIONS CONDUCTING BUSINESS WITHIN THE
22 STATE TARGETED IN A CYBER ATTACK; AND

23 (II) CITIZENS OF THE STATE TARGETED IN A CYBER ATTACK.

24 13–5A–02.

25 (A) (1) THE GOVERNOR MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
26 SUBTITLE GOVERNING THE ENLISTMENT, ORGANIZATION, ADMINISTRATION,
27 EQUIPMENT, MAINTENANCE, TRAINING, AND DISCIPLINE OF THE MARYLAND CYBER
28 RESERVE.

29 (2) THE GOVERNOR MAY PRESCRIBE A UNIFORM FOR THE
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 183 5

1 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

2 (B) (1) THE REGULATIONS SHALL PROHIBIT THE MARYLAND CYBER
3 RESERVE OR A MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE FROM ACCEPTING
4 GIFTS, DONATIONS, GRATUITIES, OR ANYTHING OF VALUE FROM A PERSON IN
5 EXCHANGE FOR SPECIFIC AND ISOLATED SERVICES RENDERED BY THE MARYLAND
6 CYBER RESERVE.

7 (2) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE INTERPRETED TO PROHIBIT
8 GIFTS, BEQUESTS, AND THE LIKE FROM ANY INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANIZATION TO THE
9 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE OR ANY FOUNDATION OR THE LIKE ESTABLISHED TO
10 SUPPORT ITS ACTIVITIES.

11 13–5A–03.

12 (A) THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE CONSISTS OF:

13 (1) COMMISSIONED OR ASSIGNED OFFICERS; AND

14 (2) QUALIFIED INDIVIDUALS WHO VOLUNTEER TO SERVE AND ARE
15 COMMISSIONED, APPOINTED, OR ENLISTED IN THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

16 (B) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT BE COMMISSIONED OR ENLISTED IN THE
17 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE IF THE INDIVIDUAL:

18 (1) IS NOT A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES;

19 (2) HAS BEEN DISMISSED FROM OR RECEIVED A BAD CONDUCT
20 DISCHARGE, A DISHONORABLE DISCHARGE, OR ANY DISCHARGE OTHER THAN
21 UNDER HONORABLE CONDITIONS FROM A MILITARY OR NAVAL ORGANIZATION OF
22 THIS STATE OR OF ANOTHER STATE, OR FROM ANY OF THE UNITED STATES ARMED
23 FORCES OR ITS AUXILIARIES, OR HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF AN OFFENSE UNDER THE
24 LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES OR OF ANY STATE PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT
25 FOR MORE THAN 1 YEAR, NO MATTER WHAT PUNISHMENT WAS ACTUALLY IMPOSED;
26 OR

27 (3) DOES NOT MEET THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMMISSIONING,
28 APPOINTMENT, OR ENLISTMENT SPECIFIED IN REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
29 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

30 (C) A CIVIL ORGANIZATION, A SOCIETY, A CLUB, A POST, AN ORDER, A
31 FRATERNITY, AN ASSOCIATION, A BROTHERHOOD, A BODY, A UNION, A LEAGUE, OR
32 ANY OTHER COMBINATION OF PERSONS OR CIVIL GROUPS MAY NOT ENLIST IN THE
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 SENATE BILL 183

1 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE AS AN ORGANIZATION OR A UNIT.

2 (D) (1) ALL MEMBERS OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SERVE ON A
3 VOLUNTARY BASIS AND WITHOUT PAY, UNLESS UNDER ORDERS, APPROVED BY THE
4 ADJUTANT GENERAL, SPECIFYING THAT THE MEMBER’S SERVICE IS WITH PAY.

5 (2) (I) IF AN ORDER APPROVED BY THE ADJUTANT GENERAL
6 SPECIFIES THAT THE SERVICE OF A MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE
7 IS WITH PAY, THE MEMBER SHALL RECEIVE A RATE OF PAY DETERMINED AND
8 PROVIDED BY RULE BY THE ADJUTANT GENERAL.

9 (II) THE RULE SHALL ESTABLISH A RATE OF PAY REASONABLE
10 AND COMMENSURATE WITH THE TRAINING, EXPERIENCE, AND PROFESSIONAL
11 QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MEMBER.

12 13–5A–04.

13 (A) AN OFFICER OR A WARRANT OFFICER COMMISSIONED OR APPOINTED IN
14 THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SHALL TAKE THE OATH PRESCRIBED IN §
15 13–5A–07 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

16 (B) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO ENLISTS IN THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE
17 SHALL TAKE AN OATH SUBSTANTIALLY IN THE FORM REQUIRED FOR ENLISTED
18 PERSONNEL OF THE NATIONAL GUARD, SUBSTITUTING “MARYLAND CYBER
19 RESERVE” WHERE NECESSARY IN THE OATH.

20 (C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
21 THE ENLISTMENT PERIOD IN THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE IS DETERMINED BY
22 THE COMMANDING OFFICER BASED ON THE SPECIALTY OF THE RECRUIT AND THE
23 NEEDS OF THE MILITIA AND MAY BE RENEWED.

24 (2) IN THE CASE THAT A STATE OF WAR EXISTS BETWEEN THE UNITED
25 STATES AND ANY OTHER NATION, OR THAT THERE IS A FEDERAL OR STATE
26 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY PRESENTLY IN FORCE IN THE STATE, ALL
27 ENLISTMENTS SHALL CONTINUE UNTIL 3 MONTHS AFTER SAID STATE OF WAR OR
28 EMERGENCY ENDS, UNLESS THE ENLISTED INDIVIDUAL IS DISCHARGED SOONER BY
29 PROPER AUTHORITY.

30 (D) THE GOVERNOR MAY ACCEPT THE RESIGNATION OF AN OFFICER OR
31 GRANT A DISCHARGE TO AN ENLISTED INDIVIDUAL AT ANY TIME.

32 13–5A–05.
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
SENATE BILL 183 7

1 (A) THE GOVERNOR MAY REQUISITION ANY ARMS AND EQUIPMENT FROM
2 THE UNITED STATES SECRETARY OF DEFENSE THAT ARE IN THE POSSESSION OF
3 AND CAN BE SPARED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FOR USE BY THE
4 MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

5 (B) THE GOVERNOR MAY ALLOW THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE TO USE
6 THE FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT OF A STATE ARMORY OR OTHER AVAILABLE STATE
7 PREMISES AND PROPERTY.

8 (C) A SCHOOL AUTHORITY MAY ALLOW THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE
9 TO USE A SCHOOL BUILDING OR SCHOOL GROUNDS.

10 13–5A–06.

11 (A) (1) THIS TITLE DOES NOT AUTHORIZE THE MARYLAND CYBER
12 RESERVE TO BE ORDERED OR DRAFTED INTO THE MILITARY SERVICE OF THE
13 UNITED STATES, EXCEPT BY ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
14 ACTING PURSUANT TO THE CONSTITUTION AND LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES.

15 (2) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT
16 SERVICE OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE OR PERSONNEL THEREOF IN
17 MISSIONS IN WHICH FEDERAL MILITARY PERSONNEL ARE ALSO SERVING OR IN
18 COMMAND.

19 (B) AN INDIVIDUAL IS NOT EXEMPT FROM MILITARY SERVICE UNDER THE
20 LAWS OF THE UNITED STATES BECAUSE THE INDIVIDUAL IS ENLISTED,
21 COMMISSIONED, OR APPOINTED IN THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

22 13–5A–07.

23 A COMMISSIONED OFFICER OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SHALL TAKE
24 THE FOLLOWING OATH OF OFFICE:

25 “I, ..............., DO SOLEMNLY SWEAR THAT I WILL SUPPORT AND DEFEND THE
26 CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF
27 MARYLAND, AGAINST ALL ENEMIES, FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC; THAT I WILL BEAR
28 TRUE FAITH AND ALLEGIANCE TO THE SAME; THAT I WILL OBEY THE ORDERS OF THE
29 PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND OF THE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE OF
30 MARYLAND; THAT I TAKE THIS OBLIGATION FREELY, WITHOUT ANY MENTAL
31 RESERVATION OR PURPOSE OF EVASION, AND THAT I WILL WELL AND FAITHFULLY
32 DISCHARGE THE DUTIES OF THE OFFICE OF ................... IN THE MARYLAND CYBER
33 RESERVE UPON WHICH I AM ABOUT TO ENTER, SO HELP ME GOD.”

34 13–5A–08.
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
8 SENATE BILL 183

1 (A) (1) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT AND COMMISSION EACH
2 COMMISSIONED OFFICER OR APPOINT EACH WARRANT OFFICER OF THE ORGANIZED
3 MILITIA ON RECOMMENDATION OF THE ADJUTANT GENERAL.

4 (2) THE APPOINTMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
5 SUBSECTION DO NOT REQUIRE CONFIRMATION BY THE SENATE OF MARYLAND.

6 (B) (1) EACH INDIVIDUAL COMMISSIONED OR APPOINTED AS AN OFFICER
7 OR A WARRANT OFFICER SHALL BE:

8 (I) AN OFFICER, A WARRANT OFFICER, OR AN ENLISTED
9 INDIVIDUAL OF THE NATIONAL GUARD;

10 (II) A RETIRED OR FORMER OFFICER OR WARRANT OFFICER OF
11 THE UNITED STATES ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD,
12 OR ANY AUXILIARY THEREOF;

13 (III) AN INDIVIDUAL WITH PRIOR ENLISTED SERVICE IN THE
14 UNITED STATES ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD, OR
15 ANY AUXILIARY THEREOF;

16 (IV) A GRADUATE OF THE UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY,
17 NAVAL ACADEMY, COAST GUARD ACADEMY, MERCHANT MARINE ACADEMY, OR
18 AIR FORCE ACADEMY;

19 (V) A GRADUATE OF A SCHOOL, A COLLEGE, A UNIVERSITY, OR
20 AN OFFICERS’ TRAINING SCHOOL WHO RECEIVED MILITARY INSTRUCTION UNDER
21 THE SUPERVISION OF AN OFFICER OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY, NAVY, MARINE
22 CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD WHO CERTIFIED THE GRADUATE’S FITNESS
23 FOR APPOINTMENT AS A COMMISSIONED OFFICER; OR

24 (VI) AN INDIVIDUAL NOT OTHERWISE IDENTIFIED IN ITEMS (I)
25 THROUGH (V) OF THIS PARAGRAPH WHO IS SPECIALLY QUALIFIED FOR SERVICE BY
26 ACHIEVEMENT IN ANY PROFESSIONAL, TECHNICAL, OR PUBLIC SERVICE CAPACITY
27 OR OTHERWISE DISPLAYS EXTRAORDINARY QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMMISSIONING
28 AS AN OFFICER OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE.

29 (2) BEFORE TAKING OFFICE, EACH MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL
30 GUARD SHALL TAKE THE OATH PRESCRIBED IN § 13–407 OF THIS TITLE AND EACH
31 MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE SHALL TAKE THE OATH PRESCRIBED
32 IN § 13–5A–07 OF THIS SUBTITLE.
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
SENATE BILL 183 9

1 (C) WHEN INITIALLY APPOINTED, A GENERAL OFFICER OR COLONEL OF
2 THE ORGANIZED MILITIA MUST:

3 (1) BE AN OFFICER IN THE NATIONAL GUARD OF A GRADE OF O–4 OR
4 HIGHER; OR

5 (2) HAVE SERVED IN ANY COMPONENT OR AUXILIARY OF THE UNITED
6 STATES ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD OR
7 NATIONAL GUARD WITH THE GRADE OF O–4 OR HIGHER.

8 (D) WHEN INITIALLY APPOINTED, A LIEUTENANT COLONEL OR MAJOR OF
9 THE LINE MUST HAVE HAD SERVICE AS AN OFFICER FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS IN ANY
10 COMPONENT OR AUXILIARY OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS,
11 AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD OR NATIONAL GUARD.

12 (E) SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION DO NOT APPLY IN THE CASE
13 OF:

14 (1) OFFICERS PROMOTED TO THE GRADE OF MAJOR OR ABOVE FROM
15 WITHIN THE MARYLAND CYBER RESERVE; OR

16 (2) OFFICERS QUALIFIED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1)(VI) OF THIS
17 SECTION.

18 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
19 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 9