START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 227 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 227 
(Senator Ellis) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Motor Vehicles – Parking – Disabled Veteran Special Registration Plates 
 
 
This bill prohibits a political subdivision from adopting or enforcing an ordinance, 
regulation, or policy requiring the payment of a fee for parking a motor vehicle in an 
on-street parking space served by a parking meter if the motor vehicle has disabled veteran 
special registration plates. The bill also prohibits a State agency from adopting or enforcing 
a regulation or policy requiring the payment of a fee for parking a motor vehicle in a 
parking lot owned or controlled by the State agency if the vehicle has disabled veteran 
special registration plates. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease due to reduced 
collection of parking fees at State-owned facilities. TTF expenditures increase for the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) to modify automated parking systems 
and/or provide additional staffing at parking gates at Baltimore-Washington International 
(BWI) Thurgood Marshall Airport, the BWI Marshall Amtrak station, and Cruise Maryland 
Terminal. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues decline minimally in jurisdictions that own and 
operate parking meters. Any changes to enforcement can likely be handled with existing 
resources, though some jurisdictions may incur minor costs for system modifications. This 
bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 227/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Power of Political Subdivisions and State Agencies to Regulate Parking  
 
Generally, any State agency authorized by law and any political subdivision of the State 
may adopt ordinances or regulations that: 
 
 
regulate the parking of vehicles; 
 
provide for the impounding of vehicles parked in violation of the ordinances or 
regulations; 
 
regulate the towing of vehicles from publicly owned and privately owned parking 
lots; and 
 
provide for the issuance of a citation by an officer for a violation of an ordinance or 
regulation that is adopted pursuant to this authorization. 
 
Special Registration Plates for Disabled Veterans 
 
The contribution of the U.S. Armed Forces is recognized through several provisions within 
the Maryland Vehicle Law. Most recently, under Chapters 472 and 473 of 2024, the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA) may issue a special disabled veteran registration plate to 
an individual who is between 50% and 99%, inclusive, service-connected disabled, as 
designated or classified by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The plate is 
available for specified common classes of vehicles, and an applicant must provide 
satisfactory proof to MVA that the individual is a U.S. Armed Forces veteran who meets 
the service-connected disabled requirements. These plates do not display the international 
symbol of access (often referred to as the wheelchair symbol) to a qualified applicant; 
however, “Disabled Veteran” appears at the bottom of the plate. While MVA does not 
charge a fee for these plates, registration fees do apply. 
 
In addition, a disabled veteran who can provide documentation from the VA proving 100% 
disability can receive a special registration plate free of charge. Such an applicant is also 
not subject to a registration fee. These 100% disabled veteran special registration plates 
contain the international symbol of access (wheelchair symbol) and have the same parking 
meter privileges as special disability registration plates. Accordingly, vehicles with such 
plates may be exempt from paying any parking meter fees of the State – or any political 
subdivision of the State – but the exemption applies only where parking meters do not meet 
the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements. Even so, they may park in a metered 
parking space for twice the maximum time permitted on the meter, but no longer than 
four hours, unless permitted by the parking meter. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 227/ Page 3 
State Revenues:  TTF revenues decrease from reduced parking fee collections at MDOT 
facilities, including those at BWI Marshall Airport and the BWI Marshall Amtrak terminal 
as well as the Cruise Maryland Terminal. MDOT advises that it cannot project the 
magnitude of lost parking fee revenues under the bill due to a lack of data on the number 
of qualifying vehicles. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase to address operational gaps at automated 
facilities. For example, MDOT advises that, because current parking systems at  
BWI Marshall Airport and the BWI Marshall Amtrak station cannot distinguish specific 
license plate types, MDOT incurs costs for payment kiosk software upgrades and camera 
technology modifications and/or staffing at parking gates to manually verify eligible 
vehicles. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Any local governments that operate parking meters may need to 
modify enforcement procedures or automated systems so that vehicles displaying disabled 
veteran plates are not improperly cited. Local fee revenues decline, likely minimally, from 
parking fee exemptions granted under the bill. The magnitude of any such decrease varies 
by jurisdiction depending on various factors (e.g., parking meter operations within the 
jurisdiction, current policies, current parking fee revenues, the disabled veteran population 
within the jurisdiction, etc.). For example, Montgomery County advises that it does not 
charge fees for any vehicles with disabled plates or tags for on-street metered spaces; the 
county can implement minor administration and training to comply with the bill using 
existing resources. Worcester County anticipates a minimal operational impact. 
Kent County does not enforce any area with parking meters, and the City of Greenbelt 
advises that it does not own or operate any paid parking meters or parking spaces. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; cities of Greenbelt and Laurel; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 227/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4