START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 279

C2 6lr1128
SB 249/22 – FIN

By: Senator Hayes
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Baltimore City – Cigarettes, Other Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking
3 Devices – Local Laws Authorization

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing Baltimore City to enact and enforce local laws regulating
5 the sale and distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, and electronic
6 smoking devices, subject to certain exceptions; and generally relating to the
7 regulation of cigarettes, other tobacco products, and electronic smoking devices in
8 Baltimore City.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Business Regulation
11 Section 16–308.4, 16.5–104, and 16.7–103
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Business Regulation

17 16–308.4.

18 EXCEPT FOR THE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES UNDER THIS TITLE OR THE
19 IMPOSITION OF TAXES ON CIGARETTES UNDER TITLE 12 OF THE TAX – GENERAL
20 ARTICLE, THE BALTIMORE CITY COUNCIL MAY ENACT AND THE MAYOR OF
21 BALTIMORE CITY MAY ENFORCE LOCAL LAWS THAT ARE AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS
22 THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE THAT REGULATE THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF
23 CIGARETTES.

24 16.5–104.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0279*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 279

1 EXCEPT FOR THE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES UNDER THIS TITLE OR THE
2 IMPOSITION OF TAXES ON OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS UNDER TITLE 12 OF THE
3 TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE, THE BALTIMORE CITY COUNCIL MAY ENACT AND THE
4 MAYOR OF BALTIMORE CITY MAY ENFORCE LOCAL LAWS THAT ARE AT LEAST AS
5 STRINGENT AS THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE THAT REGULATE THE SALE AND
6 DISTRIBUTION OF OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

7 16.7–103.

8 EXCEPT FOR THE ISSUANCE OF LICENSES UNDER THIS TITLE, THE
9 BALTIMORE CITY COUNCIL MAY ENACT AND THE MAYOR OF BALTIMORE CITY MAY
10 ENFORCE LOCAL LAWS THAT ARE AT LEAST AS STRINGENT AS THE PROVISIONS OF
11 THIS TITLE THAT REGULATE THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONIC
12 SMOKING DEVICES.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
14 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2