START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 285 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 285 
(Senators Carozza and Bailey) 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
 
Higher Education - Scholarships for Correctional Officers 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents 
Scholarship Program to include correctional officers and renames the program accordingly. 
Correctional officers are subject to the same eligibility requirements and service obligation 
requirements established under current law for police officers and probation agents. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents 
Scholarship has no effect on spending. Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) 
general fund expenditures increase by $20,000 in FY 2027 for system enhancements to the 
Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS). Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:    
 
Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program 
 
Chapter 59 of 2021, the Maryland Police Accountability Act of 2021, established the 
Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program, which was subsequently expanded 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 285/ Page 2 
(and renamed) by Chapter 100 of 2023 to include probation agents. The Maryland Police 
Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program provides tuition assistance for students 
(1) attending a degree program at an “eligible institution” that would further their intent to 
be a police officer or probation agent after graduation or (2) who are currently police 
officers or probation agents attending a degree program at an “eligible institution” that 
would further their career. The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) in MHEC 
must (1) publicize the availability of the scholarship; (2) annually select eligible students 
and offer a scholarship to each student selected to be used at an eligible institution of the 
student’s choice; and, (3) to the extent practicable, award scholarships under the program 
in a manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity. 
 
A recipient of a scholarship must (1) be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a 
Maryland high school; (2) be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible 
institution as a full-time or part-time undergraduate or graduate student, as specified; 
(3) sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of the recipient’s 
required studies; and (4) satisfy any additional criteria MHEC may establish. A current 
police officer or probation agent that meets the eligibility criteria is also eligible for a 
scholarship. A recipient of a scholarship must repay MHEC the funds received if the 
recipient does not (1) satisfy the degree requirements of the course of study or program or 
fulfill other specified requirements or (2) perform the service obligation to work as a 
police officer or probation agent for at least five years during the eight-year period after 
graduation. 
 
The annual scholarship award must be 50% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory 
fees of a resident undergraduate student at the eligible institution. The Governor must 
annually include in the budget bill an appropriation of at least $2.0 million to MHEC to 
award scholarships.  
 
For the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program, “eligible 
institution” means a public senior (four-year) higher education institution or community 
college in the State. 
 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police Officers 
 
Chapter 59 also established the Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police 
Officers to assist in the repayment of a higher education loan owed by a police officer who 
meets specified requirements. Chapter 100 expanded the program to also include probation 
agents and renamed the program accordingly. OSFA must distribute funds from the 
program to assist in the repayment of a “higher education loan” owed by a police officer 
or probation agent who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from 
a public college or university in the State; (2) obtains “eligible employment”; and 
(3) satisfies any other criteria established by the office. The Governor must include an 
annual appropriation of at least $2.0 million in the State budget for the program.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 285/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation 
Agents Scholarship Program does not necessarily require additional spending; however, to 
make additional scholarship awards, an estimated $3,400 per award is necessary. In 
fiscal 2025, 42 awards totaling $143,723 were made under the Maryland Police Officers 
and Probation Agents Scholarship. Thus, average awards were approximately $3,400 per 
individual.  
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.0 million for the Maryland Police 
Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program. The introduced budget also includes 
a contingent reduction of $1.5 million for the scholarship program, which, if implemented, 
would reduce fiscal 2027 funding to $500,000. The fiscal 2026 budget as enacted included 
$2.0 million in funding for the scholarship program; however, the fiscal 2027 budget as 
introduced reflects an additional reduction of $1.5 million for the scholarship program in 
fiscal 2026, which would reduce fiscal 2026 funding to $500,000. By comparison, the 
program received $500,000 in fiscal 2025 and $5.0 million in fiscal 2024. 
 
The additional number of scholarships under the bill cannot be reliably estimated at this 
time. However, given the small number of awards made to police officers and probation 
agents under the existing program, the effect of adding correctional officers to the program 
is likely minimal. Nevertheless, to the extent existing appropriations are insufficient to 
cover the cost of additional awards to correctional officers, individuals can be added to the 
Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship waiting list with no additional 
resources. 
 
MHEC advises that enhancing MDCAPS to include correctional officers under the 
Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship requires approximately 
$20,000 in one-time costs in fiscal 2027.  
 
MHEC advises that the agency is operating without additional administrative capacity to 
handle the new responsibilities presented by expanded scholarship programs. MHEC 
therefore advises that the agency requires one new full-time administrative specialist to 
handle tasks such as eligibility verification, loan documentation review, service tracking, 
payment processing, interagency coordination, and annual reporting. MHEC also advises 
that the agency did not receive additional staffing following the initial creation of the 
scholarship. While the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) acknowledges that 
expansion of the program entails additional operational and administrative impacts to 
MHEC, DLS advises that the bill merely expands existing programs, rather than 
establishing novel responsibilities for MHEC. DLS therefore advises that the bill itself does 
not necessitate additional staffing. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 285/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 690 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4