START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 209

M1 6lr1039
SB 638/25 – EEE (PRE–FILED)

By: Senator McKay
Requested: October 1, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Department of Natural Resources – Savage Highlands State Park – Hotel Rental
3 Surcharge

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Natural Resources to assess and collect a
5 certain hotel rental surcharge on rental units at Savage Highlands State Park and
6 remit the proceeds to the Comptroller for distribution to Garrett County; requiring
7 Garrett County to use and distribute the proceeds from the surcharge in a certain
8 manner; and generally relating to Savage Highlands State Park in Garrett County.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Natural Resources
11 Section 5–1016
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Natural Resources

17 5–1016.

18 (A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

19 (1) ASSESS AND COLLECT AN 8% HOTEL RENTAL SURCHARGE ON
20 RENTAL UNITS ON THE PROPERTY OF SAVAGE HIGHLANDS STATE PARK; AND

21 (2) REMIT THE PROCEEDS FROM THE SURCHARGE TO THE
22 COMPTROLLER FOR DISTRIBUTION TO GARRETT COUNTY.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0209*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 209

1 (B) (1) FROM THE PART OF THE SURCHARGE COLLECTED UNDER
2 SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION THAT IS ATTRIBUTABLE TO A RATE OF 6%,
3 GARRETT COUNTY SHALL DESIGNATE A PORTION FOR THE PROMOTION OF THE
4 COUNTY.

5 (2) THE PART OF THE SURCHARGE COLLECTED UNDER SUBSECTION
6 (A) OF THIS SECTION THAT IS ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE RATE GREATER THAN 6%
7 SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE COUNTY.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
9 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2