START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 215

P1, L6, M2 6lr0613
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senator Simonaire
Requested: June 26, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment and Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Veterans and Uniformed Services – Maryland Veterans Trust Fund and
3 Application of Laws

4 FOR the purpose of altering the application of certain provisions of law governing local
5 government personnel, trout stamps, and landlord remedies to apply to all uniformed
6 services; altering the composition of the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund; and
7 generally relating to veterans and the uniformed services.

8 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
9 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
10 Section 3–1501(a)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
14 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
15 Section 3–1501(h)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Education
20 Section 7–206.1(a)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2025 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
24 Article – Family Law
25 Section 4–501(a)
26 Annotated Code of Maryland

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0215*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 215

1 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

2 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
3 Article – Family Law
4 Section 4–501(m)
5 Annotated Code of Maryland
6 (2019 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

7 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
8 Article – Local Government
9 Section 1–204(c)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2013 Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
13 Article – Natural Resources
14 Section 4–614(a)(1)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
18 Article – Natural Resources
19 Section 4–614(a)(3)(iii)
20 Annotated Code of Maryland
21 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

22 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
23 Article – Real Property
24 Section 1–101(a)
25 Annotated Code of Maryland
26 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

27 BY adding to
28 Article – Real Property
29 Section 1–101(a–1)
30 Annotated Code of Maryland
31 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

32 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
33 Article – Real Property
34 Section 8–212.1(a) and 8–402(b)(1)(iii)1.
35 Annotated Code of Maryland
36 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

37 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
38 Article – State Government
39 Section 9–901(a) and 9–913(a)
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 215 3

1 Annotated Code of Maryland
2 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

3 BY adding to
4 Article – State Government
5 Section 9–901(g–1)
6 Annotated Code of Maryland
7 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

8 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
9 Article – State Government
10 Section 9–913(d)(2)(iii)
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
14 Article – Transportation
15 Section 8–657(a)(1)
16 Annotated Code of Maryland
17 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

18 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
19 Article – Transportation
20 Section 8–657(a)(2)
21 Annotated Code of Maryland
22 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

23 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
24 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

25 Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

26 3–1501.

27 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

28 (h) “Military protection order” [means a protection order issued in accordance
29 with 10 U.S.C. § 1567 by a commanding officer against a person under the officer’s
30 command in:

31 (1) Any branch of the uniformed services of the United States;

32 (2) The Maryland National Guard; or

33 (3) The national guard of any other state] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
34 § 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 215

1 Article – Education

2 7–206.1.

3 (a) An individual honorably discharged from military service may apply to obtain
4 a high school diploma if the individual withdrew from a regular full–time public or private
5 high school accredited by the State Board to enlist in the armed forces [of the United States]
6 during:

7 (1) World War II;

8 (2) The Korean Conflict; or

9 (3) The Vietnam Conflict.

10 Article – Family Law

11 4–501.

12 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

13 (m) “Military protection order” [means a protection order issued in accordance
14 with 10 U.S.C. § 1567 by a commanding officer against a person under such officer’s
15 command in:

16 (1) any branch of the uniformed services of the United States;

17 (2) the Maryland National Guard; or

18 (3) the national guard of any other state] HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
19 § 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

20 Article – Local Government

21 1–204.

22 (c) The following applicants are ineligible for a credit under this subsection:

23 (1) a current employee of a county or municipality; and

24 (2) an eligible veteran who is convicted of a crime after being discharged
25 from or completing [military] service IN THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.

26 Article – Natural Resources

27 4–614.
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 215 5

1 (a) (1) The Department shall adopt regulations to establish fishing areas
2 where a trout stamp is required.

3 (3) A trout stamp is not required of the following:

4 (iii) Any resident serving in the [armed forces of the United States]
5 UNIFORMED SERVICES while on leave in the State, during the resident’s leave period, if,
6 while angling, the resident possesses a copy of the resident’s official leave order; or

7 Article – Real Property

8 1–101.

9 (a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated unless
10 otherwise apparent from context.

11 (A–1) “ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF
12 THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

13 8–212.1.

14 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

15 (2) “Active duty” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the State
16 Government Article.

17 (3) [“Active service member” means “service member” as defined in §
18 9–901 of the State Government Article.

19 (4)] “Change of assignment” includes:

20 (i) Permanent change of station orders;

21 (ii) Temporary duty orders for a period exceeding 90 days;

22 (iii) Orders requiring a person to move into quarters located on a
23 military installation; and

24 (iv) A release from active duty, including:

25 1. Retirement;

26 2. Separation or discharge under honorable conditions; and

27 3. Demobilization of an activated member of a reserve
28 component who was serving on active duty orders for at least 180 consecutive days.
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
6 SENATE BILL 215

1 [(5)] (4) “Reserve component” has the meaning stated in § 9–901 of the
2 State Government Article.

3 8–402.

4 (b) (1) (iii) 1. This subparagraph applies only if the landlord or the
5 landlord’s spouse:

6 A. Is [on active duty with the United States military] AN
7 ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER;

8 B. Has relocated to the State as a direct result of being [on
9 active duty with the United States military] AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER;

10 C. Intends to occupy the property that is the subject of a
11 complaint under this section following the entry of a judgment under this section; and

12 D. Submits documentation supporting the requirements of
13 this subparagraph with the complaint.

14 Article – State Government

15 9–901.

16 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

17 (G–1) “MILITARY PROTECTION ORDER” MEANS A PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED
18 IN ACCORDANCE WITH 10 U.S.C. § 1567 BY A COMMANDING OFFICER AGAINST A
19 PERSON UNDER THE OFFICER’S COMMAND IN:

20 (1) ANY BRANCH OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES;

21 (2) THE MARYLAND NATIONAL GUARD; OR

22 (3) THE NATIONAL GUARD OF ANY OTHER STATE.

23 9–913.

24 (a) In this section, “Fund” means the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund.

25 (d) The Fund consists of:

26 (2) contributions to the Fund from:
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
SENATE BILL 215 7

1 (iii) the designated fees from special registration plates for recipients
2 of an individually earned, combat–related armed forces medal OR A
3 NON–COMBAT–RELATED UNIFORMED SERVICES MEDAL OF THE HIGHEST LEVELS
4 under § 13–619.1 of the Transportation Article; and

5 Article – Transportation

6 8–657.

7 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

8 (2) “Federal facility” includes:

9 (i) An installation of the [armed forces of the United States]
10 UNIFORMED SERVICES; and

11 (ii) Any property owned or leased by an agency of the United States.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
13 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 7