START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 209 
(Senator McKay) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Department of Natural Resources - Savage Highlands State Park - Hotel Rental 
Surcharge 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to (1) assess and collect an 
8% hotel rental surcharge on rental units on the property of the Savage Highlands State 
Park and (2) remit the proceeds from the surcharge to the Comptroller for distribution to 
Garrett County. From the part of the surcharge collected that is attributable to a rate of 6%, 
Garrett County must designate a portion for the promotion of the county, and the part of 
the surcharge collected that is attributable to the rate greater than 6% must be distributed 
to the general fund of the county. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Garrett County revenues increase by $53,573 in FY 2027 and  
$64,288 annually thereafter, and county expenditures increase by up to $40,180 in FY 2027 
and up to $48,216 annually thereafter, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DNR is responsible, under the Natural Resources Article, for 
(1) promoting, administering, and managing every State-owned or leased forest, park, 
scenic preserve, natural area, parkway, historic monument, and recreation area, and 
(2) administering every law and regulation relating to those resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 209/ Page 2 
Pursuant to DNR regulations, the State park system is administered under the jurisdiction 
of the Maryland Park Service (MPS) to preserve and protect the best of Maryland’s natural 
and historic places for the enjoyment and appreciation of its citizens. The parks are 
managed to provide public benefits, including (1) natural resource conservation; 
(2) cultural and historic preservation; (3) watershed protection; (4) education and 
interpretation; and (5) nature-based outdoor recreation, including trails, picnicking, 
boating, camping, cabins, hunting, fishing, and swimming. 
 
Savage River State Forest, approximately 56,000 acres of forest in Garrett and 
Allegany counties, is designated as a State forest in DNR regulations. 
 
DNR purchased the Savage Highlands State Park (previously, the Savage River Lodge) in 
Garrett County, surrounded by the Savage River State Forest, in 2024, to incorporate the 
lodge within MPS’s Western Maryland public lands and outdoor recreation sites. 
 
Under the Local Government Article, counties are authorized to impose a hotel rental tax. 
A county sets the tax rate by resolution subject to certain limitations. The hotel rental tax 
in Garrett County may not exceed 8% under State law, and it is currently set at 8%. 
 
Local Revenues:  Garrett County revenues increase by $53,573 in fiscal 2027 and 
$64,288 annually thereafter due to the 8% hotel rental surcharge on rental units of the 
Savage Highlands State Park that is distributed to the county. This estimate assumes the 
park is open for most of the year in fiscal 2027, but not the full fiscal year. DNR indicates 
the park is expected to begin opening in late summer of 2026. Since the park is not currently 
open for reservations, this estimate is based on estimated rental and rate information, 
provided by DNR, shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimate Annual Rental Surcharge Revenues 
 
 
Number of 
Units 
Projected 
Number of 
Rentals Per 
Unit Per year 
Average Rate 
Per Unit 
Annual 8% 
Surcharge 
Total 
Cabins 
18 
200 
$150/night 
$43,200 
Yurts 
8 
200 
$150/night 
19,200 
Conference Room 
1 
50 
$250/day 
1,000 
Campsites 
4 
150 
$18.50/night 
888 
Total 
 
 
 
$64,288 
 
Source:  Department of Natural Resources 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 209/ Page 3 
Local Expenditures:  Garrett County expenditures increase by up to $40,180 in 
fiscal 2027 and up to $48,216 annually thereafter (6/8, or 75%, of the surcharge revenues), 
due to the bill’s requirement that the county designate a portion of the part of the surcharge 
attributable to a rate of 6%, for the promotion of the county. Other spending of the 
surcharge revenues is at the county’s discretion. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in Garrett County that benefit from tourism may 
benefit from Garrett County spending, pursuant to the bill, on promotion of the county. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last  
three years.  See SB 638 and HB 1277 of 2025.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Natural Resources; Garrett 
County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 23, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3