START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 225

M3 6lr1160
(PRE–FILED)

By: Senators M. Washington and Brooks
Requested: October 10, 2025
Introduced and read first time: January 14, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Environment – Interjurisdictional Watersheds – Flood Management

3 FOR the purpose of providing for the designation of certain watersheds as
4 interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds for certain planning purposes; and
5 generally relating to interjurisdictional watersheds and flood management.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Environment
8 Section 5–503(c)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Environment
13 Section 5–803(d) and (e)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2013 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Environment

19 5–503.

20 (c) (1) The Department, by regulation, may designate interjurisdictional
21 watersheds in which any impoundment proposal is subject to review and approval by the
22 Department for standards relating to safety and flood control.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0225*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 225

1 (2) Gwynns Falls, Jones Falls, and Herring Run, situated in or adjacent to
2 Baltimore City, are designated interjurisdictional watersheds.

3 5–803.

4 (d) (1) (I) By July 1, 1990 each subdivision, in cooperation with the
5 Departments of the Environment and Agriculture, the Department of Planning, and other
6 appropriate State agencies, shall prepare a flood management plan based upon an
7 evaluation of the alternative management techniques and other findings included in
8 studies conducted under subsection (b) of this section.

9 (II) Each flood management plan shall be consistent with the
10 purposes and provisions of this subtitle.

11 (2) Management techniques may include:

12 (i) Flood control dams;

13 (ii) Levees and dikes;

14 (iii) Stormwater detention or retention structures;

15 (iv) Public acquisition;

16 (v) Flood proofing;

17 (vi) Storm drain and stream maintenance;

18 (vii) Tax adjustment policies;

19 (viii) Subdivision, zoning, and related ordinances; and

20 (ix) Other practical methods.

21 (3) Management techniques shall include flood warning systems.

22 (e) (1) (I) In any interjurisdictional watershed, those portions of the flood
23 management plans of the subdivisions relating to the watershed shall be subject to review
24 and approval by the Department as one plan.

25 (II) IN ACCORDANCE WITH COMAR 26.17.02.07 AND § 5–503
26 OF THIS TITLE, THE FOLLOWING WATERSHEDS AND ALL THEIR HEADWATERS AND
27 TRIBUTARIES ARE DESIGNATED AS INTERJURISDICTIONAL FLOOD HAZARD
28 WATERSHEDS:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 225 3

1 1. CARROLL CREEK IN FREDERICK CITY AND
2 FREDERICK COUNTY;

3 2. GWYNNS FALLS IN BALTIMORE CITY AND
4 BALTIMORE COUNTY;

5 3. JONES FALLS IN BALTIMORE CITY AND BALTIMORE
6 COUNTY; AND

7 4. HERRING RUN IN BALTIMORE CITY AND BALTIMORE
8 COUNTY.

9 (III) IN ADDITION TO THE WATERSHEDS SPECIFIED UNDER
10 SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DESIGNATE
11 THE PATAPSCO RIVER, INCLUDING ALL HEADWATERS AND TRIBUTARIES IN
12 BALTIMORE CITY, BALTIMORE COUNTY, HOWARD COUNTY, CARROLL COUNTY,
13 AND ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, AS AN INTERJURISDICTIONAL FLOOD HAZARD
14 WATERSHED.

15 (2) (I) Any comprehensive flood management plan which includes a
16 project for which grant funds are requested under this section is subject to review and
17 approval by the Department.

18 (II) If a plan is disapproved, the Secretary shall set forth in writing
19 the reason for disapproval.

20 (III) Disapproval of a plan shall be based only on flood management
21 considerations.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3