START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 246 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 246 
(Senator Beidle) 
Finance 
 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission - Term of Office of Members 
 
 
This bill specifies that, at the end of a term, a member of the Health Services Cost Review 
Commission (HSCRC) may continue to serve for up to six months (rather than until a 
successor is appointed and qualifies). A member who is appointed after a term has begun 
may serve only for the rest of the term (rather than for the rest of the term and until a 
qualified successor is appointed).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department 
of Health established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, 
provide access to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in 
the State. HSCRC was responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the 
successor to the Maryland All-Payer Model Contract and will implement the Achieving 
Healthcare Efficiency through Accountable Design (AHEAD) Model from 2026 to 2034 
to continue statewide efforts to improve health care quality and control costs.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 246/ Page 2 
HSCRC consists of seven members appointed by the Governor. Chapter 366 of 2023 
requires that members be appointed with the advice and consent of the Senate. When 
appointing a member, the Governor must consider and make appointments that would 
promote the racial, gender, and geographic diversity of the commission. Four members 
must be individuals who do not have any connection with the management of policy of any 
health care facility. 
 
A member’s term is four years, and terms are staggered. At the end of a term, members 
continue to serve until a qualified successor is appointed. A member who is appointed after 
a term has begun serves only for the rest of the term and until a qualified successor is 
appointed. A member who serves two consecutive full four-year terms may not be 
reappointed for four years after completion of those terms. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2