START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 211 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 211 
(Senator Folden) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Maryland Estate Tax - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the Maryland estate tax. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies 
to decedents dying on or after July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $44.0 million in FY 2027. 
Future years reflect annualization and the current estate tax revenue forecast. General fund 
expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office may decrease minimally beginning in FY 2027 
(not shown below). 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
($44.0) 
($182.5) 
($186.5) 
($190.2) 
($193.8) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($44.0) 
($182.5) 
($186.5) 
($190.2) 
($193.8)  
Note: () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The estate tax is imposed on the transfer of the Maryland estate of a 
decedent who, at the time of death, was (1) a resident of the State or (2) a nonresident 
whose estate includes any interest in tangible real property located in the State or tangible 
personal property with a taxable situs in the State. The Maryland estate tax is based on the 
federal credit for death taxes paid as in effect on December 31, 2001, before the phase-out 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 211/ Page 2 
and repeal of the credit under the federal Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation 
Act of 2001. Because the federal credit is calculated based on a marginal rate schedule, no 
tax rates are specified in Maryland statute. A top marginal rate of 16% is applied to the 
portion of the adjusted taxable estate in excess of $10,040,000. Estates are allowed a credit 
against the Maryland estate tax for Maryland inheritance tax paid. 
 
The unified credit allowed against the federal estate tax effectively excludes a portion of 
the taxable estate from taxation (applicable exclusion amount). Maryland decoupled from 
increases in the value of the federal unified credit allowed against the federal estate tax for 
decedents dying after 2003. For decedents dying after 2018, the unified credit for Maryland 
estate tax purposes is $1,945,800 – the amount which effectively excludes the 
first $5.0 million of the taxable estate from tax. 
 
The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 doubled the federal basic exclusion amounts 
for 2018 through 2025 only. For 2025, the federal basic exclusion amount is  
$13.99 million. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 permanently increased the federal 
basic exclusion amount to $15.0 million for 2026 and inflation-adjusted amounts annually 
thereafter. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $44.0 million in 
fiscal 2027, $182.5 million in fiscal 2028, and similar amounts annually thereafter due to 
the bill’s repeal of the estate tax for decedents dying on or after July 1, 2026. 
 
State Expenditures:  It is assumed that existing positions within the Comptroller’s Office 
dedicated to estate tax auditing and administration are eventually redirected to other duties 
after such work phases out. However, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s 
Office may decrease minimally beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the elimination of expenses 
related to updating estate tax forms. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Register of Wills; Internal Revenue 
Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 211/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2026 
 
sj/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3