START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 232 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 232 
(Senator Salling) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Procurement - Preferences - Historically Underutilized Business Zone 
Businesses 
 
 
This bill establishes a price preference for State procurement contracts made directly or 
indirectly with historically underutilized business zone (HUBzone) businesses, as defined 
by the bill; it also requires each State agency to structure its procurement procedures to try 
to achieve a goal of at least 1% of the total dollar value of its procurement contracts being 
made directly or indirectly with HUBzone businesses in 2026 and 2027, 2% in 2028, and 
3% in 2029 and each year thereafter. The bill establishes penalties for persons who violate 
specified provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Department of Social and Economic 
Mobility (DoSEM) increase by $85,600 beginning in FY 2027 to administer the HUBzone 
program. Additional general and/or special fund expenditures are likely necessary for 
implementation and staffing, but a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. The 
addition of another preference program likely reduces competition for State contracts, 
resulting in higher prices for many of those contracts, but a reliable estimate of any such 
effect is also not feasible. The bill’s penalty provisions are not expected to materially affect 
State revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
(85,600) 
(100,500) 
(105,200) 
(110,000) 
(114,800) 
Net Effect 
$85,600 
$100,500 
$105,200 
$110,000 
$114,800  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 232/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
HUBzone Businesses 
 
A HUBzone business is a business that meets the standards adopted by the U.S. Small 
Business Administration (SBA) in federal regulations (13 CFR 126, Subpart B) and any 
subsequent revision of that regulation, and that maintains a principal place of business in 
the State that is in a historically underutilized business zone. The definition of “small 
business” within the State’s Small Business Reserve (SBR) Program is expanded to include 
HUBzone businesses that also meet State criteria for small business certification. 
 
HUBzone Preference Program 
 
The Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs (GOSBA) must 
adopt regulations to implement the bill, including (1) establishing a process for the 
certification of HUBzone businesses, including the verification of eligibility through the 
Federal Systems for Award Management; (2) establishing the percentage price preference 
(3) establishing procedures for tracking and reporting participation of HUBzone businesses 
in State procurement; and (4) reporting annually, by December 1, to the Legislative Policy 
Committee on specified information and an evaluation of the program’s effectiveness. The 
provisions of the HUBzone preference program do not apply to an agency to the extent that 
those provisions conflict with an applicable federal program. 
 
Penalty Provisions 
 
A person may not:   
 
 
knowingly and with intent to defraud, fraudulently obtain, attempt to obtain, or aid 
another person in fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain public money, 
procurement contracts, or funds spent under a procurement contract to which the 
person is not entitled; 
 
knowingly and with intent to defraud, fraudulently represent participation of a 
HUBzone business in order to obtain or retain a bid preference or a procurement 
contract; 
 
willfully and knowingly make or subscribe to any statement, declaration, or other 
document that is fraudulent or false, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 232/ Page 3 
 
willfully and knowingly aid, assist in, procure, counsel, or advise the preparation of 
a declaration, statement, or other document that is fraudulent or false, as specified; 
 
willfully and knowingly fail to file any declaration or notice with a State agency that 
is required by the bill; or 
 
establish, knowingly aid in the establishment of, or exercise control over a business 
found to have violated the above provisions. 
 
Agencies must report any of these violations to the Board of Public Works (BPW). BPW 
must report the violations to the Office of the Attorney General, which must determine 
whether to bring a civil action against the person or business in violation of these 
provisions.  
 
A person who violates any of the above provisions:   
 
 
is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine up to $1,000 or 
imprisonment up to six months, or both; 
 
is liable for a civil penalty of (1) at least $10,000 but not more than $30,000 for a 
first offense and (2) between $30,000 and $50,000 for each subsequent offense; and 
 
pays all costs and attorney’s fees imposed and incurred by the plaintiff in a civil 
action or must be prohibited from participating in State contracts until the penalties 
are satisfied. 
 
A person who willfully misrepresents a business as a HUBzone business for purposes of 
obtaining or retaining a contract or subcontract may be subject to suspension or debarment 
and civil penalties under the Maryland False Claims Act. 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of the State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) 
program, please see the Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program. 
 
Small Business Reserve Program 
 
SBR requires most State agencies to structure their procurements so that at least 20% of 
the total dollar value of their procurements is made directly to small businesses; 
Chapter 582 of 2024 raised the goal from 15% to 20%. Under regulations governing the 
program, each agency must prepare an annual forecast of its total procurement spending. 
The agency must then develop a plan to allocate at least 20% of its forecasted spending to 
contracts for small businesses serving as prime contractors. Under Chapter 582, an agency 
can apply toward its total SBR participation goal awards made under a contract that is 
designated as an SBR procurement as well as awards not designated as an SBR 
procurement. The Special Secretary of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 232/ Page 4 
must, in consultation with the Attorney General, establish standards and guidelines for 
participation in SBR every five years. 
 
The University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, and St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland are exempt from most provisions of State procurement law, including SBR. 
 
Chapter 75 of 2004 established SBR and defined a “small business” as either a certified 
minority‑owned business or a business other than a broker that is independently owned and 
operated, not a subsidiary of another firm, and not dominant in its field of operation. In 
addition, Chapters 538 and 539 of 2012 (as amended by Chapter 76 of 2014) established 
that, to qualify as a small business under SBR, a business must meet either of the following 
criteria in its most recently completed three fiscal years:   
 
 
the firm did not employ more than 25 people in its retail operations; 50 people in 
either its wholesale or construction operations; or 100 people in either its service, 
manufacturing, or architectural and engineering operations; or 
 
average gross sales did not exceed $2.0 million for manufacturing operations, 
$3.0 million for retail operations, $4.0 million for wholesale operations, 
$4.5 million for architectural and engineering services, $7.0 million for construction 
operations, and $10.0 million for service operations. 
 
Small businesses self-report their small business status by registering on eMaryland 
Marketplace Advantage, the State’s online procurement portal. Chapter 119 of 2016 
transferred responsibility for administering SBR from the Department of General Services 
(DGS) to GOSBA and repealed its termination date, making the program permanent. In 
2025, GOSBA was transferred to the Department of Social and Economic Mobility and 
renamed the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs. 
 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 (as amended by Chapter 601 of 2025) required that any 
procurement by an Executive Branch agency for goods, supplies, services, maintenance, 
construction, construction-related services, architectural services, and engineering services 
with a total dollar value of $1,000,000 or less be designated for SBR, except for:   
 
 
procurements made in accordance with preferences made to benefit disadvantaged 
individuals; 
 
procurement involving expenditures of federal dollars, if inclusion in SBR conflicts 
with federal law or grant requirements; 
 
procurements of human, social, cultural, or educational services; and 
 
certain term or master contracts, as determined by GOSBA and the Office of State 
Procurement (OSP). 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 232/ Page 5 
A procurement is exempt from designation for SBR if GOSBA certifies, concurrently with 
the review of any waiver determinations for certified MBE contract goals, that it is not 
practicable to do so. OSP must assist GOSBA in establishing procedures and guidelines 
for the efficient exemption of procurements from SBR. 
 
Federal HUBzone Program and Eligibility 
 
The purpose of the federal program is to provide federal contracting assistance for qualified 
small businesses located in HUBzones in an effort to increase employment opportunities, 
investment, and economic development in those areas. 
 
To be eligible for HUBzone certification by SBA, the business must:   
 
 
meet federal small business size standards; 
 
have a principal office in a HUBzone; 
 
have at least 35% of its employees reside in a HUBzone; and 
 
be owned and controlled by a U.S. citizen. 
 
Under Federal Acquisition Regulations, for open procurements, contracting officers must 
apply a price preference of 10% to all offers from HUBzone businesses.  
 
Department of General Services Study 
 
Chapter 518 of 2022 required DGS, in consultation with GOSBA, to study the feasibility 
and impacts of establishing a State procurement percentage preference for businesses 
located in HUBzones. DGS submitted its report on December 1, 2022, which included a 
finding that GOSBA would require at least one additional position to manage the program. 
However, the report concluded that it found “no evidence to support any direct benefit to 
Maryland small businesses by creating a HUBzone preference within the SBR program.” 
Instead, it found that the greatest benefit to Maryland small businesses would result from 
their greater utilization of the existing federal HUBzone program. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill establishes a new procurement preference program for 
HUBzone businesses, but its overall fiscal effect is ultimately unclear because it is not 
known whether the program is intended to operate as part of SBR or as a stand-alone 
preference program. The program is drafted in a section of procurement law that is separate 
from both the MBE and SBR programs; however, the definition of a HUBzone business is 
incorporated into the definition of a small business under SBR.  
 
If the HUBzone program is intended to operate within SBR (with the specified 1-3% goals 
being a subset of the overall 20% goal), given the expansion of the definition of  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 232/ Page 6 
“small business” in the bill, the bill likely will have a minimal effect on State agencies and 
procurement costs when compared to a separate program. However, this is unlikely because 
the program is established in a separate section of procurement law. More likely, it operates 
parallel to the SBR and MBE programs and adds another participation goal to State 
procurement, in addition to MBE’ s 29% goal and SBR’s 20% goal (there is also a 
veteran‑owned small business goal of 3%). As a result, it likely has a meaningful effect on 
State agencies and procurement costs. 
 
The bill requires the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs (OSBA) 
within the DoSEM to adopt regulations for HUBzone business certification and to establish 
procedures for monitoring, tracking, and reporting HUBzone business participation. 
Accordingly, DoSEM advises that OSBA likely requires at least one additional staff 
position to administer the program. General fund expenditures increase by $85,616 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring a Compliance Manager to oversee and report on the HUBzone 
program. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,475 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$85,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Furthermore, DoSEM advises that the program requires funds to integrate 
HUBzone‑certified businesses into existing State certification databases and monitor the 
program, or to develop a new database if necessary. State agencies also likely require 
additional procurement staff to set HUBzone goals for each procurement, monitor vendor 
compliance with those goals, and track and report HUBzone business participation to 
OSBA. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs that some agencies, 
particularly those with substantial procurement activity, may require additional staff for 
these purposes. However, without more specificity about the program, many program 
features and procedures are likely to be established in the required regulations. As a result, 
these costs cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
Finally, establishing another preference program in addition to the three existing programs 
further limits competition for State contracts. It also likely creates confusion among 
vendors and overlapping priorities in State contracts, which may have the effect of further 
limiting vendor participation in State procurement. Reduced competition for procurement 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 232/ Page 7 
contracts has been shown to increase the costs of procurement contracts, but a reliable 
estimate of any such effect is not feasible. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in HUBzones benefit from increased 
opportunities to participate in State contracting. However, benefits may be limited as it is 
likely that only a small percentage of small businesses in the State are eligible to be certified 
as a HUBzone business. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill includes definitions of HUBzone businesses that 
potentially conflict with each other. It defines a HUBzone business as a business that meets 
specified federal standards established by SBA. Those federal standards include 
industry‑specific size standards. However, the bill also specifies that HUBzone businesses 
must meet industry-specific size standards established for SBR in State law. To the extent 
that these two sets of business size standards conflict, certification/designation of 
HUBzone businesses may be affected. 
 
Furthermore, the bill creates a set-aside program (with a goal of awarding 1-3% of the total 
value of contracts awarded to HUBzone businesses, as specified) and a percentage price 
preference program for HUBzone businesses. It authorizes OSBA to adopt regulations, 
consistent with the Federal Acquisition Regulation, to implement this percentage price 
preference for procurement contracts made directly or indirectly with HUBzone businesses 
to be applied during procurements open to all vendors. As stated above, the Federal 
Acquisition Regulation requires contracting officers to apply a percentage price preference 
of 10% to all offers from HUBzone businesses. As the bill requires OSBA regulations to 
be consistent with the Federal Acquisition Regulation, it is likely that the price preference 
set by OSBA will need to match the federal requirement of 10%. It is unclear how agencies 
can apply a price preference for procurements set aside only for HUBzone businesses when 
there are not any HUBzone businesses competing for those contracts. DLS notes that 
federal law and regulations do not establish a goal for HUBzone awards from federal 
agencies.  
 
Finally, the bill references the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs, which was transferred to the Department of Social and Economic Mobility in 2025, 
and renamed the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 154 and HB 1184 of 2024 and SB 908 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 232/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Governor’s Office of 
Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Department of Social and Economic 
Mobility; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Attorney General; 
University System of Maryland; Department of General Services; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 232/ Page 9 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(OSBA, now housed within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility or DoSEM), 
in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, the Chief Procurement Officer, and 
the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply.  
 
In August 2013, OSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2026. OSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total + 2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 232/ Page 10 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require OSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, the State periodically conducts a 
disparity study to determine whether there is continued evidence that MBEs are 
underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The most recent disparity study, completed in September 2025, identified continued and 
ongoing disparities in annual wages, business earnings, and business ownership rates for 
minority- and women-owned businesses when compared to nonminority and male-owned 
businesses. The study found that minority-owned businesses in the Maryland Marketplace 
made up 47.4% of all businesses but captured only 17.6% of total sales, while nonminority 
male-owned businesses accounted for 29.9% of businesses and 66.7% of total sales. The 
study likewise identified disparities in the State’s contracting with minority- and 
women-owned businesses, finding that these firms were consistently underutilized relative 
to their availability to perform State contracts. For instance, minority-owned businesses 
overall had an availability rate of 26.1% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
15.2% of the total contract value awarded by the State. Nonminority women-owned 
businesses had an availability rate of 13.7% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
7.1% of the total contract value awarded by the State. According to the analysis, these 
differences are large and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026; Chapters 620 and 621 of 2025, 
which reauthorized the program, also extended the due date for the new disparity study to 
September 2025 to inform the subsequent reauthorization process. As previously noted, 
this study was completed and published by the due date and is expected to serve as the 
empirical basis for the program’s reauthorization. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation 
rates for major Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during 
fiscal 2023 and 2024, the most recent data available; as the exhibit shows, rates can vary 
considerably from year to year. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 232/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Aging 
1.2% 
11.2% 
Agriculture 
3.2% 
6.2% 
Budget and Management 
32.9% 
3.0% 
Commerce 
53.8% 
77.5% 
Education 
11.5% 
21.9% 
Environment 
37.9% 
17.5% 
Executive Department 
4.6% 
2.2% 
General Services 
19.5% 
21.4% 
Health 
8.4% 
12.8% 
Higher Education Commission 
3.0% 
20.9% 
Housing and Community Development 
48.5% 
40.4% 
Human Services 
10.5% 
38.9% 
Information Technology 
14.4% 
23.7% 
Juvenile Services 
6.5% 
15.5% 
Labor 
18.6% 
3.7% 
Military 
22.3% 
27.5% 
Natural Resources 
10.2% 
5.9% 
Planning 
0.0% 
3.9% 
State Police 
20.9% 
12.7% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
6.2% 
28.5% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.1% 
20.4% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
20.2% 
25.1% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
48.5% 
21.0% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
13.1% 
16.4% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
21.7% 
27.0% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
12.0% 
n/a 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.4% 
19.8% 
Statewide Total1 
17.9% 
22.0% 
 
MBE:  Minority Business Enterprise 
n/a:  not available 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 232/ Page 12 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by,  
one or more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own 
it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An “economically disadvantaged 
individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2026 is $2,192,035. 
 
The Office of Minority Business Enterprise (OMBE) handles MBE certification for the 
State. Chapter 605 of 2025 transferred OMBE from the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT), which had been the State’s certification agency, to the new 
DoSEM. However, as procurement regulations have not been updated to reflect this 
transfer, MDOT is still designated as the MBE certification agency in regulations. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12