START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 245

E4 6lr1714
CF 6lr2554

By: Senators Smith, Ferguson, and Lewis Young
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Public Safety – Immigration Enforcement Agreements – Prohibition

3 FOR the purpose of prohibiting the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or
4 any agency, officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government from
5 entering into a certain immigration enforcement agreement; requiring the
6 termination of an existing immigration enforcement agreement on or before a certain
7 date; and generally relating to immigration enforcement.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Criminal Procedure
10 Section 5–104.1
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2025 Replacement Volume)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Criminal Procedure

16 5–104.1.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT”
18 MEANS A CONTRACT, AN AGREEMENT, AN INTERGOVERNMENTAL SERVICE
19 AGREEMENT, OR A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE FEDERAL
20 GOVERNMENT THAT AUTHORIZES THE STATE, A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A
21 COUNTY SHERIFF, OR ANY AGENCY, OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, OR AGENT OF THE STATE
22 OR A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ENFORCE CIVIL IMMIGRATION LAW.

23 (2) “IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT” INCLUDES AN
24 AGREEMENT MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0245*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 245

1 (I) 8 U.S.C. § 1103;

2 (II) 8 U.S.C. § 1357; OR

3 (III) ANY OTHER FEDERAL LAW.

4 (B) THE STATE, A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A COUNTY SHERIFF, OR
5 ANY AGENCY, OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, OR AGENT OF THE STATE OR A UNIT OF LOCAL
6 GOVERNMENT MAY NOT ENTER INTO AN IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT.

7 (C) THE STATE, A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A COUNTY SHERIFF, OR
8 ANY AGENCY, OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, OR AGENT OF THE STATE OR A UNIT OF LOCAL
9 GOVERNMENT WITH AN EXISTING IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT SHALL
10 EXERCISE THE TERMINATION PROVISION CONTAINED IN THE IMMIGRATION
11 ENFORCEMENT AGREEMENT NOT LATER THAN JULY 1, 2026.

12 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
13 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2