START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 275

R4 6lr1746

By: Senator Watson
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Laws – Electric Vehicle Dealer Licenses – City of Bowie

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the number of dealer licenses available for certain
4 manufacturers or distributors that deal only in electric or nonfossil–fuel burning
5 vehicles; providing that the additional license authorized under this Act may be
6 issued only for the operation of a dealership in the City of Bowie; and generally
7 relating to dealer licenses for the sale of electric and nonfossil–fuel burning vehicles
8 and the City of Bowie.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Transportation
11 Section 15–305(b) and (f)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Transportation
16 Section 15–305(e)(2)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Transportation

22 15–305.

23 (b) A license to deal in new vehicles may be issued only for a dealer in new vehicles
24 who holds a franchise from:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0275*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 275

1 (1) The manufacturer of the vehicles; or

2 (2) A distributor who is authorized by the manufacturer or the
3 manufacturer’s authorized importer of the vehicles.

4 (e) (2) (i) Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (f) of this section and
5 subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, a manufacturer or distributor may be
6 licensed as a dealer if:

7 1. The manufacturer or distributor deals only in electric or
8 nonfossil–fuel burning vehicles;

9 2. No dealer in the State holds a franchise from the
10 manufacturer or distributor;

11 3. The manufacturer or distributor, or a subsidiary, an
12 affiliate, or a controlled entity of the manufacturer or distributor, does not hold a controlling
13 interest in another manufacturer or distributor, or a subsidiary, an affiliate, or a controlled
14 entity of the other manufacturer or distributor, that is licensed as a dealer under this
15 paragraph; and

16 4. No other manufacturer or distributor, or subsidiary,
17 affiliate, or controlled entity of the other manufacturer or distributor, that is licensed as a
18 dealer under this paragraph, holds a controlling interest in the manufacturer or distributor,
19 or a subsidiary, an affiliate, or a controlled entity of the manufacturer or distributor.

20 (ii) 1. [No] SUBJECT TO SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS
21 SUBPARAGRAPH, NOT more than [four] FIVE licenses may be issued under this
22 paragraph.

23 2. ONE LICENSE UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH MAY BE
24 ISSUED ONLY FOR THE OPERATION OF A DEALERSHIP IN THE CITY OF BOWIE.

25 (iii) The Administration shall adopt regulations to implement this
26 paragraph.

27 (f) A manufacturer or distributor, or a person who is acting for a partnership or
28 corporation that is owned or controlled by or under common control with a manufacturer
29 or distributor, may not sell a new vehicle to a retail buyer.

30 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
31 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2