START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 236

G1 6lr1092
CF 6lr1093

By: Senator Kagan
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Election Law – Certification of Election–Supporting Technology – Regulations,
3 Review, and Evaluation

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Elections to adopt regulations for the
5 review, certification, and decertification of election–supporting technology and to
6 review and evaluate election–supporting technology on or before a certain date each
7 year; and generally relating to the certification of election–supporting technology.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Election Law
10 Section 9–107
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Election Law

16 9–107.

17 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “ELECTION–SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGY”
18 MEANS ANY EQUIPMENT OR TECHNOLOGY THAT IS:

19 (I) COMPATIBLE WITH A METHOD OF CASTING AND
20 TABULATING VOTES IN WHICH VOTERS RANK CANDIDATES IN ORDER OF
21 PREFERENCE AND VOTES ARE TABULATED IN A MANNER THAT REFLECTS VOTER
22 PREFERENCE; AND

23 (II) DESIGNED FOR USE IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0236*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 236

1 ELECTIONS, INCLUDING:

2 1. ELECTRONIC POLLBOOKS;

3 2. RISK–LIMITING AUDIT TOOLS; AND

4 3. ANY SOFTWARE USED FOR PREPARING, PRESENTING,
5 OR REPORTING THE RESULTS PRODUCED BY A VOTING SYSTEM.

6 (2) “ELECTION–SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGY” DOES NOT INCLUDE A
7 VOTING SYSTEM.

8 (B) THE STATE BOARD SHALL:

9 (1) ADOPT REGULATIONS:

10 (I) FOR THE REVIEW, CERTIFICATION, AND DECERTIFICATION
11 OF ELECTION–SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGY; AND

12 (II) RELATING TO REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTION–SUPPORTING
13 TECHNOLOGY SELECTED AND CERTIFIED UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

14 (2) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2027,
15 REVIEW AND EVALUATE ELECTION–SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGY.

16 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the State Board of Elections
17 shall adopt the regulations required under § 9–107 of the Election Law Article, as enacted
18 by Section 1 of this Act, on or before December 1, 2026.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2