START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 278 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 278 
(Senators West and Waldstreicher) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Expedited Document Processing 
and Fees 
 
 
This bill establishes expedited timeframes and corresponding fees to process specified 
documents filed with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for SDAT increase by $85,600 in FY 2027 for 
staff; future years reflect annualization and inflation. Special fund revenues from fees likely 
increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$85,600 
$100,500 
$105,200 
$110,000 
$114,800 
Net Effect 
($85,600) 
($100,500) 
($105,200) 
($110,000) 
($114,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Statute requires SDAT to adopt regulations governing the 
manner of filing and processing of certain documents (e.g., articles of incorporation, 
articles of organization of a limited liability company, etc.) on an expedited basis, including 
reasonable limitations on filing documents of unusual volume or length. SDAT is 
authorized to (1) adopt regulations establishing expedited processing tiers or additional 
methods of expedited document processing and (2) charge reasonable fees for the services. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 278/ Page 2 
In general, under current law, if a fee for expedited processing is paid, SDAT must 
(1) process documents filed with the department at least two hours before its close of 
business within two hours after receipt and (2) to the extent practicable, process all other 
documents on the same day that the documents are received. Regulations set forth 
additional guidance related to expedited processing. Under current law, the fee for 
expedited filings is $425 for documents filed in hard copy (online filing is $325). 
 
The bill establishes two additional options for expedited filings:   
 
 
SDAT must process documents filed at least one hour before close of business 
within one hour after the documents are received – payment of a $1,000 fee; and 
 
SDAT must process documents filed at least 30 minutes before close of business 
within 30 minutes after the documents are received – payment of a $1,500 fee. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues likely increase beginning in fiscal 2027 due to 
filers utilizing the two additional options for expedited filings under the bill’s compressed 
timeframes. SDAT advises that large law firms are most likely to request these expedited 
filings, as they often have complex, time‐sensitive corporate transactions (some of which 
are dependent on when the stock market opens). The number of expedited filings (and 
amount of associated fees) that are likely to occur cannot be reliably estimated without 
experience under the bill. For illustrative purposes only, for every 100 online filings 
requested to be processed within the 30-minute timeframe under the bill, instead of the 
expedited timeframe under current practice, special fund revenues increase by $117,500.   
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures for SDAT increase by $85,616 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one full‐time charter specialist to assist with expedited filings 
under the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$76,475 
Operating Expenses 
  9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$85,616 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
SDAT generally indicates that large firms account for a significant portion of the two‐hour 
expedited processing option that is currently available; these firms may seek the shorter 
timeframes for expedited processing set forth in the bill. SDAT therefore anticipates the 
need to hire four charter specialists, at a cost of at least $400,000 on an annual basis. While 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 278/ Page 3 
acknowledging that accommodating a consistent volume of filings in the condensed 
timeframes under the bill is not feasible with existing resources, the Department of 
Legislative Services is unable to verify that staffing of the magnitude indicated by SDAT 
is required without experience under the bill. Because the new fees for expedited 
processing are significantly higher than the current fees for two‑hour expedited processing, 
it is assumed that the timeframes under the bill are applicable in a limited number of 
circumstances and not routinely requested by all filers. Nevertheless, as reflected above, 
this estimate assumes that the additional workload generated by the timeframes under the 
bill necessitates the hiring of at least one additional staff. To the extent a greater number 
of charter specialists is required, SDAT can request additional resources through the annual 
budget process.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1416 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3