START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 285

F2 6lr2345

By: Senators Carozza and Bailey
Introduced and read first time: January 21, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Higher Education – Scholarships for Correctional Officers

3 FOR the purpose of altering the eligibility criteria for the Maryland Police Officers and
4 Probation Agents Scholarship Program to include correctional officers; and generally
5 relating to scholarships for correctional officers.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 18–3801 through 18–3804 and 18–3807 to be under the amended subtitle
9 “Subtitle 38. Maryland Police Officers, Probation Agents, and Correctional
10 Officers Scholarship Program”
11 Annotated Code of Maryland
12 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

13 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
14 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

15 Article – Education

16 Subtitle 38. Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL
17 OFFICERS Scholarship Program.

18 18–3801.

19 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

20 (B) “CORRECTIONAL OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–201 OF
21 THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

22 [(b)] (C) “Eligible institution” means:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0285*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 285

1 (1) A public senior higher education institution in the State; or

2 (2) A community college in the State.

3 [(c)] (D) “Police officer” has the meaning stated in § 3–201 of the Public Safety
4 Article.

5 [(d)] (E) “Probation agent” means an individual serving as a parole and
6 probation agent, supervisor, or regional administrator for the Department of Public Safety
7 and Correctional Services.

8 [(e)] (F) “Service obligation” means to work as a police officer or probation agent
9 in the State not less than 5 years during the 8–year period after graduation.

10 18–3802.

11 (a) There is a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
12 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship Program.

13 (b) The purpose of the program is to provide tuition assistance for students who
14 are:

15 (1) Attending an eligible institution and enrolled in a degree program that
16 would further the student’s intent to become a police officer [or], probation agent, OR
17 CORRECTIONAL OFFICER after graduation; or

18 (2) Employed as a police officer [or], probation agent, OR CORRECTIONAL
19 OFFICER, attending an eligible institution, and enrolled in a degree program that would
20 further the police officer’s [or], probation officer’s, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER’S career.

21 (c) The Office shall publicize the availability of the Maryland Police Officers
22 [and], Probation Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship.

23 18–3803.

24 (a) Each year, the Office shall select eligible students and offer a scholarship to
25 each student selected to be used at an eligible institution of the student’s choice.

26 (b) A recipient of the Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
27 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship shall:

28 (1) Be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a Maryland high
29 school;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 285 3

1 (2) Be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible institution
2 as a full–time or part–time undergraduate or graduate student pursuing a course of study
3 or program that would further the recipient’s career;

4 (3) Sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of
5 the recipient’s required studies; and

6 (4) Satisfy any additional criteria the Commission may establish.

7 (c) A current police officer [or], probation agent, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER
8 shall be eligible for a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
9 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship if they meet the eligibility criteria under
10 subsection (b) of this section.

11 18–3804.

12 The recipient of a Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation Agents, AND
13 CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarship shall repay the Commission the funds received
14 as set forth in § 18–112 of this title if the recipient does not:

15 (1) Satisfy the degree requirements of the eligible course of study or
16 program or fulfill other requirements as provided in this subtitle; or

17 (2) Perform the service obligation to work as a police officer [or], probation
18 agent, OR CORRECTIONAL OFFICER for at least 5 years during the 8–year period after
19 graduation.

20 18–3807.

21 The Office shall:

22 (1) Publicize the availability of Maryland Police Officers [and], Probation
23 Agents, AND CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS Scholarships; and

24 (2) To the extent practicable, award scholarships under this subtitle in a
25 manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity.

26 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
27 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3