START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 261

I1 6lr2096

By: Senator Beidle
Introduced and read first time: January 19, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland Money Transmission Act – Definition of Money Transmitter –
3 Alteration

4 FOR the purpose of altering, for a certain licensing requirement, the definition of “money
5 transmitter” under the Maryland Money Transmission Act to exclude a certain
6 person designated as an agent of a payor for the purpose of the agent’s provision of
7 payroll processing services under certain circumstances; and generally relating to
8 the Maryland Money Transmission Act.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Financial Institutions
11 Section 12–401(a)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Financial Institutions
16 Section 12–401(q)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Financial Institutions

22 12–401.

23 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0261*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 261

1 (q) (1) “Money transmitter” means a person that engages in money
2 transmission that is required to be licensed under this subtitle, whether or not the person
3 maintains a license.

4 (2) “Money transmitter” includes:

5 (i) A bill payer service; and

6 (ii) An accelerated mortgage payment service.

7 (3) “MONEY TRANSMITTER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A PERSON
8 DESIGNATED AS AN AGENT OF A PAYOR FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING PAYROLL
9 PROCESSING SERVICES FOR WHICH THE AGENT WOULD OTHERWISE NEED TO BE
10 LICENSED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, IF:

11 (I) THERE IS WRITTEN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PAYOR AND
12 THE AGENT THAT DIRECTS THE AGENT TO PROVIDE PAYROLL PROCESSING
13 SERVICES ON THE PAYOR’S BEHALF;

14 (II) THE PAYOR HOLDS THE AGENT OUT TO EMPLOYEES AND
15 OTHER PAYEES AS PROVIDING PAYROLL PROCESSING SERVICES ON THE PAYOR’S
16 BEHALF; AND

17 (III) THE PAYOR’S OBLIGATION TO A PAYEE, INCLUDING AN
18 EMPLOYEE OR ANOTHER PARTY ENTITLED TO RECEIVE FUNDS VIA THE PAYROLL
19 PROCESSING SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE AGENT, IS NOT EXTINGUISHED IF THE
20 AGENT FAILS TO REMIT THE FUNDS TO THE PAYEE.

21 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
22 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2