START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 225 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 225 
(Senators M. Washington and Brooks) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Environment - Interjurisdictional Watersheds - Flood Management 
 
 
This bill, in accordance with COMAR 26.17.02.07 and § 5-503 of the Environment Article, 
designates the following four watersheds and all their headwaters and tributaries as 
interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds:  (1) Carroll Creek in Frederick City and 
Frederick County; (2) Gwynns Falls in Baltimore City and Baltimore County; 
(3) Jones Falls in Baltimore City and Baltimore County; and (4) Herring Run in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County. The bill also requires the Maryland Department of 
the Environment (MDE) to designate the Patapsco River, including all headwaters and 
tributaries in Baltimore City and Baltimore, Howard, Carroll, and Anne Arundel counties, 
as an interjurisdictional flood hazard watershed. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, State finances are not materially affected, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, local finances are not materially affected, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none, under one set of assumptions, as discussed 
below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976 
 
Pursuant to the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976, MDE is responsible for various 
initiatives designed to address flood hazards, including (1) assisting in the development of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 225/ Page 2 
guidance to minimize the impacts of flooding; (2) providing State guidelines and technical 
assistance to local governments to manage flood areas; and (3) administering the 
Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program. For the purposes of State law 
regarding flood control and watershed management, “subdivision” is defined as any 
county, including Baltimore City, and any incorporated municipality that has the authority 
to adopt and enforce land use and control measures for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
 
MDE and subdivisions must coordinate flood management activities with all related 
programs, including the National Flood Insurance Program, the Sediment Control 
Program, and the State water pollution control and abatement programs. 
 
Watershed Studies:  MDE was required, by January 1, 1982, in consultation with specified 
agencies and with the consideration of recommendations submitted by subdivisions, to 
designate a priority list of watersheds for the purpose of flood control planning and 
management and to establish a schedule for the completion of studies of those watersheds. 
For each watershed designated as a priority, MDE, in cooperation with the subdivisions 
and specified State agencies, must conduct flood assessment studies of the watersheds that 
include specified information. By mutual agreement between MDE and an affected 
subdivision, MDE may delegate all or part of the study of the priority watershed to the 
appropriate subdivision. 
 
Flood Management Plans:  By July 1, 1990, each subdivision, in cooperation with MDE 
and other specified agencies, was required to prepare a flood management plan based on 
the findings of the watershed studies. In any interjurisdictional watershed, the portions of 
the plan that relate to the watershed must be reviewed and approved by MDE as one plan. 
Each subdivision must implement the flood management plan for its watershed within 
one year of completion, as specified. 
 
Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program:  MDE’s Comprehensive Flood 
Management Grant Program was established as a component of the Flood Hazard 
Management Act of 1976 to promote the development of local flood management plans, 
fund the studies of watersheds, and support capital projects for flood control and watershed 
management. The grant program was unfunded and dormant from calendar 2002 until 
2019, when capital budget funding was provided again. Since then, the 
Capital Improvement Program (CIP) has included funding for the grant program each year. 
The Governor’s fiscal 2027 through 2031 CIP includes $9.5 million in Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund special funds and $4.4 million in general obligation (GO) bond funding 
for the program in fiscal 2027 and $10.0 million annually in GO bond funding for the 
program from fiscal 2028 through 2031. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 225/ Page 3 
Among other authorized uses, and subject to approval of the Board of Public Works, MDE 
is authorized to use proceeds from the State debt created to fund the Comprehensive Flood 
Management Grant Program to pay for watershed studies. 
 
Development Restricted in Specified Watersheds 
 
State stormwater management regulations (COMAR 26.17.02.07), that took effect in 1983, 
identify Carroll Creek in Frederick City and Frederick County and Gwynns Falls and 
Jones Falls in Baltimore City and Baltimore County as interjurisdictional flood hazard 
watersheds. Development is restricted in these interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds 
and (1) may not increase the downstream peak discharge for the 100-year frequency storm 
event and (2) must comply with MDE‑approved flood management plans developed in 
accordance with the Flood Hazard Management Act of 1976. 
 
Statute also establishes requirements for Baltimore City and Baltimore County to adopt 
regulations and incorporate development restrictions for structures in and around the 
Jones Falls watershed and the 100‑year floodplain into their flood management plans. 
Further, Baltimore City and Baltimore County must impose conditions to require the risk 
of injury to people and property to be minimized to the greatest extent practicable when 
issuing any permit or approval to modify or renovate any existing structures or the use of 
open land in the 100‑year floodplain of the nontidal Jones Falls. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  MDE advises that the bill has no fiscal impact; this estimate is 
based on the interpretation that codifying the designation of Carroll Creek, Gwynns Falls, 
Jones Falls, and Herring Run as interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds under the 
State’s flood hazard management statute, and requiring MDE to designate the 
Patapsco River as an interjurisdictional flood hazard watershed, does not trigger any 
requirements for MDE to conduct studies of the watersheds, for affected subdivisions to 
develop new or updated flood management plans, or for MDE to oversee, approve, and 
assist the subdivisions with plan development and implementation. Based on this 
interpretation, the bill has minimal or no fiscal or operational impact on the State or local 
governments.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises, however, that to the extent that the 
bill does trigger those requirements, both State and local expenditures likely increase, 
potentially significantly. DLS notes that for a similar bill introduced during the 
2025 legislative session, MDE anticipated that designating Carroll Creek, Gwynns Falls, 
Jones Falls, and Herring Run as interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds would trigger 
statutory requirements to conduct watershed studies, develop new or updated flood 
management plans, and for MDE to oversee, approve, and assist the subdivisions with plan 
development and implementation. As a result, the fiscal and policy note for the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 225/ Page 4 
2025 legislation estimated an increase in costs for both MDE and affected local 
jurisdictions. 
 
If the bill does indeed trigger requirements for local governments to develop or update 
watershed studies and/or flood management plans, a survey of affected local governments 
gleaned the following information:   
 
 
Frederick County and the City of Frederick estimate that costs to hire consultants to 
develop flood management plans range from $250,000 to $400,000 each in 
fiscal 2027.  
 
Carroll County advises that initial estimated costs to hire a consultant to develop a 
flood management plan for the Patapsco River total $200,000 in fiscal 2027. (The 
county notes this does not include any costs to maintain or update a plan or to 
implement any flood management measures identified in a flood management plan.)  
 
Anne Arundel County estimates that local expenditures to prepare a flood 
management plan range from $300,000 to $500,000.  
 
Howard County estimates that local expenditures increase by between $400,000 and 
$1.0 million over a five-year period.  
 
Baltimore County does not anticipate a significant fiscal effect. Baltimore City did not 
respond to repeated requests for information regarding the fiscal effect of the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Similar to the discussion above, if the bill’s designation of 
Carroll Creek, Gwynns Falls, Jones Falls, Herring Run, and the Patapsco River as 
interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds does not trigger any requirements or additional 
regulatory restrictions, there is no impact on small businesses.  
 
On the other hand, to the extent that the bill restricts development, particularly within the 
Herring Run and Patapsco River watershed (which are newly categorized as 
interjurisdictional flood hazard watersheds under the bill), there are potentially significant 
impacts on affected projects and businesses, including small businesses. However, any 
impact ultimately depends on any new development restrictions resulting from the bill, 
which cannot be predicted in advance.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 42 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 225/ Page 5 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Maryland 
Department 
of 
the 
Environment; 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, 
Frederick, and Howard counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5