START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 240

J3 6lr0825
CF 6lr0824

By: Senator Lewis Young
Introduced and read first time: January 15, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Office of Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory Council – Establishment

3 FOR the purpose of establishing the Office of Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory
4 Council to provide feedback to the Office of Health Care Quality regarding
5 maintaining oversight of health care facilities and to notify the Secretary of Health
6 if the Office is negligent in providing oversight; and generally relating to the Office
7 of Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory Council.

8 BY adding to
9 Article – Health – General
10 Section 19–2701 and 19–2702 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 27. Office of
11 Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory Council”
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health – General

17 SUBTITLE 27. OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY STAKEHOLDER ADVISORY
18 COUNCIL.

19 19–2701.

20 (A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

22 (B) “ADVISORY COUNCIL” MEANS THE OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY
23 STAKEHOLDER ADVISORY COUNCIL.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0240*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 240

1 (C) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY IN THE
2 DEPARTMENT.

3 19–2702.

4 (A) THERE IS AN OFFICE OF HEALTH CARE QUALITY STAKEHOLDER
5 ADVISORY COUNCIL.

6 (B) THE ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL:

7 (1) PROVIDE FEEDBACK TO THE OFFICE FROM STAKEHOLDERS
8 REGARDING MAINTAINING OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH CARE FACILITIES; AND

9 (2) NOTIFY THE SECRETARY IF THE OFFICE IS REPORTED
10 NEGLIGENT BY THE ADVISORY COUNCIL IN PROVIDING OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH
11 CARE FACILITIES.

12 (C) THE ADVISORY COUNCIL CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

13 (1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
14 PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

15 (2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
16 SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

17 (3) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

18 (4) THE SECRETARY OF AGING, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

19 (5) A REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MARYLAND ATTORNEY
20 GENERAL’S HEALTH EDUCATION AND ADVOCACY UNIT, DESIGNATED BY THE
21 ATTORNEY GENERAL;

22 (6) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE SECRETARY:

23 (I) TWO FRONTLINE HOSPITAL WORKERS;

24 (II) TWO NURSING HOME WORKERS;

25 (III) TWO NURSING HOME RESIDENTS OR INDIVIDUALS WITH A
26 FAMILY MEMBER RESIDING IN A NURSING HOME;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 240 3

1 (IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE LONG–TERM CARE
2 INDUSTRY;

3 (V) ONE MEMBER OF AN ADVOCACY GROUP FOR THE
4 INTELLECTUALLY AND DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED; AND

5 (VI) ONE MEMBER OF AN ADVOCACY GROUP FOR BEHAVIORAL
6 HEALTH;

7 (7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL
8 ASSOCIATION, DESIGNATED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION; AND

9 (8) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS DESIGNATED BY THE ORGANIZATION
10 THE INDIVIDUAL REPRESENTS:

11 (I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF MEDCHI, THE MARYLAND
12 STATE MEDICAL SOCIETY;

13 (II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF 1199 SEIU UNITED
14 HEALTHCARE WORKERS EAST;

15 (III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CHAPTER OF
16 AARP;

17 (IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND STATE
18 CONFERENCE NAACP;

19 (V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF MARYLAND CASA;

20 (VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF DISABILITY RIGHTS MARYLAND;
21 AND

22 (VII) ONE MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND CONTINUING CARE
23 RESIDENTS’ ASSOCIATION.

24 (D) (1) (I) THE TERM OF A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL IS 2
25 YEARS.

26 (II) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER SHALL CONTINUE TO
27 SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED.

28 (2) (I) THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE SHALL SELECT THE CHAIR
29 OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 240

1 (II) THE TERM OF THE CHAIR IS 2 YEARS.

2 (E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE ADVISORY
3 COUNCIL.

4 (F) A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL MAY NOT RECEIVE
5 COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL.

6 (G) (1) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2027, THE ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL
7 HOLD A VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING ONCE EVERY 6 MONTHS.

8 (2) (I) EACH PUBLIC MEETING OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL:

9 1. BE STREAMED LIVE THROUGH THE DEPARTMENT’S
10 WEBSITE; AND

11 2. INCLUDE A DESIGNATED OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC
12 COMMENT.

13 (II) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER A PUBLIC MEETING OF THE
14 ADVISORY COUNCIL, THE SUMMARY COMPILED UNDER SUBSECTION (H)(2) OF THIS
15 SECTION AND MEETING MINUTES SHALL BE POSTED ON THE DEPARTMENT’S
16 WEBSITE.

17 (H) (1) AT EACH PUBLIC MEETING OF THE ADVISORY COUNCIL, THE
18 OFFICE SHALL REPORT DATA FROM THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 6–MONTH
19 PERIOD REGARDING:

20 (I) THE NUMBER OF:

21 1. HOSPITALS ACTIVELY MONITORED;

22 2. NURSING HOMES INSPECTED;

23 3. COMPLAINTS RECEIVED FROM HOSPITAL PATIENTS
24 AND LONG–TERM CARE RESIDENTS; AND

25 4. CODE VIOLATIONS IDENTIFIED IN EACH FACILITY;

26 (II) THE AVERAGE LENGTH OF TIME FOR THE OFFICE TO
27 RESPOND TO EACH COMPLAINT; AND
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
SENATE BILL 240 5

1 (III) THE NUMBER OF COMPLAINTS RESOLVED BY THE OFFICE.

2 (2) THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL:

3 (I) 1. REVIEW THE DATA REPORTS PROVIDED BY THE
4 OFFICE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

5 2. COMPILE FEEDBACK FROM EACH MEMBER OF THE
6 ADVISORY COUNCIL INTO A SUMMARY REPORT WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE REPORT
7 FROM THE OFFICE; AND

8 (II) DEVELOP RECOMMENDATIONS TO CONTINUE
9 IMPROVEMENT IN NURSING HOME AND HOSPITAL CARE QUALITY.

10 (I) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2027, THE
11 ADVISORY COUNCIL SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
12 GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
13 ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
15 non–ex officio members of the Office of Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory Council
16 shall expire as follows:

17 (1) ten members in 2027; and

18 (2) ten members in 2028.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 5