START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 240 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 240 
(Senator Lewis Young) 
Finance 
 
 
Office of Health Care Quality Stakeholder Advisory Council - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) Stakeholder Advisory 
Council in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to (1) provide feedback to OHCQ 
from stakeholders regarding maintaining oversight of health care facilities and (2) notify 
the Secretary of Health if OHCQ is reported negligent in providing oversight of health care 
facilities. MDH must provide staff for the advisory council. Beginning January 1, 2027, 
the advisory council must hold a virtual public meeting once every six months. By 
December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, the advisory council must report its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by at least $51,900 in FY 2027 to 
staff to the advisory council, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and 
ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
51,900 
58,300 
61,200 
64,000 
66,900 
Net Effect 
($51,900) 
($58,300) 
($61,200) 
($64,000) 
($66,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 240/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Membership of the Advisory Council 
  
The advisory council comprises:  (1) one member of the Senate; (2) one member of the 
House of Delegates; (3) the Secretaries of Health and Aging (or their designees);  
(4) a representative from the Maryland Attorney General’s Health Education and Advocacy 
Unit (HEAU); (5) the following members appointed by the Secretary of Health:  
two frontline hospital workers, two nursing home workers, two nursing home residents  
or individuals with a family member in a nursing home, one representative from the 
long‑term care industry, one member of an advocacy group for the intellectually and 
developmentally disabled, and one member of an advocacy group for behavioral health;  
(6) one representative of the Maryland Hospital Association; and (7) several members 
designated by the organization the individual represents.  
 
The term of a member is two years. The director of OHCQ must select the chair of the 
advisory council. The term of the chair is two years. A member of the advisory council 
may not receive compensation as a member of the advisory council.  
 
Virtual Public Meetings 
 
Each public meeting of the advisory council must be streamed live through the 
department’s website and include a designated opportunity for public comment.  
 
At each public meeting, OHCQ must report data from the immediately preceding 
six‑month period regarding (1) the number of hospitals actively monitored, nursing homes 
inspected, complaints received from hospital patients and long-term care residents, and 
code violations identified in each facility; (2) the average length of time for OHCQ to 
respond to each complaint; and (3) the number of complaints resolved. The advisory 
committee must (1) review the data reports provided by OHCQ and compile feedback from 
each member of the advisory council into a summary report within 30 days after the report 
from OHCQ and (2) develop recommendations to continue improvement in nursing home 
and hospital care quality. 
 
Within 30 days after a public meeting of the advisory council, the required summary and 
meeting minutes must be posted on the department’s website.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 240/ Page 3 
Current Law:  
 
Office of Health Care Quality  
 
The Secretary of Health must adopt reasonable rules and regulations that set standards of 
services for related institutions, hospitals, and residential treatment centers in the following 
areas:  (1) the care of patients; (2) the medical supervision of patients; (3) the physical 
environment; (4) disease control; (5) sanitation; (6) safety; and (7) dietary matters. To 
ensure compliance with these rules and regulations, OHCQ inspects each related 
institution, hospital, and residential treatment center. In general, OHCQ inspects facilities 
for which a license is sought and periodically after a license has been issued. MDH submits 
an annual report to the General Assembly regarding the inspections conducted during the 
immediately preceding year.  
 
In addition to required inspections, Chapters 285 and 286 of 2019 established the hospital 
patient’s bill of rights to promote health, safety, and well-being of patients and to foster 
better communication between patients and health care providers. OHCQ must monitor the 
compliance of each hospital.  
 
OHCQ generally makes an unannounced site visit and conducts a full survey of each 
licensed nursing home at least once per year. After a nursing home complaint alleging 
actual harm, OHCQ must initiate an investigation within 10 business days. If MDH 
receives a complaint alleging immediate jeopardy to a resident, it must make every effort 
to investigate the complaint within 24 hours, and no later than 48 hours, after receiving the 
complaint.  
 
OHCQ must submit an annual report to the Oversight Committee on Quality of Care in 
Nursing Homes and Assisted Living Facilities regarding the status of quality of care in 
nursing homes. The oversight committee – within the Maryland Department of Aging 
(MDOA) – comprises several members, including the Secretaries of Aging and Health and 
the Director of OHCQ. In general, the oversight committee evaluates progress in improving 
the quality of nursing home and assisted living facility care in the State.  
 
Chapter 680 of 2025 requires MDH to report every three months to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee (now the  
Health Committee) on the number of nursing home surveys conducted in each county. The 
data must be disaggregated by the following types of surveys:  standard; complaint; 
follow‑up; revisit; special focus facility; abbreviated; and life safety code. Every 
six months OHCQ must report to each area agency on aging the name of each nursing 
home in the county that was surveyed in the immediately preceding six months and the 
date each survey was conducted.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 240/ Page 4 
Federal Oversight of Specified Health Care Facilities  
 
The 1864 Agreement is an agreement between the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) and the state health facility survey agency to carry out specified 
provisions of the Social Security Act. Each 1864 Agreement stipulates the functions of the 
states to, among other things, certify whether or not providers and suppliers within the state 
comply with all applicable definitions and requirements. 
 
CMS allocates funding to each state for the reasonable costs of performing the functions 
specified in the agreement and for Medicare’s fair share of costs related to Medicare 
facilities. States that fail to perform survey and certification functions in a manner 
sufficient to assure the full certification of compliance, may, among other things, receive a 
revised budgetary allocation. The Medicare and Medicaid certification of providers in a 
state whose oversight process is substantially deficient may be jeopardized if CMS cannot 
ensure that the regulatory minimum health and safety standards have been met. 
 
In Maryland, certain long-term care facilities (assisted living programs and developmental 
disabilities facilities) necessitate compliance with CMS waiver requirements. Additionally, 
hospice facilities, residential treatment facilities, and other long-term care facilities require 
adherence to corresponding federal standards.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires the advisory council to provide specified feedback 
to OHCQ, notify the Secretary if OHCQ is reported negligent in providing oversight of 
health care facilities, hold a virtual public meeting once every six months, review data 
provided by OHCQ and compile feedback into a summary report within 30 days, and 
annually report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly.  
 
MDH advises that one full-time and one part-time health policy analyst are necessary to 
meet the bill’s requirements. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that, 
while additional staff are necessary, one part-time health policy analyst is likely sufficient 
to meet the bill’s requirements since the advisory council is only required to meet virtually 
and compile the specified summary report once every six months.  
 
Therefore, DLS advises that MDH general fund expenditures increase by $51,857 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one part-time health policy analyst to staff the advisory council. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$43,758 
Operating Expenses 
    8,099 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$51,857 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 240/ Page 5 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MDOA and HEAU can serve on the advisory council with existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5