START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 246

J3 6lr2195

By: Senator Beidle
Introduced and read first time: January 16, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Health Services Cost Review Commission – Term of Office of Members

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing a member of the Health Services Cost Review Commission
4 to continue to serve only for a certain period of time after the expiration of the
5 member’s term of office, rather than until a successor is appointed and qualifies;
6 repealing the authority of a member of the Commission who was appointed after a
7 term began to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies; and generally
8 relating to the Health Services Cost Review Commission.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
10 Article – Health – General
11 Section 19–203
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Health – General

17 19–203.

18 (a) (1) The Commission consists of [7] SEVEN members appointed by the
19 Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.

20 (2) Of the [7] SEVEN members, [4] FOUR shall be individuals who do not
21 have any connection with the management or policy of any facility.

22 (b) Each member shall be interested in problems of health care.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0246*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 246

1 (c) (1) The term of a member is 4 years.

2 (2) The terms of members are staggered as required by the terms provided
3 for members of the Commission on July 1, 1982. The terms of those members end as follows:

4 (i) [2] TWO in 1983;

5 (ii) [1] ONE in 1984;

6 (iii) [2] TWO in 1985; and

7 (iv) [2] TWO in 1986.

8 (3) At the end of a term, a member [continues to serve until a successor is
9 appointed and qualifies] MAY CONTINUE TO SERVE FOR A PERIOD NOT TO EXCEED 6
10 MONTHS.

11 (4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
12 rest of the term [and until a successor is appointed and qualifies].

13 (5) A member who serves [2] TWO consecutive full 4–year terms may not
14 be reappointed for 4 years after completion of those terms.

15 (6) When appointing a member to fill a vacancy due to the expiration of a
16 member’s term, the Governor shall give consideration to, and make appointments when
17 appropriate, that would promote the racial, gender, and geographic diversity of the
18 Commission.

19 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
20 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2