START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 356 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 356 
(Senator Waldstreicher) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Income Tax Credit - Parent of a Stillborn Child 
 
 
This bill establishes a refundable State income tax credit for a parent of a stillborn child. 
The credit is equal to $1,000 for each birth for which a certificate of birth resulting in 
stillbirth has been issued by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) or for which a 
certificate of fetal death or its equivalent has been issued by another state. The credit may 
be claimed only for the taxable year in which the stillbirth occurred. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026, and applies to tax year 2027 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund revenues may decrease by an estimated 
$360,000 annually beginning in FY 2028. The Comptroller’s Office can administer the 
credit with existing budgeted resources.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($360,000) 
($360,000) 
($360,000) 
($360,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($360,000) 
($360,000) 
($360,000) 
($360,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 356/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  No similar State income tax credit exists. 
 
Pursuant to Health-General Article § 4-213.1, MDH must make available a certificate of 
birth resulting in stillbirth to the parent or parents of a stillborn child for whom a fetal death 
was registered. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may decrease by an estimated $360,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2028 due to credits claimed against the personal income tax. This 
estimate is based on Maryland vital statistics published by MDH. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 414 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Comptroller’s 
Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2