START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 365

C3 6lr2456

By: Senator Waldstreicher
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Security Guards – Certification Renewal – Requirements

3 FOR the purpose of altering certain certification renewal requirements for security guards;
4 repealing a certain certification renewal late fee; repealing the requirement that a
5 licensed security guard agency or security guard employer submit a certain
6 declaration to the Secretary of State Police by a certain date; and generally relating
7 to certification renewal requirements for security guard agencies, security guard
8 employers, and security guards.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
11 Section 19–101(a) and (j) and 19–401(a)
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Business Occupations and Professions
16 Section 19–404.1
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2018 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
20 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

21 Article – Business Occupations and Professions

22 19–101.

23 (a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0365*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 365

1 (j) “Secretary”, unless the context requires otherwise, means the Secretary of
2 State Police.

3 19–401.

4 (a) Except as provided under subsection (b) of this section, a licensed security
5 guard agency may provide an individual for hire as a security guard only if the individual
6 is certified by the Secretary as a security guard.

7 19–404.1.

8 (a) [By regulation, the Secretary shall stagger the terms of the certifications.

9 (b)] Unless a certification is renewed for a 3–year term as provided in this section,
10 the certification expires on the [date the Secretary sets] LAST DAY OF THE
11 CERTIFICATION HOLDER’S BIRTH MONTH.

12 (B) (1) AT LEAST 90 DAYS, 60 DAYS, AND 30 DAYS BEFORE A
13 CERTIFICATION EXPIRES, THE SECRETARY SHALL SEND A RENEWAL NOTICE TO A
14 CERTIFICATION HOLDER THAT STATES:

15 (I) THE DATE ON WHICH THE CERTIFICATION EXPIRES; AND

16 (II) THAT THE RENEWAL APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION
17 MUST BE RECEIVED AND ACCEPTED BY THE SECRETARY BEFORE THE DATE THE
18 CERTIFICATION EXPIRES.

19 (2) THE SECRETARY SHALL SEND A RENEWAL NOTICE UNDER
20 PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BY ELECTRONIC MEANS TO THE LAST KNOWN
21 E–MAIL ADDRESS OF THE CERTIFICATION HOLDER.

22 (c) [At least 90 days before] BEFORE a certification expires, the applicant shall
23 submit to the Secretary in the manner and format designated by the Secretary:

24 (1) a renewal application; AND

25 (2) the amount of the renewal fee in a method approved by the Secretary[;
26 and

27 (3) the amount of any late fee, as determined by the Secretary].

28 (d) An individual periodically may renew the certification for an additional
29 3–year term, if the individual:

30 (1) otherwise is entitled to be certified;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 365 3

1 (2) pays to the Secretary in a method approved by the Secretary:

2 (i) a renewal fee of $10; AND

3 (ii) payment for the cost of a fingerprint card record check by the
4 Federal Bureau of Investigation; [and

5 (iii) any late fee required under this subtitle;]

6 (3) (i) satisfactorily completes 8 hours of continuing security training
7 that is approved by the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission under §
8 19–412 of this subtitle; and

9 (ii) submits to the Secretary supporting documentation that
10 demonstrates completion of the training; and

11 (4) submits to the Secretary a renewal application in the manner and
12 format designated by the Secretary.

13 (e) [(1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, if a complete application for
14 renewal of certification as required under this subtitle is not received by the Secretary on
15 or before the first business day of the next calendar month immediately following the
16 renewal date, the Secretary shall assess a late fee of $5 per day until the application is
17 received by the Secretary.

18 (2) (i) The Secretary may not charge a late fee under paragraph (1) of
19 this subsection if the applicant did not make timely renewal because of incapacity,
20 hospitalization, being called to active military duty, or other hardship.

21 (3)] The Secretary may not certify any applicant under this subtitle if the
22 applicant has outstanding [late fee] obligations UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

23 (f) (1) The Secretary shall renew the certification of each individual who
24 meets the requirements of this section.

25 (2) Within 5 days after the Secretary refuses to renew the certification of
26 an individual as a security guard, the Secretary shall send written notice of the refusal to
27 the individual who submitted the renewal application.

28 [(g) At least 90 days before a certification expires, the licensed security guard
29 agency or security guard employer shall submit a declaration to the Secretary under the
30 penalties of perjury stating whether it knows that a certified security guard who provides
31 security guard services on the security guard agency’s behalf or for the security guard
32 employer no longer satisfies all of the criteria for certification under § 19–402 of this
33 subtitle.]
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 365

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
2 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4