START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 379

J1 6lr2130

By: Senator Guzzone
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Budget and Taxation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Recovery Residence Grant Program – Funding

3 FOR the purpose of extending through a certain fiscal year the requirement that a certain
4 appropriation be included in the annual budget bill for the Recovery Residence Grant
5 Program; and generally relating to funding for the Recovery Residence Grant
6 Program.

7 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
8 Article – Health – General
9 Section 19–2505(a) and (b)
10 Annotated Code of Maryland
11 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

12 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
13 Article – Health – General
14 Section 19–2505(g)
15 Annotated Code of Maryland
16 (2023 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

17 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
18 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

19 Article – Health – General

20 19–2505.

21 (a) In this section, “Program” means the Recovery Residence Grant Program.

22 (b) (1) There is a Recovery Residence Grant Program in the Department.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0379*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 379

1 (2) The purpose of the Program is to provide grants to recovery residences
2 in the State in accordance with this section.

3 (g) For each of fiscal years 2024 through [2027] 2030, the annual budget bill shall
4 include an appropriation of $500,000 for the Program.

5 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
6 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2