START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 318

P2, B5 6lr2020

By: Senator Brooks
Introduced and read first time: January 22, 2026
Assigned to: Budget and Taxation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 State Capital Program – Covered Projects – Public Engagement and Community
3 Outreach Requirements
4 (Community Engagement and Outreach Act of 2026)

5 FOR the purpose of requiring units of State government proposing certain capital projects
6 to complete a certain community engagement plan and certain community outreach
7 activities and submit a certain report to the Department of Budget and Management;
8 requiring the Department to submit a certain compiled report; and generally relating
9 to community outreach and public engagement requirements for State capital
10 projects.

11 BY adding to
12 Article – State Finance and Procurement
13 Section 3–611
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – State Finance and Procurement

19 3–611.

20 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
21 INDICATED.

22 (2) “COMMUNITY OUTREACH RADIUS” MEANS THE AREA INSIDE A
23 RADIUS OF 1 MILE FROM THE PROJECT FOOTPRINT.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0318*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 318

1 (3) (I) “COVERED PROJECT” MEANS THE CONSTRUCTION,
2 INSTALLATION, OR SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION OF PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE OF
3 ANY CAPITAL PROJECT REQUESTED BY A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT IN
4 ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–602 OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT HAS THE POTENTIAL TO
5 CREATE MATERIAL IMPACTS ON NOISE, VISIBILITY, ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS,
6 OR COMMUNITY CHARACTER THAT:

7 1. A. IS CONSTRUCTED ON PROPERTY OWNED OR
8 LEASED BY THE STATE; OR

9 B. IS FUNDED IN WHOLE OR IN PART WITH STATE FUNDS;
10 AND

11 2. A. EXCEEDS $2,000,000 IN TOTAL PROJECT COST;
12 OR

13 B. INCLUDES A STRUCTURE THAT EXCEEDS 75 FEET IN
14 HEIGHT.

15 (II) “COVERED PROJECT” INCLUDES COMMUNICATION
16 TOWERS, TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES, UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE, PUBLIC
17 BUILDINGS, AND ENVIRONMENTAL OR PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES.

18 (III) “COVERED PROJECT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A CAPITAL
19 PROJECT INCLUDED IN THE ANNUAL STATE CAPITAL BUDGET AS:

20 1. A MISCELLANEOUS GRANT PROGRAM;

21 2. A LOCAL HOUSE OF DELEGATES INITIATIVE; OR

22 3. A LOCAL SENATE INITIATIVE.

23 (B) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30 OF THE FISCAL YEAR PRECEDING THE FISCAL
24 YEAR IN WHICH A COVERED PROJECT IS ANTICIPATED TO BEGIN, THE UNIT OF
25 STATE GOVERNMENT PROPOSING THE PROJECT SHALL COMPLETE:

26 (1) A COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PLAN WITH:

27 (I) A PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY OF THE COVERED PROJECT
28 INCLUDING:

29 1. THE PURPOSE;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 318 3

1 2. THE LOCATION;

2 3. ALTERNATIVE CONSIDERATIONS; AND

3 4. PROJECTED IMPACTS;

4 (II) THE MAP OF THE AFFECTED AREA WITHIN THE COMMUNITY
5 OUTREACH RADIUS;

6 (III) A DESCRIPTION OF ENVIRONMENTAL OR PUBLIC HEALTH
7 CONSIDERATIONS;

8 (IV) A TIMELINE FOR THE PROJECT DESIGN AND
9 CONSTRUCTION; AND

10 (V) CONTACT INFORMATION FOR PUBLIC INQUIRIES; AND

11 (2) COMMUNITY OUTREACH ACTIVITIES WITH EACH RESIDENCE,
12 BUSINESS, AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION LOCATED WITHIN THE COMMUNITY
13 OUTREACH RADIUS THAT INCLUDES:

14 (I) PROVIDING NOTICE BY MAIL AT LEAST 45 DAYS PRIOR TO
15 ANY DECISION TO APPROVE OR FINALIZE THE PROJECT;

16 (II) POSTING PUBLIC NOTICE ONLINE ON THE UNIT’S WEBSITE;

17 (III) POSTING PUBLIC NOTICE IN AT LEAST ONE LOCAL
18 NEWSPAPER;

19 (IV) CONDUCTING AT LEAST ONE PUBLIC MEETING IN THE AREA
20 WITH AN OPTION FOR VIRTUAL PARTICIPATION; AND

21 (V) ALLOWING MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC A 30–DAY PUBLIC
22 COMMENT PERIOD.

23 (C) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
24 THEREAFTER, EACH UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT PROPOSING A COVERED
25 PROJECT SHALL SUBMIT A COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND OUTREACH REPORT FOR
26 THE PROJECT TO THE DEPARTMENT.

27 (II) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
28 THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL CONTAIN:
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 318

1 1. A SUMMARY OF OUTREACH EFFORTS;

2 2. THE PUBLIC COMMENTS SUBMITTED UNDER
3 SUBSECTION (B)(2)(V) OF THIS SECTION; AND

4 3. THE UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT’S RESPONSES AND
5 MODIFICATIONS TO THE PROJECT, IF ANY.

6 (2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2027, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
7 THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A COMPILED REPORT OF THE
8 SUBMISSIONS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO:

9 (I) THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE IMPACTED COUNTY OR
10 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION; AND

11 (II) SUBJECT TO § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
12 ARTICLE:

13 1. THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; AND

14 2. THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE.

15 (D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THIS
16 SECTION.

17 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
18 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 4