START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 339

F1 6lr2863
CF 6lr2274

By: Senator Lewis Young
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Maryland School for the Deaf – Membership of Board of Trustees – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of altering the composition of the Board of Trustees of the Maryland
4 School for the Deaf; and generally relating to the membership of the Board of
5 Trustees of the Maryland School for the Deaf.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Education
8 Section 8–3A–04(a) and (b)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Education
13 Section 8–3A–04(c)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 8–3A–04.

20 (a) There is a Maryland School for the Deaf.

21 (b) The governance of the Maryland School for the Deaf is vested in the Board of
22 Trustees of the Maryland School for the Deaf.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0339*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 339

1 (c) (1) The Board of Trustees shall consist of [19] 13 members appointed by
2 the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate.

3 (2) Of the [19] 13 members, at least [6] 7 members shall be deaf.

4 (3) Each member of the Board shall:

5 (i) Be a resident of the State;

6 (ii) Be a member of the general public; and

7 (iii) Have demonstrated an active interest in the education of deaf
8 children.

9 (4) Each geographic region of the State shall be represented by at least one
10 member of the Board.

11 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

12 (a) The terms of the first 6 appointed members of the Board of Trustees of the
13 Maryland School for the Deaf whose terms expire after the effective date of this Act shall
14 terminate at the end of the last day of each respective term.

15 (b) On the termination of an appointed member in accordance with subsection (a)
16 of this section, the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall prioritize
17 appointing members who are deaf in accordance with § 8–3A–04(c)(2) of the Education
18 Article as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

19 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
20 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2