START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 387

I3, K3 EMERGENCY BILL 6lr0331
CF 6lr0332

By: The President (By Request – Administration) and Senators Augustine, Brooks,
Charles, Harris, Hettleman, Kagan, King, Lam, Lewis Young, Love, and
Zucker
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Food Retailers – Dynamic Pricing, Surveillance Data, and Collective Bargaining
3 Agreements
4 (Protection From Predatory Pricing Act)

5 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a food retailer from engaging in the practice of dynamic
6 pricing or using consumer surveillance data to set a price for consumer goods or
7 services; prohibiting a food retailer from using protected class data to offer,
8 advertise, or sell a consumer good or service under certain circumstances; prohibiting
9 a food retailer from diminishing or impairing any right or benefit guaranteed to
10 employees of the food retailer under an existing collective bargaining agreement or
11 memorandum of understanding under certain circumstances; making a certain
12 violation of this Act an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice that is subject to
13 enforcement and penalties under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act; and
14 generally relating to the regulation of food retailers.

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Commercial Law
17 Section 13–321
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2025 Replacement Volume)

20 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
21 Article – Commercial Law
22 Section 13–411
23 Annotated Code of Maryland
24 (2025 Replacement Volume)

25 BY adding to
26 Article – Labor and Employment

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0387*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 387

1 Section 4–406
2 Annotated Code of Maryland
3 (2025 Replacement Volume)

4 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
5 Article – Tax – General
6 Section 11–206(c)
7 Annotated Code of Maryland
8 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

9 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
10 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

11 Article – Commercial Law

12 13–321.

13 (A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
14 INDICATED.

15 (2) “ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
16 3.5–801 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

17 (3) (I) “DYNAMIC PRICING” MEANS THE PRACTICE OF VARYING
18 THE PRICES OF CONSUMER GOODS OR SERVICES WITHIN A BUSINESS DAY BASED ON
19 DEMAND OR OTHER FACTORS, INCLUDING THROUGH THE USE OF ARTIFICIAL
20 INTELLIGENCE OR MODELS THAT RETRAIN OR RECALIBRATE BASED ON RECEIVED
21 INFORMATION IN NEAR REAL–TIME.

22 (II) “DYNAMIC PRICING” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE USE OF
23 PROMOTIONAL PRICING OFFERS, LOYALTY PROGRAM BENEFITS, OR OTHER
24 TEMPORARY DISCOUNTS OR CHANGES TO PRICING RELATED TO RETENTION OF
25 EXISTING CUSTOMERS.

26 (4) “FOOD RETAILER” MEANS A MERCHANT THAT OPERATES A
27 BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT THAT:

28 (I) HAS A MINIMUM OF 15,000 SQUARE FEET; AND

29 (II) SELLS FOOD THAT IS EXEMPT FROM THE SALES AND USE
30 TAX IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–206(C) OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

31 (5) “SURVEILLANCE DATA” MEANS CONSUMER INFORMATION
32 COLLECTED AND TRACKED BY TECHNOLOGICAL METHODS, SYSTEMS, OR TOOLS,
33 SUCH AS SENSORS, CAMERAS, DEVICE TRACKING, BIOMETRIC MONITORING, OR
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 387 3

1 OTHER FORMS OF OBSERVATION OR DATA COLLECTION, THAT ARE CAPABLE OF
2 GATHERING PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION ABOUT A CONSUMER’S
3 BEHAVIOR, CHARACTERISTICS, LOCATION, OR OTHER PERSONAL ATTRIBUTES,
4 WHETHER IN A PHYSICAL OR DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT.

5 (B) A FOOD RETAILER MAY NOT ENGAGE IN DYNAMIC PRICING OR USE
6 SURVEILLANCE DATA TO SET A PRICE FOR CONSUMER GOODS OR SERVICES FOR A
7 SINGLE CONSUMER OR A GROUP OF CONSUMERS.

8 (C) A FOOD RETAILER MAY NOT USE PROTECTED CLASS DATA TO OFFER,
9 ADVERTISE, OR SELL A CONSUMER GOOD OR SERVICE TO A CONSUMER FOR WHOM
10 THE PROTECTED CLASS DATA PERTAINS IF THE USE OF THE PROTECTED CLASS
11 DATA HAS THE EFFECT OF WITHHOLDING OR DENYING FROM THE CONSUMER AN
12 ACCOMMODATION, AN ADVANTAGE, OR A PRIVILEGE ACCORDED TO OTHERS.

13 13–411.

14 (A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A VIOLATION OF § 13–321 OF THIS
15 TITLE.

16 [(a)] (B) Except as provided in subsection [(b)] (C) of this section, any person
17 who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and, unless another
18 criminal penalty is specifically provided elsewhere, on conviction is subject to a fine not
19 exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both, in addition to any civil
20 penalties.

21 [(b)] (C) A person may not be imprisoned for violation of any provision of an
22 order of the Attorney General or an agreement of a party relating to unit pricing under
23 Title 14, Subtitle 1 of this article.

24 Article – Labor and Employment

25 4–406.

26 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “FOOD RETAILER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
27 13–321 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE.

28 (B) A FOOD RETAILER MAY NOT IMPLEMENT AN ADMINISTRATIVE,
29 OPERATIONAL, OR ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE THAT DIMINISHES OR IMPAIRS ANY
30 RIGHT OR BENEFIT GUARANTEED TO EMPLOYEES OF THE FOOD RETAILER UNDER
31 AN EXISTING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT OR MEMORANDUM OF
32 UNDERSTANDING UNLESS THE CHANGE IS NEGOTIATED AND MUTUALLY AGREED ON
33 WITH THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EMPLOYEES.
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
4 SENATE BILL 387

1 (C) A PERSON MAY BRING AN ACTION TO RECOVER FOR INJURY OR LOSS
2 SUSTAINED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

3 (D) A PERSON WHO BRINGS AN ACTION TO RECOVER FOR INJURY OR LOSS
4 UNDER THIS SECTION AND WHO IS AWARDED DAMAGES MAY ALSO SEEK, AND THE
5 COURT MAY AWARD, REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

6 (E) IF IT APPEARS TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE COURT, AT ANY TIME,
7 THAT AN ACTION IS BROUGHT IN BAD FAITH OR IS OF A FRIVOLOUS NATURE, THE
8 COURT MAY ORDER THE OFFENDING PARTY TO PAY TO THE OTHER PARTY
9 REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

10 Article – Tax – General

11 11–206.

12 (c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the sales and
13 use tax does not apply to a sale of food for consumption off the premises by a food vendor
14 who operates a substantial grocery or market business at the same location where the food
15 is sold.

16 (2) The exemption under paragraph (1) of this subsection does not apply to:

17 (i) food that the vendor serves for consumption on the premises of
18 the buyer or of a third party; or

19 (ii) food for immediate consumption.

20 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
21 measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
22 been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
23 each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
24 enacted.
END OF PAGE 4