START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 302

E1 6lr2216
SB 933/25 – JPR

By: Senators Carozza, Folden, McKay, Ready, Salling, and West
Introduced and read first time: January 21, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Criminal Law – Causing Ingestion of an Abortion–Inducing Drug – Prohibition
3 (Women’s Freedom From Coercion Act)

4 FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from knowingly and willfully causing another to
5 ingest an abortion–inducing drug when the person knows or believes that the other
6 person is pregnant and without consent, through fraud or coercion, or through force
7 or threat of force; and generally relating to causing ingestion of abortion–inducing
8 drugs.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Criminal Law
11 Section 3–216
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Criminal Law

17 3–216.

18 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “ABORTION–INDUCING DRUG” MEANS A DRUG,
19 MEDICINE, OR A MEDICINAL OR CHEMICAL PREPARATION FOR INTERNAL HUMAN
20 CONSUMPTION THAT IS DESIGNED TO INDUCE AN ABORTION.

21 (B) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY AND WILLFULLY CAUSE ANOTHER TO
22 INGEST AN ABORTION–INDUCING DRUG:

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0302*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 302

1 (1) WHEN THE PERSON KNOWS OR BELIEVES THAT THE OTHER
2 PERSON IS PREGNANT; AND

3 (2) (I) WITHOUT CONSENT;

4 (II) THROUGH FRAUD OR COERCION; OR

5 (III) BY FORCE OR THREAT OF FORCE.

6 (C) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A FELONY AND
7 ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 25 YEARS.

8 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
9 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2