START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 382

Q3 6lr2507
SB 207/23 – B&T CF 6lr3006

By: Senators Watson, Benson, West, Salling, Gile, Bailey, Carozza, Muse, and
Jennings
Introduced and read first time: January 27, 2026
Assigned to: Budget and Taxation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Retire in Maryland Tax Relief Act

3 FOR the purpose of authorizing a credit against the State income tax for certain taxpayers
4 who are at least a certain age; and generally relating to an income tax credit for
5 taxpayers who are at least a certain age.

6 BY adding to
7 Article – Tax – General
8 Section 10–754.1
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
12 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

13 Article – Tax – General

14 10–754.1.

15 (A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER” MEANS A RESIDENT WHO:

16 (1) ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE YEAR, IS AT LEAST 77 YEARS
17 OLD; AND

18 (2) HAS FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME NOT EXCEEDING:

19 (I) $175,000 FOR A TAXPAYER FILING AS AN INDIVIDUAL; OR

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0382*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 382

1 (II) $250,000 FOR SPOUSES FILING A JOINT RETURN OR FOR A
2 SURVIVING SPOUSE OR HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD AS DEFINED IN § 2 OF THE INTERNAL
3 REVENUE CODE.

4 (B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER FILING AS
5 AN INDIVIDUAL OR AS A SURVIVING SPOUSE OR HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD AS DEFINED
6 IN § 2 OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

7 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (D) AND (E) OF THIS SECTION, AN
8 ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER MAY CLAIM A CREDIT AGAINST THE STATE INCOME TAX IN AN
9 AMOUNT EQUAL TO:

10 (I) 25% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR, IF
11 THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER IS 77 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE YEAR;

12 (II) 50% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR, IF
13 THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER IS 78 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE YEAR;

14 (III) 75% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR, IF
15 THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER IS 79 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE YEAR;
16 AND

17 (IV) 100% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR,
18 IF THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER IS AT LEAST 80 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE
19 TAXABLE YEAR.

20 (C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER FILING A
21 JOINT RETURN.

22 (2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (D) AND (E) OF THIS SECTION, AN
23 ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER MAY CLAIM A CREDIT AGAINST THE STATE INCOME TAX IN AN
24 AMOUNT EQUAL TO:

25 (I) 25% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR AN ELIGIBLE
26 TAXPAYER, IF BOTH SPOUSES ARE AT LEAST 77 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE
27 TAXABLE YEAR;

28 (II) 50% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR, IF
29 BOTH SPOUSES ARE AT LEAST 78 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE
30 YEAR;
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 382 3

1 (III) 75% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR, IF
2 BOTH SPOUSES ARE AT LEAST 79 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE
3 YEAR; AND

4 (IV) 100% OF THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THE TAXABLE YEAR,
5 IF BOTH SPOUSES ARE AT LEAST 80 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE TAXABLE
6 YEAR.

7 (D) IF THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR
8 EXCEEDS THE STATE INCOME TAX FOR THAT TAXABLE YEAR, THE UNUSED AMOUNT
9 OF THE CREDIT MAY NOT BE CARRIED OVER TO ANY OTHER TAXABLE YEAR.

10 (E) AN ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER MAY NOT CLAIM A CREDIT UNDER THIS
11 SECTION IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR IN WHICH THE ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER CLAIMS A
12 CREDIT UNDER § 10–754 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

13 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
14 1, 2026, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2025.
END OF PAGE 3