START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 318 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 318 
(Senator Brooks) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Capital Program - Covered Projects - Public Engagement and Community 
Outreach Requirements (Community Engagement and Outreach Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill requires a unit of State government proposing a “covered project” to complete a 
community engagement plan, along with community outreach activities, by June 30 of the 
fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which a covered project is anticipated to begin. 
Additionally, the bill specifies reporting requirements for the Department of Budget and 
Management (DBM) and each unit of State government proposing a covered project. DBM 
must adopt regulations to implement the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase significantly, potentially by more 
than $20.0 million annually, beginning in FY 2027 to conduct community outreach 
activities for covered projects. No effect on total capital expenditures, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Local government revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “covered project” is the construction, installation, or substantial 
alteration of physical infrastructure of any capital project requested by a unit of 
State government in accordance with State law that has the potential to create material 
impacts on noise, visibility, environmental conditions, or community character that:  (1) is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 318/ Page 2 
constructed on State owned or leased property or is funded in whole or in part with 
State funds, and (2) exceeds $2.0 million in total project costs or includes a structure that 
exceeds 75 feet in height. The bill specifies that miscellaneous grant programs in the capital 
budget and Senate and House initiatives are not covered projects. 
 
A community engagement plan must include:   
 
 
a plain language summary of the covered project; 
 
the map of the affected area within the community outreach radius; 
 
a description of environmental or public health considerations;  
 
a timeline for the project design and construction; and 
 
contact information for public inquiries. 
 
Community outreach activities with each residence, business, and community organization 
located within a one-mile radius of the project footprint must include:   
 
 
providing notice by mail at least 45 days prior to any decision to approve or finalize 
the project; 
 
posting public notice online on the unit’s website; 
 
posting public notice in at least one local newspaper; 
 
conducting at least one public meeting in the area with an option for virtual 
participation; and 
 
allowing members of the public a 30-day public comment period. 
 
By October 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, each unit of State government proposing a 
covered project must submit a community engagement and outreach report for the project 
to DBM as specified. By December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, DBM must submit a 
compiled report of the required submissions to the governing body of impacted counties or 
municipalities, the General Assembly, and the Legislative Policy Committee. 
 
Current Law:  DBM must study each capital project proposed by a unit of 
State government. Except for emergency capital projects, a unit of State government 
requesting a capital project must submit its request to DBM by June 30 of the fiscal year 
preceding the fiscal year in which the capital project is to begin. Each request for a capital 
project by a unit of State government must include a detailed list of all proposed 
expenditures for capital improvements to be funded from grants or nonbudgeted revenues. 
 
Before an appropriation may be authorized for preliminary planning of a proposed capital 
project, the unit of State government requesting the appropriation is required to submit to 
DBM a program describing, in detail, the scope and purpose of the project. The Secretary 
of Budget and Management must approve the program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 318/ Page 3 
Before an appropriation may be authorized for construction of a proposed capital project, 
the unit of State government requesting the appropriation must submit to the Department 
of General Services (DGS) and DBM a detailed design program, which must include all 
information required by DGS and DBM; and both the Secretary of General Services and 
the Secretary of Budget and Management must approve the detailed design program. No 
change may be made in any proposed capital project after the preliminary plan for that 
project has been completed and approved unless approved by both Secretaries. 
 
The National Environmental Policy Act 
 
For major federal projects, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires a range 
of alternatives to be considered and the environmental impacts of each alternative to be 
analyzed. This environmental impact statement is required prior to the commitment of 
federal funds to any major project or prior to any action taken by a federal agency that 
might cause a significant impact on the environment. Some of the basic steps in this process 
include a public scoping process, data collection, analysis of policy alternatives, and 
preparation of draft and final documents. The process involves numerous federal, state, and 
local partners. 
 
State Expenditures:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase significantly, potentially 
by more than $20.0 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2027 to complete a community 
engagement plan, conduct community outreach activities, and meet the bill’s reporting 
requirements for each covered project, as discussed below. There is no effect on total 
capital expenditures, which are fixed annually by the Governor and General Assembly 
through the capital budget process, subject to debt affordability limits. However, 
community outreach and engagement activities required by the bill may result in some 
project delays, postponing and increasing the costs of individual projects due to inflation. 
If covered projects are met with significant negative community feedback, there could be 
further delays from any project revisions. To the extent that individual capital budget 
project costs increase, funding for other capital projects is either reduced or delayed. 
 
State Agencies with Covered Projects 
 
The bill does not define a material impact on noise, visibility, environmental conditions, or 
community character for covered projects, so it is unknown how many capital projects meet 
that threshold. However, a majority of capital projects cost more than $2.0 million in total 
project costs and could likely be deemed to be a covered project depending on how material 
impact is defined. The $2.0 million threshold is not adjusted for inflation, so additional 
projects could become covered projects each year. 
 
State agencies with covered projects may need to hire additional staff or consultants to 
conduct or oversee the community outreach and fulfill the bill’s reporting requirements. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 318/ Page 4 
Additionally, State agencies may incur costs associated with direct mailings, newspaper 
postings, hosting meetings, and meeting materials. These costs could vary significantly, 
especially depending on the population density around a covered project.  
 
For example, MDTA projects nonbudgeted expenditures increasing by $80,000 per 
covered project for a third-party to satisfy the minimum community outreach requirements, 
totaling as much as $10 million annually. Similarly, the State Highway Administration 
(SHA) estimates Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increasing by $100,000 per 
project for consultant services, totaling $10.6 million annually for 106 projects. 
Additionally, SHA notes four administrators are needed to oversee the consultants and 
public outreach efforts. Although both MDTA and SHA have community engagement 
policies and practices in place, they generally apply only to larger projects than those 
required under the bill, resulting in the higher costs for more projects. 
 
The University System of Maryland institutions already have a policy on community 
notification of capital projects, which requires notifying adjoining property owners and 
local governments during the planning phase of a new structure or a substantial exterior 
modification of an existing structure. However, requirements of the bill are more extensive 
than this existing policy. Thus, the University of Maryland College Park Campus estimates 
higher education expenditures increase by approximately $15,000 to $20,000 per project 
to hire a consultant to prepare required materials, advertise, notify the required stakeholders 
by mail, conduct a meeting, and document public input. With several projects over the 
$2.0 million threshold, UMCP anticipates higher education expenditures increasing by 
approximately $100,000 annually. Other public higher education institutions may likewise 
experience an increase in higher education expenditures. 
 
The Maryland Stadium Authority reports that it needs to hire three additional program 
managers to coordinate and conduct community meetings, along with incurring 
approximately $90,000 of annual mailing and consultant expenses. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services concurs that the bill may have a significant impact 
on State agencies. However, the actual impact cannot be determined at this time and 
depends on several factors, particularly how a “material impact” is defined and the 
population density of a covered project. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, DBM must submit a compiled report of 
impacted agencies’ community engagement and outreach submissions that are submitted 
to DBM by October 1 annually. DBM notes that the Office of Capital Budgeting is fully 
extended from October through November and thus may not be able to review submissions 
without additional staff. To the extent that DBM is simply compiling the information and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 318/ Page 5 
not reviewing or verifying it, DBM can likely do so with existing resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill may result in project delays for covered projects, which 
could increase individual capital project costs. If any of those covered projects have local 
matching fund requirements or are otherwise partially funded by local governments, then 
local government expenditures may increase annually beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Local governments may become better informed of covered projects and have more 
opportunities to provide feedback on covered projects. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may become better informed of covered projects 
and have more opportunities to provide feedback on covered projects. To the extent that 
small businesses rely on covered projects and those projects are delayed, any delays may 
be detrimental for those small businesses. 
 
Small businesses that are marketing consultants may benefit to the extent that 
State agencies use their services to conduct community outreach activities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Board of Public Works; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of General Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Stadium Authority; University System 
of Maryland; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5