START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 314 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 314 
(Senator Waldstreicher) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Courts - Immunity From Liability - Donation of Pet Supplies 
 
 
This bill establishes a limitation on liability regarding the donation of “pet items,” 
including commercial feed, that mirror existing provisions regarding the donation of food. 
Specifically, unless the act or omission amounts to gross negligence or willful and wanton 
misconduct, a person may not be held civilly liable for any act or omission that affects the 
nature, age, condition, or packaging of a donated pet item if the person, in good faith, 
donated the item for use or distribution by, or dispensed the item on behalf of, a nonprofit 
corporation, organization, or association or a unit of State or local government. In addition, 
the bill authorizes the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) to (1) inspect for 
wholesomeness any commercial feed donated to a nonprofit corporation, organization, or 
association and (2) establish procedures for handling commercial feed donated to any 
nonprofit corporation, organization, or association. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $84,600 in FY 2027. Future years 
reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
84,600 
69,700 
73,100 
76,600 
80,000 
Net Effect 
($84,600) 
($69,700) 
($73,100) 
($76,600) 
($80,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 314/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Pet item” means any apparently fit tangible pet supply that meets all 
quality and labeling standards imposed by federal, State, and local laws and regulations 
even if the item may not be readily marketable due to appearance, age, freshness, grade, 
surplus, or other condition. The term includes apparently fit “commercial feed,” as defined 
in § 6-101 of the Agriculture Article.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Person, Defined 
 
Under § 1-101 of the Agriculture Article, “person” means the State, any county, 
municipality or other political subdivision of the State, or any of their units, or an 
individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, fiduciary, or representative 
of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, or any other 
entity, unless provided otherwise. 
 
Commercial Feed 
 
Under § 6-101 of the Agriculture Article, “commercial feed” means a material or 
combination of materials distributed or intended for distribution, for use as feed, or for 
mixing in feed for any animal, other than man, including feed prepared and distributed for 
consumption by dogs and cats, or any domesticated animal normally maintained in a cage 
or tank, as specified, except (1) unmixed whole seeds and physically altered entire unmixed 
seeds that are not chemically altered or adulterated; (2) commodities such as hay, straw, 
stover, silage, cobs, husks, hulls, and individual chemical compounds or substances when 
the commodities, compounds, or substances are not intermixed with other materials or 
adulterated; or (3) a material or combination of materials exempt from the definition in 
regulations adopted by the Secretary of Agriculture. 
 
MDA’s State Chemist Section, among other things, regulates the sale and distribution of 
animal feeds and pet foods in order to enhance and promote agricultural production, protect 
animals from unsafe products, ensure the sale of effective products, and provide the 
regulated industry with a competitive marketplace. The State Chemist Section samples, 
inspects, tests, and analyzes commercial feed distributed in the State to the extent 
considered necessary to ensure compliance with the law. A distributor generally must 
register annually each brand name or product name of commercial feed before distributing 
it in the State, unless it has been registered by another person and the product label has not 
been altered or changed. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 314/ Page 3 
Immunity from Liability for the Donation of Food and Related Inspection Authority 
 
Unless the act or omission amounts to gross negligence or willful and wanton misconduct, 
a person, including a nonprofit corporation, organization, or association, is not civilly liable 
for any act or omission that affects the nature, age, condition, or packaging of the donated 
food if the person in good faith:   
 
 
donates food for use or distribution by a nonprofit corporation, organization, or 
association; 
 
prepares donated food for use or distribution by a nonprofit corporation, 
organization, or association; 
 
serves donated food distributed by a nonprofit corporation, organization, or 
association; or 
 
dispenses donated food distributed by a nonprofit corporation, organization, or 
association. 
 
The limitation on liability described above does not apply to any person, including a 
nonprofit corporation, organization, or association, who (1) donates food to a nonprofit 
corporation, organization, or association that sells or offers for sale any donated food;  
(2) prepares donated food for use or distribution by a nonprofit corporation, organization, 
or association that sells or offers for sale any donated food; or (3) serves donated food for 
distribution by a nonprofit corporation, organization, or association that sells or offers for 
sale any donated food. 
 
The Maryland Department of Health and MDA may (1) inspect for wholesomeness any 
food donated to a nonprofit corporation, organization, or association and (2) establish 
procedures for handling food donated to any nonprofit corporation, organization, or 
association.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $84,611 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one agricultural inspector to perform inspections of donated commercial feed on a 
complaint basis. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the 
purchase of a vehicle), and ongoing operating expenses. While MDA’s State Chemist 
Section regulates commercial feed, it does not currently conduct inspections of commercial 
feed that has been donated (e.g., if donated commercial feed causes illness in or death of a 
pet). As a result, MDA advises that it does not have the resources to conduct inspections 
for this purpose, even on a complaint basis. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 314/ Page 4 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$50,570 
 Vehicle Purchase 
23,500 
Operating Expenses 
10,541 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$84,611 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of the Judiciary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4