START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 398

A2 6lr2550
CF 6lr3446

By: Anne Arundel County Senators
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Board of License Commissioners – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of increasing the membership of the Board of License Commissioners for
4 Anne Arundel County; requiring the Governor to appoint members to the Board from
5 a list of individuals recommended by the Anne Arundel County delegations to the
6 General Assembly; altering the eligibility requirements for Board membership;
7 requiring the Board to adopt and publish a certain ethics policy; and generally
8 relating to the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County.

9 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
10 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
11 Section 11–102
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
15 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
16 Section 11–202(a) and (b)
17 Annotated Code of Maryland
18 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

19 BY adding to
20 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
21 Section 11–210
22 Annotated Code of Maryland
23 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

24 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
25 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

26 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0398*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 398

1 11–102.

2 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

3 11–202.

4 (a) (1) [The] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
5 Governor shall appoint [three] FIVE members to the Board.

6 (2) The appointments shall be made:

7 (i) if the Senate is in session, with the advice and consent of the
8 Senate; or

9 (ii) if the Senate is not in session, by the Governor alone, SUBJECT
10 TO THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE WHEN THE SENATE NEXT CONVENES.

11 (3) (I) THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE MEMBERS OF THE
12 BOARD FROM A LIST OF INDIVIDUALS RECOMMENDED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
13 COUNTY HOUSE AND SENATE DELEGATIONS TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

14 (II) THE GOVERNOR MAY REQUEST A NEW LIST OF
15 RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH AT ANY TIME.

16 (b) (1) Each member of the Board shall be:

17 (i) a resident and voter of the county; and

18 (ii) an individual of high character and integrity and of recognized
19 business capacity.

20 (2) No more than [two] THREE members of the Board may belong to the
21 same political party.

22 (3) NO MORE THAN TWO MEMBERS OF THE BOARD MAY BE
23 RESIDENTS OF THE SAME STATE LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT.

24 11–210.

25 THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT AND PUBLISH A WRITTEN POLICY RELATED TO
26 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND THE RECUSAL OF BOARD MEMBERS FROM BOARD
27 MATTERS.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 398 3

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the initial terms of the two
2 additional members of the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel County, as
3 enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall begin May 2, 2027.

4 SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
5 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3