START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 345

R4 6lr1888
CF 6lr2053

By: Senator Waldstreicher
Introduced and read first time: January 23, 2026
Assigned to: Judicial Proceedings

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Vehicle Manufacturers and Dealers – Dealer Associations – Administrative
3 Hearings

4 FOR the purpose of authorizing a vehicle dealer association to request an administrative
5 hearing on certain matters; and generally relating to vehicle dealer associations.

6 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
7 Article – Transportation
8 Section 15–201(a)
9 Annotated Code of Maryland
10 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

11 BY adding to
12 Article – Transportation
13 Section 15–201(a–1)
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
17 Article – Transportation
18 Section 15–214
19 Annotated Code of Maryland
20 (2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

21 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
22 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

23 Article – Transportation

24 15–201.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0345*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 345

1 (a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

2 (A–1) “DEALER ASSOCIATION” MEANS A BUSINESS ENTITY THAT:

3 (1) IS PRIMARILY OWNED BY OR COMPOSED OF DEALERS THAT
4 COLLECTIVELY REPRESENT A MAJORITY OF THE FRANCHISED DEALERS IN THE
5 STATE; AND

6 (2) PRIMARILY REPRESENTS THE INTERESTS OF DEALERS.

7 15–214.

8 (A) [In] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, IN
9 addition to any other right to request a hearing under this subtitle and notwithstanding
10 any provisions of the franchise agreement to the contrary, a dealer, designated dealer
11 successor as provided in § 15–211.1 of this subtitle, DEALER ASSOCIATION ON BEHALF
12 OF ITSELF, A DEALER, OR A GROUP OF DEALERS, manufacturer, distributor, or factory
13 branch may request a hearing under Title 12, Subtitle 2 of this article to:

14 (1) Resolve a dispute under any provision of this title between a dealer [or],
15 a designated dealer successor, OR A DEALER ASSOCIATION and a manufacturer,
16 distributor, or factory branch; or

17 (2) Seek clarification or interpretation of any provision of this [subtitle]
18 TITLE.

19 (B) SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A DISPUTE
20 INVOLVING A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH THAT DOES
21 NOT HAVE AT LEAST ONE FRANCHISED DEALER IN THIS STATE.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
23 October 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2