START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 393

F2 6lr1709

By: Senator King
Introduced and read first time: January 28, 2026
Assigned to: Budget and Taxation

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Community College Facilities Renewal Grant Program – Alterations

3 FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “eligible project” by repealing the requirement
4 that a project have a certain total estimated cost; requiring an appropriation of a
5 certain amount to the Community College Facilities Renewal Grant Program if the
6 Governor appropriates less than a certain amount to the Community College
7 Construction Grant Program in each fiscal year; increasing the number of grants the
8 Maryland Higher Education Commission may make in each fiscal year; requiring a
9 certain appropriation to be awarded equally to certain community colleges; and
10 generally relating to the Community College Facilities Renewal Grant Program.

11 BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
12 Article – Education
13 Section 16–320
14 Annotated Code of Maryland
15 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

16 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
17 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

18 Article – Education

19 16–320.

20 (a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

21 (2) “Community college” includes Baltimore City Community College.

22 (3) “Eligible project” means a facility renewal project, including
23 improvements, repairs, and deferred maintenance, that [has a total estimated cost of not

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0393*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 393

1 more than $1,000,000 and] has been submitted to the Commission as part of an annual
2 master plan or a 10–year master plan.

3 (4) “Program” means the Community College Facilities Renewal Grant
4 Program.

5 (b) (1) There is a Community College Facilities Renewal Grant Program that
6 shall provide State funds to community colleges for improvements, repairs, and deferred
7 maintenance projects in accordance with this section.

8 (2) The Commission shall administer the Program.

9 (c) (1) (i) In fiscal years 2019 through 2021, the Governor shall annually
10 appropriate in the operating budget of the Commission an amount equal to 5% of the
11 appropriation to the Community College Construction Grant Program in the same fiscal
12 year.

13 (ii) [In] FOR THE PROGRAM, IN fiscal year 2022 and each fiscal
14 year thereafter, the Governor shall annually appropriate in the operating or capital budget
15 of the Commission an amount equal to 5% of the appropriation to the Community College
16 Construction Grant Program in the same fiscal year.

17 (2) The appropriation required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall
18 be in addition to and may not supplant the amount appropriated to the Community College
19 Construction Grant Program in the State budget.

20 (3) FOR THE PROGRAM, IN EACH FISCAL YEAR, IF THE AMOUNT THE
21 GOVERNOR APPROPRIATES TO THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE CONSTRUCTION GRANT
22 PROGRAM IS LESS THAN $80,000,000, THEN THE GOVERNOR SHALL APPROPRIATE
23 IN THE OPERATING OR CAPITAL BUDGET OF THE COMMISSION AN AMOUNT EQUAL
24 TO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN $80,000,000 AND THE AMOUNT APPROPRIATED TO
25 THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE CAPITAL GRANT PROGRAM IN THAT FISCAL YEAR.

26 (d) (1) On or before September 1 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year of
27 the grant award, a community college shall provide to the Commission information about
28 the eligible project for which the community college is requesting a grant.

29 (2) (i) The Commission may make up to [eight] 16 grants in each fiscal
30 year.

31 (ii) [1. Subject to subsubparagraph 2 of this subparagraph, a
32 community college may not receive a grant in 2 consecutive fiscal years.

33 2. If a community college does not request funds in a fiscal
34 year, the community college may not receive a grant until the second following fiscal year.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SENATE BILL 393 3

1 (iii) 1. Subject to subsubparagraph 2 of this subparagraph, a
2 community college may not receive more than $500,000 in a fiscal year under the Program.

3 2. If the appropriation provided under subsection (c) of this
4 section is less than $4,000,000 in a fiscal year, the] THE appropriation shall be awarded
5 equally to each community college that is eligible for a grant in [that] EACH fiscal year.

6 [3. Subject to the limitation established in subsubparagraph
7 1 of this subparagraph, a community college may receive funding for more than one eligible
8 project in a fiscal year.]

9 [(iv)] (III) The Commission shall consult with each community
10 college to determine which community colleges will receive a grant for eligible projects
11 under the Program in each fiscal year.

12 (e) The Commission, in collaboration with the community colleges, shall adopt
13 any regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

14 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
15 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 3