START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 332 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 332 
(Senator Kramer) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Condominiums - Property Insurance Deductibles - Unit Owner Responsibility 
 
 
This bill increases, from $10,000 to $25,000, the maximum amount of the council of unit 
owners’ property insurance deductible for which a unit owner is responsible if the cause of 
any damage to (or destruction of) any portion of the condominium originates from the 
owner’s unit. The bill also specifies that a contract for the resale of a condominium unit by 
a unit owner (other than a developer) is not enforceable unless the required disclosure 
regarding the unit owner’s responsibility in regard to property insurance includes written 
notice of the unit owner’s responsibility when damage or destruction originates from a unit. 
The bill also makes a conforming change. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) requires 
new filings to ensure that policy forms and rates conform with the bill's requirements, 
special fund revenues increase minimally. MIA can use existing resources to accommodate 
any additional document review necessary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  No later than the first conveyance of a condominium unit to a person other 
than the developer, the council of unit owners must maintain, to the extent reasonably 
available:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 332/ Page 2 
 
property insurance in amounts determined by the council of unit owners, but no less 
than any amount specified in the declaration or bylaws (1) for attached, multifamily 
dwelling units, or detached units located within a condominium not composed 
entirely of similarly detached units, on the common elements and units, exclusive 
of improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the 
developer and (2) for detached units located within a condominium composed 
entirely of similar detached units, on the common elements only; and 
 
comprehensive general liability insurance, as specified. 
 
If any portion of the common elements and the units (generally exclusive of 
improvements/betterments installed in the units by owners) is damaged or destroyed, it 
must promptly be repaired or replaced by the council of unit owners unless (1) the 
condominium is terminated; (2) repair or replacement would be illegal under any State or 
local health or safety statute or ordinance; or (3) 80% of the unit owners, including every 
owner of a unit or assigned limited common element which will not be rebuilt, vote not to 
rebuild. 
 
Generally, the cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds and reserves 
is a common expense. A property insurance deductible is not a cost of repair or replacement 
in excess of insurance proceeds. When damage or destruction within the condominium 
originates from a unit, the owner of that unit is responsible for the council of unit owners’ 
property insurance deductible, up to a maximum of $10,000 (increased to $25,000 under 
the bill).  
 
Unit owners must be informed annually in writing of their responsibility for the council of 
unit owners’ property insurance deductible and the deductible’s amount. Any deductible 
amount exceeding the $10,000 ($25,000 under the bill) for which a unit owner is 
responsible constitutes a common expense. 
 
Generally, a contract for the resale of a unit by a unit owner other than the developer is not 
enforceable unless, among other requirements, the owner provides the purchaser (no later 
than 15 days prior to closing) with a written notice of the unit owner’s responsibility for 
the council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible and the amount of the deductible. 
 
For more information on condominiums, a type of common ownership community, see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 446 and HB 449 of 2025. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 332/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 332/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 4