START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 304 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 304 
(Senator Bailey, et al.) 
Finance 
 
 
Collisions With Wild Animals - Prohibited Actions by Insurer 
 
   
This bill prohibits an insurer from raising the premium, adding a surcharge, or removing, 
altering, or refusing to consider a discount for a private passenger motor vehicle insurance 
policy based on accidents or losses caused by a collision with a free-roaming wild animal 
and for which the insured was not at fault for the loss.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from rate and form filing fees. Enforcement can be 
handled using existing budgeted resources. General fund revenues may be affected, as 
discussed below. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to 
affect MAIF operations or finances because MAIF advises that it does not adjust its 
premiums for any not-at-fault losses. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MIA and the Insurance Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties 
include, among other things, certifying insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and 
approving the rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance 
professionals. MIA and the Commissioner have broad authority to enforce the 
requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers and insurance professionals. For 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 304/ Page 2 
example, depending on the type of violation and following the administrative processes 
required by Insurance law and regulations, the Commissioner is authorized to issue orders 
directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain actions, impose administrative 
penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or licenses. 
 
Insurance law applied for private passenger motor vehicle insurance does not include any 
requirements, exceptions, or other specifications related to accidents and losses caused by 
a collision with a free-roaming wild animal.  
 
A private passenger motor vehicle insurer may not cancel or refuse to renew coverage 
based on the claims history of an insured where two or fewer of the claims within the 
preceding three-year period were for accidents or losses where the insured was not at fault 
for the loss. Insurance law also prohibits various types of insurers from using specified 
events and circumstances to increase the premium for an insurance policy. For example, a 
private passenger motor vehicle insurer or a homeowner’s insurer may not increase the 
premium for an insured who becomes a surviving spouse based solely on the insured’s 
change in marital status. Additionally, no insurer may use an insured’s status as an organ 
donor to increase premium rates for an insurance policy.  
 
Furthermore, current law specifies certain requirements and procedures that must be 
followed by a private passenger motor vehicle insurer when it proposes to cancel, refuse to 
renew, reduce coverage for, or increase the premium of a policy. For example, an insurer 
may not terminate a policy mid-term, except in limited circumstances (e.g., nonpayment of 
a premium), and an insurer must send notice to an insured in a specified manner when it 
proposes to reduce the coverage provided by the policy. Additionally, when proposing to 
increase the premium of a policy, an insurer must notify the policyholder of certain 
information directly related to the premium increase, including the policyholder’s rate 
classification and the factors that may cause or contribute to an increase in the policy’s 
premiums.  
 
State Revenues:  Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each 
authorized insurance company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company 
that sells, or an individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage 
upon a risk that is located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund. 
 
Currently available information indicates that private passenger automobile insurers in the 
State are uncertain as to what effect the bill has on premiums for private passenger 
automobile insurance policies. While insurers would be unable to increase premiums based 
on the accidents and losses specified under the bill, insurers may choose to adjust their 
premiums in other ways. Thus, the direction and extent of any impact on general fund 
revenues from the premium tax cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 304/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 551 of 2025 and SB 172 and HB 1387 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3