START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 310 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 310 
(Senator Jennings) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Records - Maryland Judiciary Case Search - Traffic Violation by a 
Minor 
 
   
This bill prohibits the Maryland Judiciary Case Search from referring in any way to the 
existence of records relating to an alleged violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or any 
other traffic law, ordinance, or regulation by a minor.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $83,100 in FY 2027 
only for one‐time programming changes. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Judiciary Case Search provides public Internet access to 
information from Maryland District Court and circuit court traffic, criminal, and civil case 
records. The information shown generally includes names of parties, addresses, case 
numbers, dates of birth, trial dates, charges, and case dispositions. Statute prohibits the 
Maryland Judiciary Case Search from referring in any way to the existence of:   
 
 
records of a charge in a case with electronic records if the charge resulted in 
acquittal; dismissal; or nolle prosequi, except nolle prosequi with the requirement 
of drug or alcohol treatment (this exception is repealed effective January 31, 2026);  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 310/ Page 2 
 
records of a charge in a case with electronic records for (1) a charge marked “stet” 
on the docket at least three years previously or (2) a charge of possession of cannabis 
that resulted in a conviction that was later pardoned the Governor (effective 
January 31, 2026); and  
 
a criminal case in which possession of cannabis is the only charge in the case, and 
the charge was disposed of before July 1, 2023. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $83,095 in fiscal 2027 only 
for one‐time computer programming of the Maryland Judiciary Case Search system. 
The Judiciary advises that because the bill does not specify that it applies prospectively 
only, these costs include programming to remove references to historical case records as 
well.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2