START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 408

F1 6lr2831
CF 6lr1950

By: Anne Arundel County Senators
Introduced and read first time: January 29, 2026
Assigned to: Education, Energy, and the Environment

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County Public Schools – Election Official Career and Technical
3 Education Pilot Program

4 FOR the purpose of requiring the Anne Arundel County Board of Education and the State
5 Board of Elections, in consultation with the State Department of Education, to
6 establish a pilot program in the county schools to prepare students for a career as an
7 election official; and generally relating to career and technical education in Anne
8 Arundel County Public Schools.

9 BY adding to
10 Article – Education
11 Section 21–211
12 Annotated Code of Maryland
13 (2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

14 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
15 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

16 Article – Education

17 21–211.

18 (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY.

19 (B) THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS, IN
20 CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT, SHALL DEVELOP A CAREER AND
21 TECHNICAL EDUCATION PILOT PROGRAM IN THE COUNTY SCHOOLS THAT PREPARES
22 STUDENTS FOR A CAREER AS AN ELECTION OFFICIAL.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0408*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 408

1 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
2 1, 2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of June 30, 2031,
3 this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
4 of no further force and effect.
END OF PAGE 2