START OF PAGE 1
SENATE BILL 414

A2 6lr2094

By: Senator Beidle
Introduced and read first time: January 29, 2026
Assigned to: Finance

A BILL ENTITLED

1 AN ACT concerning

2 Anne Arundel County – Alcoholic Beverages – Consumption–Only Nonprofit
3 Swim Club License

4 FOR the purpose of establishing a consumption–only nonprofit swim club license in Anne
5 Arundel County; authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
6 County to issue the license to a nonprofit swim club in Anne Arundel County;
7 authorizing the license holder to allow the consumption of beer, wine, and liquor
8 during certain designated events; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages
9 licenses in Anne Arundel County.

10 BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
11 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
12 Section 11–102
13 Annotated Code of Maryland
14 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

15 BY adding to
16 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
17 Section 11–1006.3
18 Annotated Code of Maryland
19 (2024 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)

20 SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
21 That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

22 Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

23 11–102.

24 This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

EXPLANATION: CAPITALS INDICATE MATTER ADDED TO EXISTING LAW.
[Brackets] indicate matter deleted from existing law. *sb0414*
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
2 SENATE BILL 414

1 11–1006.3.

2 (A) THERE IS A CONSUMPTION–ONLY NONPROFIT SWIM CLUB LICENSE.

3 (B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO A NONPROFIT SWIM CLUB.

4 (C) (1) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO ALLOW
5 MEMBERS OF THE SWIM CLUB AND THEIR GUESTS TO BRING BEER, WINE, AND
6 LIQUOR ONTO THE LICENSED PREMISES FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

7 (2) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY ALLOW THE CONSUMPTION OF BEER,
8 WINE, AND LIQUOR:

9 (I) IN A DESIGNATED AREA OF THE SWIM CLUB;

10 (II) DURING A DESIGNATED EVENT; AND

11 (III) UP TO 5 DAYS PER YEAR, UNLESS ADDITIONAL DAYS ARE
12 AUTHORIZED BY THE BOARD.

13 (D) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE BOARD AT
14 LEAST 10 DAYS PRIOR TO A DESIGNATED EVENT WHERE ALCOHOL WILL BE
15 CONSUMED.

16 (E) DURING A DESIGNATED EVENT, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY ALLOW THE
17 CONSUMPTION OF BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR IN THE DESIGNATED AREA FROM 2 P.M.
18 TO 10 P.M.

19 (F) (1) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $100.

20 (2) THE FEE FOR ADDITIONAL DAYS IS $50 PER DAY, UP TO A
21 MAXIMUM OF 3 ADDITIONAL DAYS.

22 SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
23 1, 2026.
END OF PAGE 2