START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 49 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 49 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Environment) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Building Energy Performance Standards - Alterations and 
Analysis 
 
 
This departmental bill makes various changes to provisions related to the building energy 
performance standards (BEPS) for covered buildings that the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) is charged with administering pursuant to the Climate Solutions Now 
Act (CSNA) (Chapter 38 of 2022). Among other things, the BEPS regulations that MDE 
must establish pursuant to current law must include additional special provisions, 
exceptions, and exemptions and an annual reporting fee. In addition, among other changes, 
the bill alters the definition of “covered building” and requires MDE to (1) certify a  
county BEPS program under specified conditions and (2) conduct a cost-benefit analysis 
and develop recommendations regarding BEPS policy options and submit its analysis and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by $690,000 in FY 2026 from fees; out-years 
reflect fee increases due to inflation. MDE expenditures increase by $1,033,800 in  
FY 2026; while the FY 2026 budget includes $1.0 million in special funds for MDE 
contingent upon the enactment of legislation to establish a BEPS annual reporting fee, 
which this bill effectuates, special fund revenues are not sufficient to cover MDE’s costs, 
so general fund expenditures increase by $343,800 in FY 2026 only. State expenditures 
(multiple funds) increase to pay the annual reporting fee beginning in FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$690,000 
$703,800 
$717,900 
$732,200 
$746,900 
GF Expenditure 
$343,800 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$690,000 
$484,700 
$506,200 
$528,800 
$551,300 
Exp. (Mult. Funds) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 49/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase to pay the annual reporting fee beginning in  
FY 2026. Montgomery County is the only county expected to have a county BEPS program 
certified by MDE under the bill; effects on the county are anticipated to be primarily 
operational, as discussed below. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment due to the amendments, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Climate Solutions Now Act 
 
In general:  CSNA made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing statewide 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and addressing climate change. Among other things, 
CSNA accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets originally 
established under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the State to 
develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce GHG emissions 
by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions 
by 2045. 
 
Building Energy Performance Standards:  To accomplish these goals, among other things, 
under current law and the bill, CSNA requires MDE to develop BEPS for covered 
buildings that achieve (1) a 20% reduction in net direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2030, 
as compared with 2025 levels for average buildings of similar construction and (2) net-zero 
direct GHG emissions by January 1, 2040. To facilitate the development of these BEPS, 
MDE must require owners of covered buildings to measure and report direct emissions 
data to the department each year beginning in 2025. The provision requiring MDE to set a 
standard that achieves net-zero direct GHG emissions for covered buildings terminates 
December 31, 2029. 
 
Under current law and the bill, “covered building” means a building that (1) has a 
gross floor area of 35,000 square feet or more, excluding the parking garage, and (2) is a 
commercial or multifamily residential building in the State or is owned by the State. Under 
current law, the term does not include (1) a building designated as a historic property under 
federal, State, or local law; (2) a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school 
building; (3) a manufacturing building; or (4) an agricultural building. Under the bill, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 49/ Page 3 
“covered building” also does not include a hospital. In addition, the bill establishes a 
definition for “manufacturing building,” which means a facility in which “manufacturing,” 
as defined in current law, takes place. 
 
Implementing Regulations:  CSNA required MDE to adopt regulations to implement BEPS 
by June 1, 2023. MDE initiated the regulatory promulgation process to implement the 
required BEPS regulations in December 2023, but ultimately withdrew the regulations in  
December 2024. MDE finalized a second round of BEPS regulations that took effect  
December 23, 2024. The regulations establish BEPS and related benchmarking and 
reporting requirements under COMAR 26.28. However, the regulations do not include 
energy use intensity () standards. Under the regulations, beginning in calendar 2025, 
owners of covered buildings are required to report benchmarking information for the 
previous calendar year by June 1. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as enacted included language restricting funding for the final 
development and submission of EUI targets and standards regulations until MDE submits, 
among other things, a report on EUI costs and alternatives to EUI for meeting GHG targets. 
 
Under current law, among other requirements, the regulations must meet several specified 
requirements, including that the regulations must include (1) EUI targets by building type 
and (2) special provisions or exceptions to account for building age, regional differences, 
the unique needs of particular building or occupancy types (as specified), and the use of 
district energy systems and biofuels by covered buildings. Under the bill, in addition to 
those special provisions or exceptions, the regulations must include special provisions or 
exceptions to account for (1) crediting the generation of on-site renewable energy by 
covered buildings toward their EUI targets; (2) crediting the GHG reduction impact of the 
on-site use of biomethane; and (3) excluding the energy use and GHG emissions related to 
the production of steam for sterilization in – and the generation of emergency backup 
power at – specified facilities, laboratories, critical infrastructure, and buildings. 
 
Under current law and the bill, the regulations must also consider the needs of covered 
building owners who (1) are not responsible for the design, modification, fixtures, or 
equipment of commercial tenants; (2) do not have access or control over building energy 
systems that are used or controlled by commercial tenants; or (3) own buildings occupied 
by commercial tenants who are responsible for all maintenance of and repairs to the 
buildings. 
 
Under the bill, the regulations also must exempt from EUI targets, a covered building that 
contains an area designed, built, and operated as a permanent sensitive compartmented 
information facility and is operated by an agency or contractor of the U.S. General Services 
Administration, the U.S. Department of Defense, the National Security Agency, the 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, any other U.S. intelligence agency, or the State. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 49/ Page 4 
Additionally, the regulations must exempt an owner of such a covered building from 
EUI reporting requirements if, in circumstances where tenant authorization is required, the 
tenant or occupant does not provide energy use information to the owner of the covered 
building due to concerns about the confidentiality of the building’s secure area. 
 
Under current law and the bill, the regulations must also include an alternative compliance 
pathway (ACP) allowing an owner of a covered building to pay a fee for GHG emissions 
attributable to the building’s failure to meet direct GHG emissions reduction targets. 
 
Finally, under the bill, the regulations must include an annual reporting fee of 
$100 per covered building, adjusted for inflation, to cover the administrative costs of the 
BEPS program. 
 
Certification of a County Building Energy Performance Standards Program 
 
Under the bill, MDE must certify a BEPS program adopted by a county administering a 
BEPS program by March 1, 2025, and waive the requirement for covered buildings in the 
county to comply with the statewide program. A county administering an MDE-certified 
BEPS program is authorized to take appropriate actions to enforce the county standards, 
including establishing ACPs for compliance and imposing and collecting ACP fees and 
penalties up to the same amount and in the same manner allowed by MDE, as specified. 
 
A county that is administering an MDE-certified BEPS program is not precluded from 
adopting BEPS for buildings that are not covered buildings under the statewide program 
or modifying an adopted BEPS program. 
 
Required Cost-benefit Analysis 
 
Under the bill, MDE must conduct an analysis of the potential costs and benefits of BEPS 
policy options featuring direct emissions reduction requirements, EUI requirements, and a 
combination of both requirements that describes, for each scenario, the following:   
(1) program design considerations; (2) GHG emissions reduction potential; (3) direct 
emissions reduction potential; (4) overall energy savings potential; (5) peak energy savings 
potential; (6) implementation costs to building owners and MDE; (7) lifecycle costs of the 
building and equipment and cost-effectiveness for building owners; and (8) program 
implementation cost and complexity. In conducting the analysis, MDE must (1) identify 
specified policy considerations and recommendations and (2) calculate building 
benchmarks based on benchmarking data reported to MDE by covered building owners 
pursuant to current law. MDE must submit the analysis and recommendations to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by December 31, 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 49/ Page 5 
Background:  MDE advises that the department plans to adopt EUI standards in 
regulations following the submission of the required report to the General Assembly and 
the calculation of EUI standards based on data reported to MDE in 2026. MDE notes that 
EUI standards are important for promoting efficient electrification to enable Maryland’s 
clean energy transition, minimize electricity grid impacts, and achieve Maryland’s goal of 
net-zero GHG emissions by 2045. 
 
MDE advises that it needs additional revenue to cover its administrative costs to implement 
the BEPS program (including costs to purchase software and hire staff to provide technical 
support to building owners). The fee revenue generated by the bill assists in covering at 
least some of those costs. 
 
The Montgomery County Council adopted county BEPS in February 2025. The 
Montgomery County BEPS cover most commercial and multifamily buildings that are at 
least 25,000 gross square feet. Covered buildings are grouped by size and type. The 
grouping dictates when buildings begin benchmarking, their baseline periods, and the 
interim and final performance standard deadlines. The county has information about the 
Montgomery County BEPS on its website. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Reporting Fee Revenues for the Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
Special fund revenues for the Maryland Clean Air Fund within MDE increase by an 
estimated $690,000 in fiscal 2026, increasing to $746,900 by fiscal 2030 (due to increases 
in the fee for inflation, as provided by the bill). This estimate, which reflects revenue 
collected by MDE from the annual reporting fee, is based on the following information and 
assumptions: 
 
• 
there are an estimated 8,500 covered buildings in the State, under the bill’s changes; 
• 
buildings exempted from the statewide BEPS program due to the establishment of 
a county BEPS program are also exempt from paying the reporting fee; anticipating 
that Montgomery County’s BEPS program is certified by MDE under the bill, 
approximately 1,600 covered buildings under that county program do not pay the 
annual reporting fee; 
• 
an estimated 6,900 owners of covered buildings pay the $100 annual reporting fee 
each year; and 
• 
MDE promulgates the regulations and begins collecting the annual reporting fee at 
the end of fiscal 2026, when covered buildings owners are required to report their 
calendar 2025 data (by June 1, 2026). 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 49/ Page 6 
DLS notes that the above estimate is only due to the reporting fee; the future effects on 
MDE’s special fund revenues from ACP fees are discussed separately below. 
 
Budgeted Funding and Administrative Costs for the Maryland Department of the 
Environment 
 
Budgeted Funding and Use of Special Funds:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $1.0 million in special funds for MDE contingent on the 
enactment of legislation to establish a BEPS annual reporting fee, which this bill 
effectuates. However, as discussed above, reporting fee revenues are only estimated to 
generate special fund revenues of $690,000 in fiscal 2026, while MDE’s costs to implement 
the bill in fiscal 2026 are estimated to total $1,033,837, as discussed below. As a result, it 
is assumed that general funds are needed to cover the shortfall in special fund revenues; 
accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $343,837 in fiscal 2026 only. 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, estimated special fund revenues exceed the estimated costs for 
MDE to implement the bill’s requirements. Other costs to implement BEPS that are likely 
not fully covered by the fee revenue generated by the bill are discussed below. 
 
Administrative Costs to Implement the Bill:  MDE’s administrative expenditures to 
implement the bill increase by $1,033,837 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring five regulatory and 
compliance engineers to (1) review exemption requests; (2) annually review and update 
forms, review and sample reported data, conduct inspections as necessary, and ensure that 
benchmarking reports accurately reflect the various exclusions and exemptions under the 
bill; and (3) generally implement the expanded requirements and BEPS provisions under 
the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
The estimate also includes costs to hire a contractor to conduct studies and make 
modifications to the benchmarking tool to incorporate additional exemptions and 
considerations into BEPS standards. Specifically, MDE needs contractual assistance to 
(1) conduct a study to identify a standard deduction for steam sterilization in order to 
exclude the energy use and GHG emissions related to the production of steam sterilization 
in specified facilities; (2) customize its compliance and covered building tracking and 
benchmarking tools to track exempted equipment and buildings so that MDE can 
implement the additional special provisions, exceptions, and exemptions from BEPS 
requirements established under the bill; and (3) conduct the required analysis of the 
potential costs and benefits of BEPS policy options featuring direct emissions reduction 
requirements, EUI requirements, and a combination of both, as specified. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 49/ Page 7 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$371,993 
Contractual Costs 
625,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       36,844 
Total MDE 2026 Admin. Expenditures 
$1,033,837 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Other Ongoing Costs of the Building Energy Performance Standards Program:  DLS notes 
that although the annual reporting fee revenues generated by the bill are anticipated to 
cover MDE’s costs to implement the bill’s changes to BEPS beginning in fiscal 2027, the 
fee revenue will not be sufficient to cover the additional anticipated costs MDE expects to 
incur related to the general implementation of BEPS as established by CSNA. 
 
Specifically, MDE advises that – in addition to the positions discussed above that are 
needed to implement the requirements of the bill itself – it needs to hire five employees 
(four regulatory and compliance engineers and one assistant Attorney General) in 
fiscal 2026 to administer the BEPS program and to establish and maintain an online 
reporting system for covered buildings, as required by current law. Associated 
administrative expenditures are anticipated to total $642,825 in fiscal 2026, increasing to 
$789,323 by fiscal 2030. The fiscal 2026 estimate reflects salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including costs to establish an 
online reporting system ($225,000). Future year estimates reflect salaries with annual 
increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses, including costs to maintain the online reporting system. Therefore, because this 
bill establishes new administrative responsibilities for MDE, even with the estimated 
revenue anticipated to be generated from the annual reporting fees, MDE does not have 
sufficient available special funds to fully implement the BEPS program. 
 
Future Effects on Alternative Compliance Pathway Fee Revenue 
 
Pursuant to CSNA and its implementing regulations, under current law BEPS provisions, 
beginning in calendar 2030, owners of covered buildings may come into compliance with 
net direct emissions standards by paying an ACP fee for GHG emissions in excess of the 
standards. Under current law and the bill, ACP fee revenues are anticipated to begin 
accruing in fiscal 2031. The bill makes several changes that affect the amount of ACP fees 
collected. Notably, under the bill, (1) certain buildings are excluded from the definition of 
“covered building”; (2) additional special provisions, exceptions, and credits are 
incorporated into BEPS standards; and (3) MDE is authorized to certify county BEPS (and 
owners of covered buildings in a county with a certified county BEPS program will not 
pay ACP fees to the State). Under current law, there are an estimated 9,000 covered 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 49/ Page 8 
buildings in the State; as noted above, based on information provided by MDE, under the 
bill’s changes, approximately 6,900 covered buildings are subject to the State BEPS. 
 
Although a reliable estimate of the effect of the bill’s changes cannot be made at this time 
– in part because an estimate of ACP fee revenues anticipated under current law is not 
available – ACP fee revenues likely decrease beginning in fiscal 2031 under the bill. 
 
County Impacts Related to the Establishment of County Building Energy Performance 
Standards 
 
Based on available information, the only known county BEPS program in the State is the 
program that has already been adopted in Montgomery County. Thus, it is anticipated that 
Montgomery County is the only county affected by the bill’s requirement for MDE to 
certify a county BEPS program adopted by March 1, 2025, and to waive the requirements 
for covered buildings in that county from the statewide program. Although the bill 
authorizes the county to establish ACP fees to enforce its county BEPS program, according 
to Montgomery County, it is not currently planning to do so. However, the county notes 
that the enforcement authority provided by the bill – specifically, the authority to impose a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day for a violation – is significantly more robust than the 
existing penalty provisions under the county BEPS. The county does not expect this 
authority to have a significant impact on county revenues but does anticipate that it could 
result in improved compliance with the county BEPS program. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect as Owners of Covered Buildings 
 
Owners of covered buildings could include State agencies, local governments, and small 
businesses. The bill makes several changes to the implementation of BEPS for owners of 
covered buildings, the effects of which cannot be reliably estimated at this time. The 
changes that likely have fiscal implications on owners of covered buildings are described 
below. 
 
Reduced Compliance Costs for Some Building Owners:  The bill is anticipated to reduce 
compliance costs for some building owners that are no longer subject to BEPS (due to the 
change in the definition of “covered building”) or are exempt from EUI targets. 
 
Annual Reporting Fee:  State agencies, local governments, and any small businesses that 
own affected covered buildings are subject to the annual reporting fee that must be 
established by MDE under the bill. Thus, expenditures for affected entities increase 
beginning in fiscal 2026 to pay the fee, which is $100 in fiscal 2026 and increases over 
time due to inflation. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 49/ Page 9 
County Building Energy Performance Standards:  As discussed above, it is anticipated that 
Montgomery County’s BEPS program is likely the only county BEPS certified by MDE 
under the bill. According to MDE and Montgomery County, there are several meaningful 
differences between the State BEPS and the Montgomery County BEPS. Notably, the 
following program components differ:  covered building size thresholds and definitions; 
BEPS exemption types and uses; the scope and magnitude of requirements imposed on 
covered buildings; compliance timelines; ACP options; opportunities and the basis of 
potential waivers for economic feasibility; and enforcement approaches. 
 
Given the scope and complexity of the differences between the programs and the fact that 
the EUI portion of the State program has not been established, a reliable estimate of the 
bill’s impact on affected building owners in Montgomery County cannot be made at this 
time. Even so, for affected building owners that would otherwise need to comply with both 
the State and county BEPS programs, the bill likely results in reduced complexity and 
potentially lower overall compliance costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 256 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties; Baltimore City; City of Frederick; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 49/ Page 10 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - April 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2025 
Enrolled - May 12, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 12, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 12, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 12, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - May 12, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - December 18, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 49/ Page 11 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Environment - Building Energy Performance Standards - Compliance and 
Reporting  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 49 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Hadley Anthony 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
To the extent that this bill has an economic impact on Maryland’s small businesses, it will provide 
more flexibility to comply with BEPS regulations. This flexibility will lead to cost saving measures 
that otherwise would not be available without the alternative compliance outlined in this bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11