START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 31 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 31 
(Delegates Kaufman and Hornberger) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Right to Repair - Powered Wheelchairs 
 
 
This bill generally requires a manufacturer to make available (on fair and reasonable terms 
and costs, as specified) any documentation, parts, embedded software, firmware, or tools 
that are intended for use with a powered wheelchair (or any part), inclusive of any updates, 
to an independent repair provider or owner. The bill applies only to documentation, parts, 
embedded software, firmware, or tools that are necessary for an independent repair 
provider or owner to perform services with respect to specified parts (e.g., batteries and 
battery chargers, nonprogrammable joysticks, joystick housings or brackets, etc.). The bill 
only applies prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on (or 
application to) any contract that is executed between an authorized repair provider and a 
manufacturer before the bill’s effective date. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to 
MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 31/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s right-to-repair requirements do not apply to (1) a part that is no 
longer available to the original manufacturer and (2) conduct that would require a 
manufacturer to divulge a trade secret, unless compliance is necessary to provide services 
on the grounds that the documentation, part, embedded software, firmware, or tool is itself 
a trade secret. A manufacturer may make redactions to remove trade secrets from the 
documentation before providing it if the usability of the documentation is not diminished 
for purposes of providing services.  
 
For equipment that contains an electric security lock or other security-related functions, a 
manufacturer must (on fair and reasonable terms and costs) make available to independent 
repair providers any documentation, parts, embedded software, firmware, or tools needed 
to reset the lock or function when disabled in the course of providing services. This 
requirement may be satisfied through appropriate secure release systems.  
 
A manufacturer is not liable for faulty or improper repairs provided by independent repair 
providers or owners, including faulty or improper repairs that cause certain outcomes, as 
specified.  
 
The bill’s requirements may not be construed to (1) limit the liability of a person under a 
products liability claim or (2) require a manufacturer to provide an independent repair 
provider (or owner) access to information that the manufacturer provides to an authorized 
repair provider under a contract or other arrangement (other than documentation necessary 
for compliance with the bill).  
 
The requirements and remedies provided under the bill may not be waived or limited by a 
contract or other arrangement.  
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or 
effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer.  
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 31/ Page 3 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that repair powered wheelchairs may 
meaningfully benefit under the bill, which requires manufacturers to make information 
available that allows for the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of a powered wheelchair. 
However, authorized repair providers, to the extent they are small businesses, may face 
greater competition.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 382 (Senator Kagan, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3