START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 819

Chapter 819

(House Bill 99)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Class A (Off–Sale) and Class D (Off–Sale) Licenses
– Population Ratio Quota

FOR the purpose of establishing a population ratio quota for certain Class A (off–sale) and
Class D (off–sale) licenses in Anne Arundel County; specifying a certain official map
to be used to identify certain tax assessment districts for purposes of the population
ratio quota; prohibiting the Board of License Commissioners for Anne Arundel
County from approving the transfer of certain alcoholic beverages licenses under
certain circumstances; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Anne
Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 11–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 11–1602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

11–102.

This title applies only in Anne Arundel County.

11–1602.

(a) In this section, “assessment district” means a tax assessment district:

(1) established by the county [through local law]; AND

(2) SHOWN ON THE OFFICIAL MAP ADOPTED BY THE COUNTY
COUNCIL TITLED “TAX ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS, 2005”.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 819 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) [The] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE Board may
issue a Class A (off–sale), Class B (off–sale), or Class D (off–sale) license based on its
determination of whether the license is necessary to accommodate the public.

(c) [In making its determination,] IF THE APPLICATION IS FOR A CLASS A
(OFF–SALE) OR CLASS D (OFF–SALE) LICENSE, the Board [may consider whether the
establishment for which the license would be issued is in] MAY NOT ISSUE THE LICENSE
IF:

(1) THE ESTABLISHMENT FOR WHICH THE LICENSE WOULD BE ISSUED
IS LOCATED IN an assessment district in which the ratio of off–sale licenses per individual
[is more than] EXCEEDS one [per] FOR EVERY 4,000 3,750 3,500 individuals; or

(2) [an assessment district in which the ratio of off–sale licenses per
individual is less than one per 4,000 individuals] THE ISSUANCE OF THE LICENSE
WOULD CAUSE THE RATIO OF OFF–SALE LICENSES PER INDIVIDUAL IN AN
ASSESSMENT DISTRICT TO EXCEED ONE FOR EVERY 4,000 3,750 3,500 INDIVIDUALS.

(D) SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY:

(1) TO THE TRANSFER OR RENEWAL OF A LICENSE THAT WAS ISSUED
ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025; OR

(2) IN THE 6TH TAX ASSESSMENT DISTRICT; OR

(3) TO AN APPLICATION FOR AN ON–SITE CONSUMPTION PERMIT
UNDER § 2–207 OF THIS ARTICLE BY AN APPLICANT THAT HOLDS A CLASS 5
BREWERY LICENSE.

(E) THE POPULATION OF EACH ASSESSMENT DISTRICT IS TO BE
DETERMINED BY:

(1) THE LATEST FEDERAL CENSUS; OR

(2) ESTIMATES PREPARED BY THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY OFFICE
OF PLANNING AND ZONING.

(F) THE BOARD MAY NOT APPROVE THE TRANSFER OF A CLASS A
(OFF–SALE) LICENSE OR CLASS D (OFF–SALE) LICENSE:

(1) TO A LOCATION OUTSIDE THE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT IN WHICH
THE LICENSE WAS LOCATED ON JULY 1, 2025; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 819

(2) IF THE LICENSE WAS NOT IN EXISTENCE AS OF JULY 1, 2025, TO A
LOCATION OUTSIDE THE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT IN WHICH THE LICENSE WAS
ORIGINALLY ISSUED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and 6 months and, at the end of
December 31, 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall
be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3