START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 89 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 89 
(Delegate Embry) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Crimes Relating to Animals - Conviction and Sentencing 
 
 
This bill establishes that each animal harmed in a violation of Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the 
Criminal Law Article (crimes against animals) is a separate offense and must be deemed 
an individual victim for purposes of the sentencing guidelines stacking rule. The bill 
specifies that (1) a conviction for a violation of the subtitle cannot merge with a conviction 
for any other crime based on the act establishing the violation and (2) a sentence imposed 
for a violation of the subtitle may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with 
a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing the violation. The bill also clarifies 
that specified crimes related to animals do not apply to either hunting or fishing activities 
that use the most humane method reasonably available, if they are completed in accordance 
with State wildlife or fisheries law or regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to 
the bill’s effect on charging and sentencing practices, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s effect on charging and sentencing practices, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the Criminal Law Article contains a variety of 
offenses concerning the improper treatment of animals. Exhibit 1 lists those offenses and 
their maximum penalties. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 89/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the Criminal Law Article 
Offenses and Maximum Penalties 
 
Offense 
Maximum Penalty 
§ 10-604 – Abuse or neglect of an animal 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine 
§ 10-605 – Attending dogfights or 
cockfights 
Misdemeanor – 1 year imprisonment 
and/or $2,500 fine 
§ 10-606 – Aggravated cruelty to animals 
Felony – 3 years imprisonment and/or 
$5,000 fine 
§ 10-607 – Prohibited activities related to 
dogfights  
Felony – 3 years imprisonment and/or 
$5,000 fine 
§ 10-607.1 – Possession of an implement 
of dogfighting 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $5,000 fine 
§ 10-608 – Prohibited activities related to 
cockfights 
Felony – 3 years imprisonment and/or 
$5,000 fine 
§ 10-610 – Giving a live animal as a prize 
Misdemeanor – $500 fine 
§ 10-611 – Killing of a dog or cat by 
prohibited means 
Misdemeanor – $500 fine 
§ 10-612 – Abandoning a domestic animal Misdemeanor – $100 fine 
§ 10-613 – Sale of puppy or kitten less 
than eight weeks old without its dam 
Misdemeanor – $500 fine 
§ 10-614 – Transfer or coloring of a chick 
less than three weeks old 
Misdemeanor – $25 fine 
§ 10-617 – Disposal of a domestic animal 
First offense – $500 civil fine 
Subsequent offense – Misdemeanor – 
$500 fine 
§ 10-618 – Poisoning dog 
Misdemeanor – $100 fine 
§ 10-619 – Dangerous dog 
Misdemeanor – $2,500 fine 
§ 10-620 – Interference with a racehorse 
Misdemeanor – 1 year imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine 
§ 10-621 – Import, offer, or transfer of 
dangerous animal 
Misdemeanor – $1,000 fine if an 
individual, $10,000 fine if not an 
individual 
§ 10-622 – Injuring or trapping a carrier 
pigeon 
Misdemeanor – $10 fine per violation 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 89/ Page 3 
Offense 
Maximum Penalty 
§ 10-623 – Leaving dog outside and 
unattended by use of restraints 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine (unless otherwise 
specified civil offense) 
§ 10-624 – Unauthorized surgery on dogs 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine (first offense) or 
180 days imprisonment and/or $5,000 fine 
(subsequent offense) 
§ 10-625 – Unauthorized surgical 
devocalization of cat or dog 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine (first offense); or 
1 year imprisonment and/or $2,000 fine 
(subsequent offense) 
§ 10-625.1 – Declawing cats 
Civil offense – $1,000 fine 
§ 10-626 – Killing or harming a service 
animal 
Misdemeanor – 2 years imprisonment 
and/or $2,500 fine  
§ 10-626 – Interfering with use of a 
service animal 
Misdemeanor – 1 year imprisonment 
and/or $1,000 fine 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Sentencing Guidelines – Stacking Rule 
 
The State’s sentencing guidelines apply to criminal cases prosecuted in a circuit court. 
However, jury trial prayers and appeals from the District Court are excluded from 
guidelines coverage unless a presentence investigation is ordered. Pursuant to the 
sentencing guidelines’ multiple victims “stacking” rule, when there is a criminal event with 
multiple victims and not more than one seriousness category I or II offense, the person 
completing the sentencing guidelines worksheet must add the highest of the upper limits 
of the guidelines ranges for each victim to find the correct overall range for the criminal 
event. Animals are not considered victims for the purposes of applying the multiple victims 
stacking rule. 
 
Exceptions to Crimes Against Animals 
 
Sections 10-601 through 10-608 and § 10-626 of the Criminal Law Article (abuse or 
neglect of an animal, aggravated cruelty to animals, dogfighting, cockfighting, and killing 
or harming a service animal) do not apply to (1) customary and normal veterinary and 
agricultural husbandry practices, including dehorning, castration, tail docking, and limit 
feeding; (2) research conducted in accordance with protocols approved by an animal care 
and use committee, as required under the federal Animal Welfare Act or the federal Health 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 89/ Page 4 
Research Extension Act; (3) an activity that may cause unavoidable physical pain to an 
animal, including food processing, pest elimination, animal training, and hunting, if the 
person performing the activity uses the most humane method reasonably available; or 
(4) normal human activities in which the infliction of pain to an animal is purely incidental 
and unavoidable. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Comprehensive information on current charging and sentencing 
practices in animal crimes cases is not readily available at this time. However, given the 
case volume and conviction statistics listed below and judicial discretion in sentencing, it 
is estimated that the bill (1) may result in a minimal increase in general fund revenues from 
fines imposed in the District Court and (2) may result in a minimal increase in general fund 
expenditures should more individuals be committed to State correctional facilities, if 
individuals are committed to State correctional facilities for longer periods of time, or if 
the State has to make increased payments to counties for reimbursement of costs for 
incarcerated individuals. 
 
The Judiciary reports the following information on the number of charges that were filed 
for abuse or neglect of an animal and for aggravated cruelty (under §§ 10-604 and 10-606, 
respectively), and the number of charges that resulted in a guilty disposition, in the 
District Court in fiscal 2024:   
 
 
Abuse or Neglect of an Animal (§ 10-604):  2,052 charges filed and 180 guilty 
dispositions; and 
 
Aggravated Cruelty to Animals (§ 10-606):  79 charges filed and 1 guilty 
disposition. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy (MSCCSP) reports the 
following data for individuals sentenced in the State’s circuit courts during fiscal 2024:   
 
 
37 individuals were sentenced for violations under Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the 
Criminal Law Article. 
 
Of those individuals, 28 were sentenced for 1 count and 9 were sentenced for 
multiple counts (4 sentenced for 2 counts, 2 sentenced for 3 counts, 2 sentenced for 
4 counts, and 1 sentenced for 14 counts). 
 
In addition, a 2023 MSCCSP memorandum that examined 2017 to 2021 sentencing data 
indicated that out of the 33 sentencing events in the circuit courts during that time period 
that involved multiple counts of crimes against animals, 28 sentencing events involved 
only one criminal event and 5 sentencing events involved multiple criminal events. (A 
sentencing event is a sentencing disposition or hearing for an individual defendant in front 
of one judge on the same day.) Of the 28 multiple count sentencing events that involved a 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 89/ Page 5 
single criminal event, 22 (79%) imposed consecutive sentences for two or more counts of 
crimes against animals. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,339 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues may increase minimally if the bill increases fines imposed in 
the circuit courts in animal crimes cases. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
provisions. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the 
first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have 
ranged from approximately $140 to $350 per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 17 and HB 667 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 152 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 89/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - January 15, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6