START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 88 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 88 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Estates and Trusts - Maryland Trust Decanting Act - Notification and Document 
Transmittal 
 
 
This bill establishes provisions governing the methods by which notice may be given, or 
documents may be sent, under the Maryland Trust Decanting Act. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Manner of Providing Notice or Sending a Document 
 
The bill requires that notice to a person, or the sending of a document to a person, under 
the Maryland Trust Decanting Act, be accomplished in a manner reasonably suitable under 
the circumstances and likely to result in receipt of the notice or document.  
 
Notice Provided by an Authorized Fiduciary 
 
An authorized fiduciary must provide notice to a person under the Act: 
 
 
by personal service; 
 
by certified mail or first-class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 88/ Page 2 
 
by courier delivery service, delivery service prepaid, delivery confirmation 
requested; or 
 
if a person entitled to receive notice agrees in writing to accept an alternative form 
of notice, by (1) first-class mail, postage prepaid; (2) facsimile transmission from a 
facsimile device that produces a confirmation page that specifies the date and time 
of a successful transmission; or (3) e-mail, acknowledgement requested.  
 
If an authorized fiduciary who provides notice by one of the above alternative methods 
knows or should know that the person entitled to receive notice did not actually receive 
notice, the authorized fiduciary must provide notice by one of the first three above-listed 
methods. 
 
A person may revoke the authorized fiduciary’s authorization to provide notice by one of 
the alternative methods by providing notice to the authorized fiduciary by personal service, 
certified or first-class mail (postage prepaid, return receipt requested), or courier delivery 
service (delivery service prepaid, delivery confirmation requested). An authorized 
fiduciary may continue to provide notice by an authorized alternative method until the 
person entitled to receive notice revokes the authorization. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Trust Decanting Act (Title 14, Subtitle 6 of the Estates and 
Trusts Article) – enacted in 2023 (Chapters 715 and 716) – allows for an authorized 
fiduciary (a trustee or other fiduciary who has discretion to distribute property of a trust) 
to exercise the “decanting power,” defined as the power of an authorized fiduciary to 
distribute property from a (first) trust to one or more other (second) trusts or to modify the 
terms of the first trust. Under the Act, subject to certain exceptions, an authorized fiduciary 
must give notice of any intended exercise of the decanting power at least 60 days before 
the exercise of the power. The notice must be given to each qualified beneficiary of the 
first trust and other specified persons. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 158 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):   Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Register of Wills; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 88/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3