START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1 
(Delegate Ebersole, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of Transportation - Human Trafficking Awareness, Training, and 
Response (See Someone, Save Someone Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), in consultation 
with stakeholders, to develop or identify and implement a training program that includes a 
curriculum on the identification and reporting of suspected human trafficking. MDOT must 
administer the training program to specified MDOT employees (including employees 
under contract). Each employer of an affected employee must (1) certify to MDOT that its 
employees have completed the training program by January 1 annually beginning in 2027; 
(2) provide the training to a new employee within 90 days after the date of hire; (3) establish 
a human trafficking reporting procedure, as specified; and (4) implement a human 
trafficking prevention policy, as specified. Finally, to the extent practicable, MDOT must 
require frequent public service announcements with safety information for human 
trafficking victims, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $262,500 in 
FY 2026 and by $137,500 in FY 2027. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
262,500 
137,500 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($262,500) 
($137,500) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Applicability and Program Requirements 
 
The bill applies to an employee who is (1) a State employee who works at a transit station, 
airport, port facility, or highway rest stop; (2) a State employee who provides transit 
service; or (3) employed under a contract with the State to provide transit service. It also 
applies to the employer of one of those employees.  
 
The training program developed or identified by MDOT must (1) include a definition of 
human trafficking and (2) offer guidance to employees and contract employees on the 
identification of potential victims of human trafficking and protocols for reporting 
suspected human trafficking. To the extent feasible, the training program must be 
administered to affected employees during regular working hours. 
 
Requirements for Employers 
 
Generally, by January 1, 2027, and each January 1 thereafter, each employer must certify 
to MDOT that its employees have completed the training program. An employer must 
provide a new employee with the required training within 90 days after the date of hire. To 
the extent feasible, the training program must be administered during regular working 
hours. 
 
Each employer, in consultation with MDOT, must (1) establish a procedure for employees 
and contract employees to report suspected incidents of human trafficking to the 
appropriate local agencies, including the designated regional navigator, and (2) implement 
a human trafficking prevention policy for employees and contract employees by providing 
information on how to recognize potential victims, respond to an individual who may be 
or is a victim, and connect an individual who may be or is a victim with available resources.  
 
Limitations on Liability 
 
An employer, employee, or contract employee may not be held civilly or criminally liable 
for reporting or responding in good faith to a suspected incident of human trafficking. 
 
Public Service Announcements 
 
To the extent practicable, MDOT must require frequent public service announcements with 
safety information for human trafficking victims to be made, in both English and Spanish, 
at transit stations, airports, port facilities, and highway rest stops. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Department of Transportation  
 
MDOT’s responsibilities to operate and maintain the State’s transportation systems are 
carried out through modal units that are organized by mode of transportation. For example, 
the State Highway Administration (SHA) is in charge of maintaining the State’s highways 
and roadways, the Maryland Aviation Administration is responsible for maintaining the 
State’s airports, and the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) is generally responsible 
for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
Human Trafficking Awareness Training 
 
Numerous government entities and licensed businesses in the State are required to provide, 
approve, and/or receive training on the identification and reporting of human trafficking. 
For example: 
 
 
the Maryland State Department of Education is required to collaborate with the 
Maryland Department of Health to provide awareness and training for Directors of 
Student Services in local education agencies on human trafficking, including 
strategies for the prevention of trafficking of children; 
 
a commercial driver’s license training school is required to include, as part of its 
curriculum, education and training on the recognition, prevention, and effective 
reporting of human trafficking; and 
 
each innkeeper must provide a new employee with an annual training for the 
accurate and prompt identification and reporting of suspected human trafficking 
(any such training program must be approved by the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) and the Maryland Department of Labor). 
 
Chapter 559 of 2019 established the Safe Harbor Regional Navigator Grant Program to 
support services for youth victims of sex trafficking. GOCPP must provide grant funding 
for services provided by the program; the Governor may annually appropriate up to 
$3.0 million for grant funding. Services coordinated and provided by a grantee must 
include safety planning, emergency response, basic living needs, trauma counseling and 
mental health services, drug and alcohol abuse treatment, legal services, victim advocacy, 
case management, and designation of regional navigators. A “regional navigator” is a 
provider of services designated by a grantee of the program. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase by an estimated $262,525 in fiscal 2026 
and by an estimated $137,525 in fiscal 2027 to develop the required human trafficking 
awareness training and to administer the training for affected MDOT employees. This 
estimate assumes that: 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1/ Page 4 
 
MTA develops the training at an estimated one-time cost of $125,000 in fiscal 2026 
(because the training requirement primarily affects MTA employees) and the 
training is developed as an online course;  
 
the training developed by MTA can be provided to other affected MDOT employees 
(for example SHA employees that may work at a highway rest stop or provide 
shuttle service to and from an airport); 
 
overtime is needed to cover the shifts of an estimated 2,500 employees so that they 
can complete the training during regular working hours;  
 
an estimated two hours of overtime pay is needed to cover each employee’s shifts, 
at an average hourly rate of $55.01; and 
 
the estimated overtime costs are incurred evenly across fiscal 2026 and 2027 
(totaling $137,525 per year) so that affected employees can receive the training by  
January 1, 2027. (Although it is unclear, it is assumed that affected MDOT 
employees must receive the training by that date.) 
 
To the extent that fewer employees are affected or less overtime is required, costs decrease 
accordingly. For new employees, the training can be added to existing trainings and 
orientations at no additional cost. 
 
It is anticipated that MDOT can likely develop and implement the reporting procedure, the 
prevention policy, and public service announcements using existing resources. To the 
extent existing resources prove insufficient for these efforts (for example, if MDOT must 
develop a significant amount of signage to meet the bill’s requirements), costs increase 
accordingly. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires MDOT to administer the training program to its 
employees and contract employees. However, the bill also requires an employer of such a 
contract employee to provide the training to a new employee within 90 days after the date 
of hire. Accordingly, it is unclear if MDOT or an employer is required to provide the 
training to a new contract employee of the department. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 148 of 2024 and SB 203 and HB 1053 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 7 (Senator Jackson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland State Department of Education; Morgan State University; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1/ Page 5 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; University System of Maryland; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5