START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 41 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 41 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Board of Elections) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Petitions for the Formation of a New Political Party - Process 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the time period prior to presidential and gubernatorial 
general elections during which a petition to form a new political party, or any additional 
signatures to such a petition, may not be filed. The bill expands the time period by moving 
the beginning of the period from the first Monday in August before the general election to 
the first Monday in July. The bill also prohibits signatures submitted with a petition to form 
a new political party, that is officially determined to have failed to meet State law 
requirements, from being resubmitted with a subsequent petition. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Any group of registered voters may form a new political party by (1) filing 
a petition with SBE and (2) adopting and filing an interim constitution and bylaws. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 41/ Page 2 
The petition must state (1) the partisan organization’s intent to organize a State political 
party; (2) the name of the partisan organization; (3) the name and signature of the State 
chairman of the partisan organization; and (4) the names and addresses of 25 registered 
voters, including the State chairman, who must be designated as constituting the initial 
governing body of the partisan organization. 
 
The petition must also include papers bearing the signatures of at least 10,000 registered 
voters who are eligible to vote in the State as of the first day of the month in which the 
petition is submitted. The signatures must have been affixed to the petition not more than 
two years before the filing date of the last qualifying signature. 
 
A petition for the formation of a new political party, or any additional signatures to a 
petition, may be filed at any time, except: 
 
 
in a presidential election year, (1) during the period of time that voter registration is 
closed before and after the primary election and (2) after the first Monday in August 
until voter registration reopens after the general election; 
 
in a gubernatorial election year, after the first Monday in August until voter 
registration reopens after the general election; and 
 
when a special primary election and a special election are proclaimed by the 
Governor to fill a vacancy in the office of Representative in Congress, (1) after the 
fifth Monday before the special primary election through the tenth day following 
the special primary election and (2) after the fifth Monday before the special election 
through the fifteenth day following the special election. 
 
If the petition is certified in accordance with State law and the constitution and bylaws filed 
by the partisan organization are determined to meet applicable requirements, the partisan 
organization is then considered a State political party. 
 
If the petition does not meet State law requirements (1) SBE must declare the petition 
insufficient; (2) the partisan organization is not a State political party; and (3) SBE must 
promptly notify the State chairman of the partisan organization. 
 
Background:  SBE indicates that the bill’s change to the time period for filing a petition 
to form a new political party (and any additional signatures) is needed to provide sufficient 
time for SBE and the local boards of elections to verify the petitions in advance of 
producing ballots and updating voter communications concerning political parties prior to 
a general election. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 41/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 267 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Election Officials; Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 41/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Election Law - Petitions for the Formation of a New Political Party - 
Process 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 41 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jennifer McLaughlin, Policy Analyst and Mail-in Ballot Lead, 
Maryland State Board of Elections, Jennifer.mclaughlin@maryland.gov, 410-271-6939 
mobile 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4