START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 18 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 18 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems Pilot Program - Inspection 
and Extension 
 
 
This bill extends by two years the termination date and reporting requirements of 
Chapters 624 and 625 of 2024, which established authorization for Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties to use noise abatement monitoring systems on State and local 
highways to record violations of State law governing maximum sound limits of motor 
vehicles. The bill also applies existing requirements related to the inspection of images 
captured by automated enforcement systems to images from noise abatement monitoring 
systems. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase, likely minimally, in FY 2027 and 2028 to 
the extent that the counties extend their pilot programs and noise abatement monitoring 
systems citations are contested and heard in District Court. The District Court can handle 
any additional caseload using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures and revenues for Montgomery and Prince George’s counties 
increase in FY 2027 and 2028 to the extent the counties continue their pilot programs, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 18/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems 
 
Chapters 624 and 625 authorized the use of up to three noise abatement monitoring systems 
in both Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. Under the Acts, any such system may 
only be implemented if its use is authorized by the governing body of the county by local 
law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing; however, Chapters 624 and 625 
terminate June 30, 2026. The Acts included additional requirements and specifications for 
the use of the systems, including:   
 
 
requiring fine revenues to be paid directly to the appropriate political subdivision, 
unless a case is contested in the District Court (in which case the fine revenues are 
paid to the District Court); 
 
authorizing the counties to recover the costs of implementing and administering the 
systems from the fines collected and requiring any balance to be used solely for 
public safety purposes, as specified; 
 
requiring the counties to provide specified notice to the general public before 
activating a system; 
 
requiring the counties to designate an official or employee to respond to questions 
and concerns about the systems; 
 
requiring system operators to receive training and be certified by the system 
manufacturer, as specified; 
 
requiring operators to complete daily logs, as specified; 
 
requiring the systems to undergo annual calibration checks, as specified; 
 
establishing penalty amounts and requiring the District Court to prescribe a uniform 
citation form; 
 
establishing other requirements related to violations, administration of the penalties, 
the processing of citations, the admissibility of the recordings as evidence, and 
information the District Court may consider in defense of a violation; and  
 
requiring, by December 1, 2025, a county that authorizes a program of noise 
abatement monitoring systems to report to the Governor and General Assembly on 
specified information about the program.  
 
The bill extends the authorization for Montgomery and Prince George’s counties to use the 
noise abatement monitoring systems through June 30, 2028. The bill also requires the 
aforementioned report to be completed by December 1, 2027, instead of December 1, 2025. 
The bill also specifies, similar to the disclosure rules for information collected by other 
authorized automated enforcement systems, that a custodian must deny inspection of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 18/ Page 3 
recorded images produced by a noise abatement monitoring system except under specified 
circumstances. 
 
Sound Limits 
 
Under current law, a person is prohibited from driving (or permitting to be driven) a motor 
vehicle on a highway in violation of maximum sound limits established under State law. A 
violation is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The prepayment penalty is $60. 
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for citations issued under 
the pilot program, general fund revenues increase for an additional two-year period 
(encompassing the entirety of fiscal 2027 and 2028). Any such impact depends on the 
extent to which the counties continue their pilot programs under the extended authorization 
granted by the bill and citations are contested. While both counties have enacted legislation 
to implement a pilot program under Chapters 624 and 625, the Montgomery County 
program has only been in effect since October 15, 2024, and the Prince George’s County 
program takes effect February 3, 2025. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, both counties have enacted legislation to establish 
noise abatement monitoring systems under the authority granted by Chapters 624 and 625. 
Montgomery County has yet to place its systems; Prince George’s County advises that it 
has procured a vendor to place three units in the county in March or April 2025. 
 
Accordingly, county expenditures to maintain the systems and penalty revenues from 
citations issued and collected increase in fiscal 2027 and 2028 to the extent that the counties 
choose to extend their pilot programs as authorized by the bill. According to the 
Fiscal Impact Statement for the local legislation enacted by Montgomery County, 
expenditures for the program are anticipated to be $99,400 annually, and revenues cannot 
be reliably estimated without actual experience under the pilot program. The 
Department of Legislative Services advises that revenues for the counties are anticipated 
to be minimal; for both counties, the civil penalty for a violation may not exceed $75. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 121 (Senator A. Washington) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 18/ Page 4 
Transportation; Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4