START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 22 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 22 
(Delegate Valentine) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services - Study on Location of 
Individuals Prior to and Following Incarceration 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to 
conduct an annual study on the location of individuals before and following incarceration 
in a State correctional facility. DPSCS must report the results of the study to specified 
legislative committees by October 1, 2026, and each October 1 thereafter. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DPSCS can conduct the annual study and prepare the annual report with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must include:   
 
 
data on the county of residence of each individual released during the previous year, 
as reported by the individual on intake to the facility; 
 
data on the county of release following incarceration; 
 
for individuals who were transferred from one State correctional facility to another 
prior to release, the number of days that the transfer occurred before release; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 22/ Page 2 
 
a comparison of (1) the number of individuals released from a State correctional 
facility into the same county in which they resided prior to incarceration; (2) the 
number of individuals released from a State correctional facility into the same 
county in which conviction occurred; and (3) the number of individuals released 
from a State correctional facility into the county in which they were incarcerated at 
the time of release. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Release from Division of Correction 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning issuance of an identification (ID) card to 
incarcerated individuals on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. The 
Commissioner of Correction must issue an ID card to an incarcerated individual before 
release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Current regulations specify that, when feasible, a parole release plan must be completed 
before a parole hearing. A release plan must include the name of the parolee’s employer or 
evidence of other legitimate means of financial support, the location at which the parolee 
will reside, and the nature of any community services necessary to meet the special needs 
of the parolee. In addition, current regulations specify the following elements of a release 
plan:   
 
 
evidence must be furnished to the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) that the 
prospective parolee will be legitimately employed following release; however, the 
employment requirement may be waived by MPC where circumstances warrant a 
waiver; 
 
assurance should be given that necessary aftercare will be available to parolees who 
are ill or who have any other demonstrated problems in which special treatment may 
be necessary; 
 
parolees must be allowed, in the discretion of MPC, to return to their homes, or to 
go elsewhere, upon such terms and conditions as MPC prescribes; and 
 
gradual release may be completed through a community-based treatment facility 
(i.e., halfway house). (MPC may require such placement as a step in the release 
process.) 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 22/ Page 3 
The status of any detainers lodged against an incarcerated individual will be investigated 
so far as reasonably possible, before the parole hearing, and the Office of Public Defender 
must be notified and encouraged to assist the incarcerated individual in the disposition of 
the detainer. MPC may parole an incarcerated individual to meet detainers if the 
incarcerated individual is considered in other respects to meet the required parole criteria. 
MPC will cooperate in making arrangements for concurrent supervision with other 
jurisdictions when it is feasible and when release on parole appears justified. 
 
MPC must cooperate in making arrangements for concurrent supervision with other 
jurisdictions when it is feasible and when release on parole appears justified. 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry 
Services 
 
Chapters 936 and 937 of 2024 established the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of 
Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by DPSCS. The task force must 
(1) identify and assess the reentry services that exist in the State; (2) identify gaps in reentry 
services currently provided in the State; (3) assess the markers of successful reentry; 
(4) ensure that the recommendations of the task force equally consider returning citizens 
regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan to establish a Division of Returning Citizens within 
DPSCS for specified purposes; and (6) develop a plan to expand specified services for 
individuals in the State after release from incarceration. By December 31, 2025, the task 
force must submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. 
 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund 
 
The Performance Incentive Grant Fund within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy is intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of Chapter 515 
of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, to provide grants for specified programs and 
services, including providing for pretrial risk assessments, services to reduce pretrial 
detention, diversion programs, specialty courts, reentry programs, and ensuring that the 
rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced. Money expended from the fund for 
programs to reduce recidivism and control correctional costs is supplemental to and is not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for such 
purposes. The fiscal 2026 budget as introduced includes $11.2 million for the fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 860 and HB 1332 of 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 22/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 84 (Senator Corderman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4