START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 94 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 94 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Opioid-Associated Disease Prevention and Outreach Programs - Appeals and 
Membership of Standing Advisory Committee 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the membership of the Standing Advisory Committee on 
Opioid-Associated Disease Prevention and Outreach Programs, replacing the Deputy 
Secretary for Public Health Services with the Secretary of Health (or the 
Secretary’s designee). Accordingly, the bill shifts responsibility for chairing the advisory 
committee and handling appeals of an adverse decision to operate an opioid-associated 
disease prevention and outreach program from that deputy secretary to the Secretary (or 
the Secretary’s designee). The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The December 2015 final report of the Heroin and Opioid Emergency Task 
Force included a recommendation for legislation authorizing any county in Maryland to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 94/ Page 2 
establish an opioid-associated disease prevention and outreach program. Chapter 348 of 
2016 implemented that recommendation and established the advisory committee. 
 
The advisory committee consists of at least 11 members, including its chair. Other 
members include specified individuals from academia, law enforcement, public health, and 
substance-related disorder treatment, as well as participants and family members. MDH 
may recommend additional members. 
 
The advisory committee must provide technical assistance to each program on the 
development of its operating procedures, community outreach and education plan, and 
substance-related disorder treatment linkage protocols and make recommendations to a 
program on procedures or operations. 
 
An opioid-associated disease prevention and outreach program must:   
 
 
secure program locations and equipment; 
 
allow participants to obtain and return hypodermic needles and syringes at any 
program location, if more than one location is available; 
 
have appropriate staff expertise in working with individuals who inject drugs; 
 
include adequate staff training; 
 
disseminate other means for curtailing the spread of HIV and viral hepatitis; 
 
link individuals to additional services, including substance-related disorder 
counseling, treatment, and recovery services; testing for specified diseases; 
reproductive health education and services; wound care; and overdose response 
program services; 
 
educate participants on the dangers of contracting HIV and viral hepatitis; 
 
provide overdose prevention education and access to naloxone or a referral to obtain 
naloxone; 
 
establish procedures for identifying program participants in accordance with 
specified confidentiality provisions; 
 
establish methods for identifying and authorizing staff members and volunteers who 
have access to hypodermic needles, syringes, and program records; 
 
develop a plan for data collection and program evaluation; and 
 
collect and report specified information to MDH at least annually. 
 
MDH and a local health officer must jointly approve or deny an application for 
authorization to operate an opioid-associated disease prevention and outreach program. A 
local health department or community-based organization may appeal an adverse decision 
by MDH and a local health officer. MDH must grant or deny an appeal and provide a 
written explanation of the decision to the applicant within 60 days. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 94/ Page 3 
Background:  In March 2024, MDH transferred the Center for Harm Reduction Services 
from the Prevention and Health Promotion Administration (PHPA), which is overseen by 
the Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services, to the Behavioral Health Administration 
(BHA), which is overseen by the Deputy Secretary for Behavioral Health. The transfer 
moved oversight of opioid-associated disease prevention and outreach programs from 
PHPA to BHA. MDH advises that the bill’s transfer of responsibilities from the 
Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services to the Secretary (or the Secretary’s designee) 
reflects this transfer and provides the Secretary with greater flexibility in assigning 
responsibilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 224 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 7, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 94/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Opioid-Associated Disease Prevention and Outreach Programs - 
Appeals and Membership of Standing Advisory Committee 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 94 
 
PREPARED BY:   Maryland Department of Health, Behavioral Health Administration 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
OR 
 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The change proposed in this bill is a technical change to the makeup of the Standing 
Advisory Committee on Opioid-Associated Disease Prevention and Outreach Programs. 
This change will have no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 4