START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 36 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 36 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Aging) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Department of Aging – Aging Services – Program Repeal and Consolidation 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that the Secretary of Aging develop 
congregate housing services and assisted living programs for seniors; instead, the Maryland 
Department of Aging (MDOA) must develop, coordinate, and administer a consolidated 
program to provide specified services. The bill repeals the Interagency Committee on 
Aging Services and instead transfers specified committee responsibilities to MDOA and 
clarifies and expands those responsibilities. Beginning in June 2025, MDOA must engage 
with key stakeholders to conduct program transition planning and co-design the new 
consolidated program, as well as develop transition plans for specified individuals. The bill 
replaces references to “seniors” with “older adults” in specified sections of the Human 
Services Article and specifies that an “area agency” is an “area agency on aging.” The bill 
must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to 
have any effect on or application to any cause of action arising before the effective date of 
the bill. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2026; provisions relating to transition 
planning take effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. To the extent MDOA enters into agreements or contracts 
with specified entities to coordinate services to older adults, general fund expenditures may 
increase beginning in FY 2027. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent MDOA enters into agreements or contracts with local 
governments to provide services authorized under the bill, local government revenues and 
expenditures may increase. Area agencies on aging (AAAs) can complete person-centered 
assessments with existing budgeted resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 36/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDOA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Reconfiguration of Major Departmental Programs 
 
By repealing the authorizing statutes for MDOA’s congregate housing (§§ 10-209 and 
10-210 of the Human Services Article) and assisted living program responsibilities 
(§ 10-211 of the Human Services Article) and expanding MDOA’s statute under Title 10, 
Subtitle 3 of the Human Services Article to include authorization to provide similar 
services, the bill combines the Senior Care, Senior Assisted Living Subsidy (SALS), and 
Congregate Housing Services Provider (CHSP) programs under the Senior Care statute.  
 
Transition Planning  
 
Beginning in June 2025, MDOA must engage with key stakeholders, including AAAs, to 
(1) conduct program transition planning and co-design the new, consolidated program that 
combines the Senior Care, SALS, and CHSP programs and (2) provide that individuals 
enrolled in those programs at the time of the transition will receive a person-centered 
assessment, performed by the appropriate AAA for that jurisdiction, to determine an 
individual transition plan that may include continues service delivery, or an alternative to 
ensure appropriate care is maintained.  
 
Repeal of the Interagency Committee on Aging Services 
 
As the interagency committee is repealed, the bill clarifies and specifies the duties 
transferred to MDOA. MDOA may enter into agreements and contracts and adopt 
regulations, policies, and procedures to implement and coordinate services to older adults. 
MDOA may collaborate with county agencies, AAAs, nonprofit organizations, or other 
persons that establish local interagency committees.  
 
MDOA must establish, coordinate, and supervise a program to provide single points of 
entry within each planning and service area. Each AAA must continue to operate a single 
point of entry program to assess the needs of older adults (rather than seniors) and their 
caregivers and provide appropriate services.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 36/ Page 3 
AAAs (rather than local interagency committees on services to seniors) must make 
agreements with nonprofit organizations or other persons as needed and provide staff on 
a regular basis at the single points of entry to provide information and services to older 
adults in need of long-term services and administer agency programs.  
 
MDOA must develop, coordinate, and administer with AAAs or other persons a system to 
provide services to older adults in need of long-term services and supports to allow older 
adults to age in their selected location with appropriate services, supports, and housing 
opportunities. The services may include (1) integrated screening and evaluation; 
(2) development of an individual plan of care; (3) in-home services, as specified; 
(4) community-based services such as day care, food and other meal coordination, and 
other efforts to assist older adults or adult caregivers; (5) a subsidy for the costs of an 
assisted living program; (6) any other service that may mitigate the risk of impact to, or 
improve resilience or, housing or services of older adults by natural, technological, or 
human-made threats and hazards, including climate change; and (7) any other service 
authorized by MDOA. To be eligible to participate in the system, a county, AAA, nonprofit 
organization, or any other person must comply with MDOA standards.  
 
Current Law:  MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the delivery of services for, and 
advocates on behalf of, older adults at all levels of government. The department also 
administers programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older Americans 
Act. Most of the direct services funded by MDOA are delivered through AAAs.  
 
In Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designate an AAA. The agency 
may be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. AAAs provide a 
variety of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, and temporary 
disability programs.  
 
Pursuant to the Human Services Article, an “area agency” means the local agency that 
MDOA designates in accordance with the Older Americans Act of 1965 to administer the 
delivery of a comprehensive and coordinated plan of social and other services and activities 
for seniors in a planning and service area.  
 
Interagency Committee on Aging Services 
 
The 12-member Interagency Committee on Aging Services comprises, among other 
representatives, the Secretaries of Aging, Disabilities, Health, Housing and Community 
Development, and Human Services. The committee must develop and update annually a 
plan for providing services to seniors in the State consistent with priorities established by 
MDOA. The committee must present a report before each legislative session to the 
General Assembly on the developed plan, the activities of the committee, and the status of 
services to seniors in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 36/ Page 4 
The committee must establish interagency agreements and adopt regulations to 
(1) implement and coordinate services to seniors consistent with the developed plan; 
(2) maximize the sharing of resources among units of State government for services to 
seniors; (3) consolidate planning and evaluation efforts at the State and local levels; and 
(4) coordinate and expedite the delivery of services to seniors by providing technical 
assistance to local agencies. The committee must also assist county agencies to establish 
local interagency committees to coordinate and expedite the delivery of services to seniors.  
 
The committee must establish and coordinate a program to provide single points of entry 
within each planning and service area. MDOA must supervise the program. Additionally, 
each area agency must operate a single point of entry program to assess the needs of seniors 
and their caregivers and provide appropriate services, as specified. To the extent possible, 
each single point of entry must be located in a senior citizen center and available for access 
at least five days a week. Local interagency committees on services to seniors must make 
agreements to provide staff on a regular basis at the single points of entry to provide 
information and services to seniors and administer agency programs.  
 
The committee must also develop a system to provide services to frail or health-impaired 
seniors at risk of institutionalization and coordinate the system among the agencies 
represented on the committee. MDOA must administer the system for the committee. 
Services must include (1) integrated screening and evaluation; (2) development of an 
individual plan of care; (3) in-home services, as specified; and (4) community services, as 
specified, to assist seniors or adult caregivers in providing care for seniors. 
 
To be eligible to participate in the system, a county or counties must establish a 
community-based plan that:   
 
 
is developed by a local or regional committee composed of specified stakeholders;  
 
is consistent with the plan for providing coordinated services for seniors;  
 
specifies administrative arrangements to evaluate and develop care plans for frail or 
health-impaired seniors;  
 
encourages further coordination of service delivery; and 
 
fosters individual contributions for services provided, the development of 
innovative service delivery, the development of services in conjunction with the 
private sector, and community involvement through the use of volunteers.  
 
The committee, through MDOA, must work with local health departments, local 
departments of social services, AAAs, and local housing, transportation, economic 
development, and employment development officials to develop a system to designate case 
managers to secure and manage necessary services for each frail or health-impaired senior 
in need and guidelines to establish local or regional committees to coordinate services.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 36/ Page 5 
Congregate Housing Services 
 
Under §§ 10-209 and 10-210 of the Human Services Article, “congregate housing services” 
means services provided in an apartment building that promote independent living for an 
eligible individual. Congregate housing services must include congregate meals, 
housekeeping, and personal services. An individual is eligible for congregate housing 
services if they are at least 62 years old and have temporary or periodic problems with 
one or more essential activities of daily living (ADLs), such as feeding, bathing, grooming, 
dressing, or transferring. The spouse of an eligible individual is also eligible if they are at 
least 55 years old and also have temporary or periodic difficulty with one or more ADLs. 
A congregate housing services program must be certified by the Secretary.  
 
The Secretary must develop congregate housing services programs for seniors in 
conjunction with public or private for-profit or nonprofit corporations or State or federal 
units. Among other things, the Secretary must also:   
 
 
make maximum use of rent and other subsidies available from federal and State 
sources;  
 
provide for subsidies necessary from State general funds to assist low-income 
seniors to reside in congregate housing as an alternative to more costly institutional 
care that is not required;  
 
find sponsors or managers for congregate housing services programs;  
 
assist developers in formulating design concepts and meeting program needs;  
 
when necessary, provide subsidies for congregate meals, housekeeping, and 
personal services and develop eligibility requirements for the subsidies; and 
 
adopt regulations to govern the certification and operation of congregate housing 
services programs and provide for investigations of criminal records of congregate 
housing services providers and employees.  
 
The Secretary may impose a civil money penalty against a provider of congregate housing 
services for specified violations. The civil money penalty may not exceed $20 per violation 
per resident for each day that a violation remains uncorrected after the time set for 
correction. A penalty may not exceed $1,000 per violation or $5,000 in total.  
 
Assisted Living Programs 
 
Section 19-1801 of the Health-General Article defines an “assisted living program” as a 
residential or facility-based program that provides housing and supportive services, 
supervision, personalized assistance, health-related services, or a combination of such 
services that meets the needs of individuals who need assistance with ADLs.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 36/ Page 6 
Under § 10-211 of the Human Services Article, the Secretary must develop assisted living 
programs for seniors in conjunction with public or private for-profit or nonprofit 
corporations or State and federal units. Among other things, the Secretary must also:   
 
 
make maximum use of rent and other subsidies available from federal and State 
sources;  
 
provide for and set, by regulation, the amount of subsidies necessary from State 
general funds to assist low-income seniors to reside in assisted living programs as 
an alternative to more costly institutional care that is not required;  
 
provide subsidies, when necessary and in accordance with available funds, for 
congregate meals, housekeeping, and personal services for assisted living programs 
and develop eligibility requirements for subsidies;  
 
adopt regulations to govern eligibility requirements for subsidies;  
 
find sponsors for assisted living programs; and 
 
assist developers in formulating design concepts and meeting program needs.  
 
The Secretary must review the compliance of assisted living programs with the regulations 
that the Secretary of Health adopts for licensing these programs to operate in the State.  
 
Background:  MDOA advises that the bill is intended to combine three existing programs 
(Senior Care, SALS, and CHSP) under one umbrella to facilitate MDOA in managing the 
programs as one singular program. According to MDOA, each of the three programs are 
authorized separately by outdated statutes and regulations that provide different eligibility 
criteria and the programs have struggled with stagnant growth and inefficient use of funds. 
Under the bill, MDOA hopes to provide the same services under a single statutory, 
programmatic, and budgetary umbrella.  
 
MDOA further advises that the Interagency Committee on Aging Services has not met 
since 2014 as the committee no longer aligns with MDOA operations.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$20.1 million in general funds for the three MDOA programs affected by the bill; 
specifically, $13.2 million for Senior Care, $4.9 million for SALS, and $1.9 million for 
CHSP. This analysis assumes that these funds will be used for the singular combined 
program beginning in fiscal 2027, following the July 1, 2026 effective date of the bill.  
 
MDOA advises that existing staff resources for the three separate programs are sufficient 
to meet the requirements of the bill. MDOA advises that it will request that the Department 
of Budget and Management consolidate the three funding streams into a single one and 
rename the broadened program appropriately.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 36/ Page 7 
Under the bill, MDOA may enter into specified agreements or contracts with county 
agencies, AAAs, nonprofit organizations, or other persons that establish local interagency 
committees to coordinate services to older adults. To the extent that MDOA enters into 
such agreements, general fund expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As mentioned above, under the bill, MDOA may enter into 
agreements or contracts as appropriate with AAAs, some of which may be units of local 
government. MDOA may also enter into agreements with other county agencies to provide 
program services. Under such agreements, local government revenues and expenditures 
may increase to provide services. Additionally, AAAs must provide individuals enrolled 
in Senior Care, SALS, and CHSP at the time of the transition will receive a person-centered 
assessment performed by the appropriate AAA for that jurisdiction.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 212 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Aging) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Aging; Department of Commerce; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and 
Frederick counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human Services; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 24, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 36/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:   
Department of Aging - Aging Services - Program Repeal and 
Consolidation 
BILL NUMBER:   
HB 36 
PREPARED BY:   
Andrea Nunez 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS  
OR  
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES  
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The agency expects minimal economic impact on small businesses in Maryland.  
These are the impacted outside stakeholders from this program reconfiguration bill and 
accompanying budgeting changes:   
1. Maryland’s 19 AAAs – these are largely significant units within county governments, 
often housed within a county human service agency.  Three nonprofit AAAs exist in certain 
Eastern Shore counties and Washington County.  
2. Ten current Congregate Housing Service Providers (non-profits, local governments and 
housing authorities) that currently have agreements with the Department to provide certain 
supportive services to older adults living in 22 buildings.  Most of these are long-time 
contracting relationships with MDOA.  Current providers include Catholic Charities 
(operates in 5 counties), Good Samaritan, the Housing Authorities of Baltimore City, 
Annapolis, Cumberland, B’nai B’rith Montgomery County, Garrett County Community 
Action and others.  The full list of providers, funding, people served and waitlist were 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 36/ Page 9 
described in a 2023 JCR report.  Catholic Charities is the largest provider and provides 
services in 5 counties.  
3. 211 assisted living facilities participating in the Senior Assisted Living Subsidy 
Program.  These are predominantly smaller and mid-sized, more affordable assisted living 
facilities across Maryland.  AAAs are responsible for managing these relationships and the 
precise number participating in each jurisdiction tends to be relatively fluid.   
4. Approximately 1,000 older Marylanders who receive either a subsidy for their assisted 
living monthly costs through the SALS program or supportive services in their senior (age-
restricted or congregate) housing settings through the CHSP program.  
 
After bill passage, the Department plans to:   
 
1. request DBM consolidate the 3 separate budget lines into the same Senior Care funding 
line item,  
2. rename the reconfigured Senior Care program appropriately and reflect that new name as 
well as eligibility, what services are covered, guardrails on how funds may be spent, and 
any other appropriate information in a single set of new regulations and agency policy 
directive (a manual) to smoothly guide area agencies on aging (AAAs).  
3. repeal the existing SALS and CHSP regulations and agency guidance.  
 
This is not a reduction in funds or programming, but a shift in a very small portion of the state 
budget, $7M for SALS and CHSP, changing hands to be managed more efficiently and effectively 
by the Area Agencies on Aging, which are typically located in County governments, within human 
service agencies.  
This bill assisted living providers currently participating in the SALS subsidy program are 
predominantly smaller and mid-sized, more affordable assisted living facilities.  These are mostly 
small businesses and many have subcontractors for certain services.  It is possible that individual 
AAAs will elect not to continue providing the same, or any level of assisted living subsidy as 
existed under the SALS program and some or all of the 211 current assisted living providers will 
lose residents and income temporarily because of it.  
The housing communities and service providers that currently participate in the CHSP program 
are not small businesses.  However, it is likely that many CHSP providers utilize subcontractors 
of different sizes to provide certain services (i.e. laundry, housekeeping, food).  It is possible that 
individual AAAs will elect not to continue contracting with these 10 organizations for the same, 
or any level of services as existed under the CHSP program resulting in a loss of long-time 
contracts for them.  
 

END OF PAGE 9