START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 92 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 92 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Heating, Ventilation, Air–Conditioning, and Refrigeration Contractors – License 
Restoration 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the time period (from 90 days to four years) during which a 
licensee of the State Board of Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration 
(HVACR) Contractors may apply for a license restoration after expiration. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of HVACR Contractors can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing budgeted resources. Revenues and expenditures are likely not materially 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  If an application for a license restoration is made within 
90 days of expiration (four years under the bill), the license may be restored on payment 
of the required renewal or reinstatement fee. If application for restoration is not made 
within the 90-day period (four years under the bill), the State Board of HVACR Contractors 
may require compliance with the process for initial applications as if the applicant had 
never been licensed. Current renewal fees (which are the same as fees for an original 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 92/ Page 2 
license) range from $12 for an apprentice license to $94.50 for a master or limited license. 
Fees are paid to the State Occupational Mechanical Licensing Boards’ Fund. 
 
Background:  MD Labor advises that it is necessary to extend the time within which an 
HVACR licensee may seek renewal or reinstatement of an expired license. Under current 
law, any request for reinstatement after 90 days of license expiration requires an individual 
to qualify for an original license, including passing a license examination. Certain licensees 
(e.g., an individual recovering from an injury) may not realize within the 90-day period 
that their license has expired and may not have access to the electronic application 
platform. The bill is intended to mirror the reinstatement requirements for other mechanical 
licensing boards within MD Labor. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 263 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 92/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Heating, 
Ventilation, 
Air–Conditioning, 
and 
Refrigeration 
Contractors – License Restoration 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 92 
 
PREPARED BY: 
John Bull Executive Director, Mechanical Boards 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 

END OF PAGE 3