START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 46 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 46 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council - Membership 
 
 
This departmental bill adds the Administrator of the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) 
(or the Administrator’s designee) and the Executive Director of the Office of Social Equity 
(OSE) (or the Executive Director’s designee) as members of the Cannabis Public Health 
Advisory Council. It also makes a technical correction to the affiliation and corresponding 
title of one of the advisory council members. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment 
does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council was 
established to study and annually report its findings and recommendations on specified 
public health impacts of cannabis legalization. Members of the advisory council may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to standard reimbursement for travel expenses. The 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 46/ Page 2 
Maryland Department of Health provides staff and technical assistance for the advisory 
council. 
 
The advisory council’s annual report must address: 
 
 
the promotion of public health and mitigation of youth use, misuse, and addiction 
to cannabis; 
 
data collection and reporting of data that measures the impact of cannabis 
consumption and legalization; 
 
the impact of cannabis legalization on the education, behavioral health, and somatic 
health of individuals younger than age 21; 
 
initiatives to prevent cannabis use by individuals younger than age 21, including 
educational programs for use in schools; 
 
public health campaigns on cannabis; 
 
advertising, labeling, product testing, and quality control requirements; 
 
training for health care providers related to cannabis use; 
 
best practices regarding requirements to reduce the appeal of cannabis to minors, 
including advertising, potency, packaging, and labeling standards; and 
 
any other issues that advance public health related to cannabis use and legalization. 
 
The council convened its first meeting in August 2023, and according to its December 2024 
annual report, has since formed the following workgroups:  (1) youth cannabis use 
mitigation; (2) data and surveillance; (3) health care professional education; (4) on-site 
consumption; and (5) legislative. 
 
OSE is an independent office functioning within the Maryland Cannabis Administration, 
established to promote and encourage full participation in the regulated cannabis industry 
by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on 
drugs in order to positively impact those communities. 
 
According to MDOT, the Administrator of MVA, as a traffic safety expert, has specialized 
knowledge and experience to assist in addressing the complex challenges of cannabis use 
and impaired driving. By adding the administrator to the advisory council membership, the 
bill is intended to ensure that impaired driving is included in council discussions and 
decisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 46/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 222 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Transportation) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - February 7, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 46/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Public Health – Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council 
Membership  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 222 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4