START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 71 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 71 
(Delegate Edelson) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Holocaust Education Assistance Grant Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Holocaust Education Assistance Grant Program in the Maryland 
State Department of Education (MSDE) to assist local school systems with Holocaust 
education in public schools. Grants may be used only for Holocaust related teacher training 
or teaching materials. The Governor must include an appropriation of $50,000 in the 
annual budget bill for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, general fund expenditures increase by 
$50,000 annually due to the mandated appropriation for the grant program. MSDE can 
administer the grant program using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  For a local school system that applies for and receives a grant, local revenues 
and expenditures for specified Holocaust education related activities increase as early as 
FY 2027. If all 24 local school systems receive an equal share of available funding, each 
grant could be up to $2,083 annually. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 71/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Social Studies Framework addresses or alludes to the 
Holocaust in several units, specifically, High School Modern World History, High School 
United States History, and the Social Studies Standards and Framework for Grades 6-8. 
State Frameworks are defined as supporting documents and provide guidance for 
implementing the State Standards in Social Studies, which are reviewed and adopted by 
MSDE every eight years. 
 
With the advice of the State Superintendent of Schools, the State Board of Education 
establishes basic policy and guidelines for the program of instruction for public schools. 
Subject to State law and the regulations, bylaws, policies, and guidelines established by the 
State Board of Education, each local board of education must establish the curriculum 
guides and courses of study for schools in its jurisdiction. Policies, rules, and regulations 
for the graduation of students from Maryland public schools are established by local boards 
of education and the State Board of Education. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 71 of 2024 and HB 638 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2