START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 99 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 99 
(Delegate Rogers) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Class A (Off-Sale) and Class D (Off-Sale) Licenses - 
Population Ratio Quota 
 
 
This bill limits the issuance of Class A (off-sale) and Class D (off-sale) licenses in certain 
assessment districts of Anne Arundel County, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates December 31, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues are not affected, as discussed below. 
Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Assessment district” means a tax assessment district established by  
the county and shown on the official map adopted by the county council titled  
“Tax Assessment Districts, 2005.” The population of each assessment district is determined 
by the latest federal census or estimates prepared by the Anne Arundel County Office of 
Planning and Zoning. 
 
If a business applies for a Class A (off-sale) or Class D (off-sale) license, the Anne Arundel 
County Board of License Commissioners may not issue the license if the business is located 
in an assessment district where the ratio of off-sale licenses exceeds one for every 
3,500 individuals, or if the issuance of the license would cause the ratio to exceed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 99/ Page 2 
one license per 3,500 individuals. This does not apply (1) to the transfer or renewal of a 
license issued by July 1, 2025; (2) in the sixth tax assessment district; or (3) to an 
application for an on-site consumption permit by an applicant that holds a State-issued 
Class 5 Brewery License. 
 
Additionally, the board may not approve the transfer of a Class A (off-sale) or  
Class D (off-sale) license to a location outside of the assessment district in which the 
license was located on July 1, 2025. If the license did not exist on July 1, 2025, it may not 
be transferred to a location outside of the assessment district in which the license was 
initially issued. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner and may authorize the sale of alcohol for on- and 
off-premises consumption, as specified. 
 
Generally, off-sale licenses authorize the license holder to sell alcoholic beverages for 
consumption off the licensed premises. In the State, Class A licenses authorize the sale of 
alcoholic beverages as packaged goods, and Class D licenses authorize the sale of alcoholic 
beverages for taverns. 
 
The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners may issue off-sale licenses 
based on its determination of whether the license is necessary to accommodate the public. 
Chapter 69 of 2020 authorized the board to consider the population-to-license ratio in the 
applicant’s assessment district in its determination. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County is divided into eight assessment districts; 
however, the bill does not apply to the sixth assessment district. The board advises all but 
two of the remaining seven assessment districts (District 2 and District 4) currently have 
more than 1 license per 3,500 residents. District 2 is currently under the bill’s proposed 
limit by 1 license, and District 4 is under the limit by 10 licenses. Thus, the issuance of 
new Class A (off-sale) and Class D (off-sale) licenses in five county assessment districts 
would be prohibited under the bill until there is sufficient population growth to support 
additional licenses. However, since the bill does not apply to licenses that exist in an 
assessment district as of July 1, 2025, the license fee revenues the county receives from 
these existing license holders would not be affected by the bill. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 99/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 571 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 4, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3