START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 63 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 63 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Public Accountancy - Sunset Extension and Report 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Public 
Accountancy within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) by five years to 
July 1, 2030. MD Labor must submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee 
(JAEC) with information regarding the board (as determined by JAEC). The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained from 
FY 2026 through 2030. MD Labor and JAEC can handle the reporting requirement with 
existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Public Accountancy regulates and 
licenses individuals acting as certified public accountants and issues permits to business 
entities that provide public accountancy services. Practicing certified public accountancy 
means, among other things, to (1) conduct an audit; (2) conduct any examination, review, 
or agreed-upon procedures engagement to be performed in accordance with the Statements 
on Standards for Attestation Engagements issued by the American Institute of Certified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 63/ Page 2 
Public Accountants; or (3) provide a written certificate or opinion offering positive or 
negative assurance or full or limited assurance on the correctness of the information or on 
the fairness of the presentation of the information in certain documentation. To qualify for 
a license, an applicant must meet certain educational and experience criteria and pass the 
Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination. Additionally, a firm that has an office 
in the State and either uses the title of “CPA” or “CPA firm” or performs certain services 
must have a permit issued by the board. To qualify for a permit, a firm must meet certain 
requirements depending on the type of firm. 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. 
However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by 
legislation. The board is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; OPEGA was not asked to 
conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested 
reauthorizing legislation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MD Labor advises that the extension of the board has a meaningful 
impact on small businesses in the State, as any licensees must contiue to adhere to board 
regulations. DLS disagrees that the bill has a meaningful impact and notes that it only 
extends existing requirements. Thus, the bill has no additional impact on licensees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 261 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 63/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Board of Public Accountancy - Sunset Extension and Report 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 63 
 
PREPARED BY: Christopher Dorsey 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
    x    WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3