START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 19 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 19 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Nursing - Loan Repayment, Education, and Sunset 
Extension (Building Opportunities for Nurses Act of 2025) 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Nursing (MBON) 
by five years to July 1, 2030. The Secretary of Health continues to have authority over 
MBON infrastructure operations, but MBON special funds may be used to cover those 
costs. The bill expands eligibility to additional nurses and nursing support staff under the 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program (MLARP) for Nurses and Nursing Support 
Staff. The bill alters education requirements for licensure, adds an exception for licensure 
by endorsement, and repeals provisions regarding nursing assistant training programs. The 
bill delays the date by which (1) a certified nursing assistant (CNA) must obtain 
certification as a CNA-I or CNA-II to April 1, 2026, and (2) MBON must notify individuals 
of the licensure requirements and update regulations to January 1, 2026; it also conforms 
related definitions. The termination dates for specified preceptorship income tax credit 
programs are extended to June 30, 2030. The bill generally takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBON special fund expenditures increase by approximately $440,000 in 
FY 2025, as discussed below. General fund revenues decrease by as much as $100,000 
annually from FY 2027 through 2030, while the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase by, at most, $100,000 in FY 2026 and 
$300,000 annually thereafter through FY 2030 for extension of specified preceptorship 
income tax credit programs, as discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
($0.1) 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0.1 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
SF Expenditure 
$0.4 
$0.1 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
Net Effect 
($0.4) 
($0.1) 
($0.2) 
($0.2) 
($0.2)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 19/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Authority Over Infrastructure Operations 
 
Chapters 222 and 223 of 2023 extended the termination date for MBON to July 1, 2025, 
and granted the Secretary of Health authority over the infrastructure operations of MBON 
through June 30, 2025. The Secretary may employ staff for the board in accordance with 
the State budget, define the duties of its staff, and designate a staff member who is a 
registered nurse (RN) as the board’s executive director. Chapter 855 of 2024 repeals the 
requirement that the executive director be an RN, effective July 1, 2025, or the date on 
which Chapters 222 and 223 terminate.  
 
Pursuant to Chapters 222 and 223, the Secretary may set the compensation of a board 
employee whose position is unique to the board, requires specific skills or experience to 
perform the duties of the position, and does not require the employee to perform functions 
that are comparable to functions performed in other units of the Executive Branch. The 
Secretary of Budget and Management, in consultation with the Secretary of Health, must 
determine the positions for which the Secretary may set compensation. Special funds from 
the Board of Nursing Fund may not be used to pay for infrastructure operations while the 
Secretary retains authority.  
 
Under the bill, the Secretary’s authority over MBON infrastructure operations (including 
the authority to designate a staff member who is an RN as the board’s executive director) 
is extended by five years through June 30, 2030, after which authority reverts to MBON 
(concurrent with the termination date for the board under the bill). The bill repeals the 
prohibition on the Board of Nursing Fund being used to pay for infrastructure operations 
while the Secretary retains authority. 
 
Registered Nurse Licensure Requirements 
 
Under current law, an individual must be licensed by MBON to practice registered nursing 
in the State, with specified exceptions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 19/ Page 3 
Under the bill, an applicant for an RN license must satisfactorily complete and meet all 
requirements for a diploma or degree from (1) an entry-level registered nursing education 
program approved by MBON or (2) an entry-level registered nursing program in any other 
state or country that the board finds substantially equivalent to the education program in 
the State at the time of the applicant’s graduation. “Entry-level registered nursing education 
program” means an RN program that is the initial entry point for formal RN education that, 
on successful completion, qualifies an individual with no prior registered nursing education 
to obtain an RN license. “Entry-level registered nursing education program” does not 
include degree completion programs, as specified.  
 
Licensure by Endorsement 
 
Under current law, MBON may issue a license by endorsement and waive any appropriate 
examination requirement for an applicant who has an active unencumbered RN or licensed 
practical nurse (LPN) license in any other state or country if the applicant meets specified 
requirements. An applicant must provide adequate evidence that, at the time the applicant 
graduated from a nursing education program approved in the other state or country, the 
applicant met the educational qualifications required by the laws of Maryland.  
 
Under the bill, the applicant must provide evidence that, at the time the applicant graduated, 
the program was substantially equivalent to the education program approved in Maryland. 
If an applicant for licensure as an RN by endorsement cannot provide this evidence, the 
applicant may still qualify for licensure by endorsement if the applicant has:   
 
• 
completed satisfactorily and met all requirements for an associate or a baccalaureate 
degree in registered nursing from a college or university that, at the time of the 
applicant’s graduation, is (1) accredited by a national or regional nursing 
accreditation agency recognized by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of 
Education or the Council for Higher Education Accreditation and (2) approved by 
MBON or an applicable state regulator in the state in which the program is located; 
and 
• 
completed a minimum number of direct patient care practice hours as required by 
regulations adopted by MBON.  
 
Certified Nursing Assistants 
 
Chapters 818 and 819 of 2024 require a CNA to obtain certification as a CNA-I or CNA-II. 
An individual who has met the requirements for a CNA credential by October 1, 2025, 
must be certified as a CNA-I. Beginning October 1, 2025, a CNA-II may be certified as a 
CNA-I by submitting an application to MBON and providing satisfactory evidence of 
(1) successful completion of an approved nursing assistant training program and 
(2) passing a nursing assistant competency evaluation. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 19/ Page 4 
The bill delays the date by which a CNA must be certified as a CNA-I or CNA-II to 
April 1, 2026.  
 
Chapters 818 and 819 require, by June 1, 2025, MBON to (1) notify individuals with a 
nursing assistant certification of the licensure requirements and (2) update regulations in 
consultation with the Office of Health Care Quality. 
 
The bill delays these requirements to January 1, 2026. 
 
The bill also alters the definition of (1) CNA-I to include a CNA who was certified as a 
geriatric nursing assistant on March 31, 2026 (rather than September 30, 2025), and 
(2) CNA-II to mean, among other things, a CNA who, on March 31, 2026 (rather than  
September 30, 2025), was certified as a CNA and was not authorized to practice in a 
nursing facility or skilled nursing facility. 
 
Certified Nursing Assistant Training Programs 
 
Under current law, a nursing assistant training program may continue to operate during the 
MBON approval process. The curriculum content for an approved nursing assistant 
training program must include, among other things, content that meets all specified federal 
requirements and all basic skills required of a nursing assistant, regardless of the setting of 
the practice. MBON, in conjunction with the Maryland Higher Education Commission, 
must approve each nursing assistant training program prior to its implementation and 
periodically survey all programs in the State.  
 
The bill removes the requirement that MBON approve the use of a nursing assistant 
training site by a nursing assistant training program within 45 days after the training 
program applies for approval if the training program has previously been approved to use 
the training site by the board. The bill also repeals the authorization for a nursing assistant 
training program to operate during the approval process, effective April 1, 2026 (or the 
date on which Chapters 818 and 819 take effect).  
 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
Chapter 314 of 2022 established MLARP for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff and the 
associated MLARP for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff Fund to assist in the repayment 
of education loans owed by a nurse or nursing support staff who (1) practices in an eligible 
field of employment or (2) meets any other requirements established by MDH. The Act 
also required MDH to convene a stakeholder workgroup to examine how the State can 
implement a program to further incentivize nursing and nursing support staff students to 
practice in professional shortage areas and medically underserved areas in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 19/ Page 5 
Under the bill, “eligible field of employment” is expanded to include, in addition to 
specified employment by a nonprofit entity, for-profit employment in an area of the State 
identified by MDH as having a health care workforce shortage or public health need. 
 
Subject to the availability of money in the fund, the bill authorizes MDH to assist in the 
repayment of an education loan owed by a nurse or nursing support staff who (1) practices 
a medical specialty that has been identified by MDH as being in shortage in the geographic 
area of the State where the nurse practices and (2) commits to practicing in the area for a 
period of time determined by MDH. MDH must prioritize funding for the repayment of 
education loans in the following order:  (1) nurses or nursing support staff practicing in an 
eligible field of employment; (2) nurses or nursing support staff practicing in primary care 
in a geographic area where MDH has identified a shortage of nurses or nursing support 
staff; and (3) nurses or nursing support staff practicing in a medical specialty other than 
primary care in a geographic area where MDH has identified a shortage of that specialty. 
 
Preceptorship Income Tax Credits 
 
Nurse Practitioner Preceptorship Income Tax Credit:  Chapters 385 and 386 of 2016 
established the nurse practitioner preceptorship tax credit. A $15 fee for the renewal of an 
advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) certificate must be distributed to the Nurse 
Practitioner Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund, which is intended to offset the costs of the tax 
credit. To qualify for the tax credit, a licensed nurse practitioner must serve without 
compensation as a preceptor in a preceptorship program approved by MBON and work 
(1) at least three rotations with each rotation consisting of 100 hours of community-based 
clinical training and (2) in an area identified as having a health care workforce shortage. 
MDH must issue a credit certificate of $1,000 for each eligible student rotation for which 
the applicant served as a nurse practitioner preceptor without compensation, not to exceed 
$10,000 per applicant. Tax credit applications are approved on a first-come, first-served 
basis until the maximum limit is reached; each year, MDH may issue the lesser of $100,000 
in tax credit certificates or the total amount of money in the fund. If the aggregate amount 
of tax credit certificates issued in a year is less than $100,000, the excess amount may be 
issued in the next taxable year. The credit terminates June 30, 2026.  
 
Licensed Physician Preceptorship Income Tax Credit:  Chapters 385 and 386 also 
established the licensed physician preceptorship tax credit. In each year, up to $100,000 in 
unspent Health Personnel Shortage Incentive Grant (HPSIG) funds may be transferred or 
reverted to the general fund to offset the costs of the physician preceptorship tax credit. To 
qualify for the tax credit, a licensed physician must serve without compensation as a 
preceptor in a preceptorship program authorized by an accredited medical school in the 
State and work (1) at least three rotations with each rotation consisting of at least 100 hours 
of community-based clinical training and (2) in an area identified as having a health care 
workforce shortage. MDH must issue a credit certificate of $1,000 for each eligible student 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 19/ Page 6 
rotation for which the applicant served as a physician preceptor without compensation, not 
to exceed $10,000 per applicant. Tax credit applications are approved on a first-come, 
first-served basis until the maximum limit is reached; each year, MDH may issue up to 
$100,000 in physician preceptorship credits. If the aggregate amount of tax credit 
certificates issued in a year is less than $100,000, the excess amount may be issued in the 
next taxable year. The credit terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
Physician Assistant Preceptor Income Tax Credit:  Chapters 153 and 154 of 2021 
established the physician assistant preceptorship tax credit. A $15 fee for the renewal of a 
physician assistant license must be distributed to the Physician Assistant Preceptorship Tax 
Credit Fund, which is intended to offset the costs of the tax credit. To qualify for the tax 
credit, a licensed physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner must serve without 
compensation as a physician assistant preceptor in a preceptorship program approved by 
MDH and work (1) at least three rotations with each rotation consisting of 100 hours of 
community-based clinical training and (2) in an area identified as having a health care 
workforce shortage. MDH must issue a credit certificate of $1,000 for each eligible student 
rotation for which the applicant served as a physician assistant preceptor without 
compensation, not to exceed $10,000 per applicant. Tax credit applications are approved 
on a first-come, first-served basis until the maximum limit is reached; each year, MDH 
may issue the lesser of $100,000 in tax credit certificates or the total amount of money in 
the Physician Assistant Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund. If the aggregate amount of tax 
credit certificates issued in a year is less than $100,000, the excess amount may be issued 
in the next taxable year. The credit terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
The bill extends the termination date of the nurse practitioner, physician, and physician 
assistant preceptorship income tax credit programs by four years to June 30, 2030. The bill 
also reduces the number of required hours for each rotation in one preceptorship income 
tax credit program (for nurse practitioners) from 100 to 90.  
 
Licensed Practical Nurse and Registered Nurse Preceptorship Income Tax Credit:  
Chapter 675 of 2022 established an LPN and RN preceptorship income tax credit and fund. 
The fund consists of specified federal COVID-19 pandemic relief funding, money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund, and any other money accepted for the benefit 
of the fund. To qualify for the tax credit, an LPN, APRN, or RN must serve without 
compensation as a preceptor in a preceptorship program approved by MBON and work 
(1) at least three rotations with each rotation consisting of 100 hours of community-based 
clinical training and (2) in an area identified as having a health care workforce shortage. 
MDH must issue a credit certificate of $1,000 for each eligible student rotation for which 
the applicant served as a preceptor without compensation, not to exceed $10,000 per 
applicant for any taxable year. Tax credit applications are approved on a first-come, 
first-served basis until the maximum authorized credits are awarded; each year, MDH may 
issue the lesser of $100,000 in tax credit certificates or the total amount of money in the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 19/ Page 7 
fund. If the aggregate amount of tax credit certificates issued in a year is less than $100,000, 
the excess amount may be issued in the next taxable year. The LPN and RN preceptorship 
income tax credit is applicable for tax years 2022 through 2024 and terminates 
June 30, 2025.  
 
The bill extends the credit by five years, with a termination date of June 30, 2030, making 
the credit applicable to tax years 2025 through 2029. It also reduces the number of required 
hours for each rotation in the preceptorship income tax credit program from 100 to 90. 
 
Background:   
 
Registered Nursing Licensure Requirements 
 
The bill authorizes an applicant for an RN license to satisfactorily complete and meet all 
requirements for a diploma or degree from specified entry-level registered nursing 
education programs. MDH advises that this authorization conforms with the directive to 
address the nursing workforce shortage in the State and removes barriers to RN licensure.  
 
Certified Nursing Assistant Training Programs 
 
MDH advises that current statutory requirements for the approval of a nursing assistant 
training site are inconsistent with MBON’s current reapproval process. Additionally, 
MDH advises that current law may conflict with federal regulations (42 CFR 481.151(e)) 
that prohibit a state from approving a nurse aide training and competency evaluation 
program for a period longer than two years. Thus, removing the requirement to approve 
the use of a nursing assistant training site if the training program has previously been 
approved by the board and authorization for a nursing assistant training program to operate 
during the approval process removes any such conflicts.  
 
MDH advises that delaying the dates by which a CNA must obtain certification as a CNA-I 
or CNA-II and MBON must notify individuals of the licensure requirements and update 
regulations better aligns with the current timeline for completing CNA training programs.  
 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff 
 
MDH advises that the bill’s expansion of program eligibility for nurses and nursing support 
staff with for-profit employment and those practicing medical specialties in an area of the 
State identified as having a health care workforce shortage or public health need eliminates 
a barrier that excludes nursing professionals who serve similar populations in public or 
nonprofit counterparts and those practicing medical specialties other than primary care 
from the program. According to MDH, these changes better align the program with 
State priorities.  

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 19/ Page 8 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
MBON is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under the Maryland Program Evaluation 
Act, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. 
However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by 
legislation. On January 3, 2023, the Executive Director of DLS directed OPEGA to conduct 
a performance evaluation of MBON.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  With the reauthorization, MBON special fund revenues and 
expenditures are maintained through fiscal 2030. However, certain provisions have 
fiscal impacts, as discussed below. 
 
Authority Over Infrastructure Operations 
 
MBON is special funded; accordingly, typically, all board operations are paid with 
special funds generated through fee revenues. However, under current law, costs associated 
with MBON infrastructure operations shifted to MDH in fiscal 2023, with that shift 
continuing through the entirety of fiscal 2025 (June 30, 2025). More specifically, personnel 
expenditures related to MBON’s Executive, Operations (including information technology, 
fiscal, and human resources), and Legal divisions transferred to the Secretary’s control and 
are general funded through fiscal 2025. MDH also assumed payment of fixed infrastructure 
costs, including rent, utilities, office supplies, and printing. Expenditures related to 
MBON’s Accountability (complaints, investigations, discipline, and compliance), Exams 
and Education, and Licensure and Certification divisions have remained under the board’s 
control and continue to be special funded. 
 
This cost shift has benefitted the board. In fiscal 2022, the MBON fund balance was 
projected to be completely depleted by the end of fiscal 2024. However, as infrastructure 
operations have been funded by MDH general funds since fiscal 2023, MBON’s closing 
fund balance at the end of fiscal 2024 was rebuilt to approximately $1.8 million. 
 
Under the bill, while authority over infrastructure operations is retained by the Secretary 
for another five years, the costs associated with infrastructure operations return to MBON 
beginning June 1, 2025 (the final month in fiscal 2025).  
 
In fiscal 2024, MDH reimbursed approximately $5.2 million to MBON for infrastructure 
operations costs, and the fiscal 2025 working appropriation is $8.0 million. However, 
MDH estimates that infrastructure operations costs total approximately $5.3 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2026. Therefore, since the bill requires MBON to resume 
responsibility for its infrastructure operations costs beginning June 1, 2025, MBON special 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 19/ Page 9 
fund expenditures increase by approximately $440,000 for one month in fiscal 2025. 
Annually thereafter, the $5.3 million in infrastructure operations costs are covered by 
special funds, as they would be under current law (assuming reauthorization of the board).  
 
Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $1.0 million for the 
MLARP for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff Fund. MDH advises that existing staff 
resources are sufficient to meet the program eligibility as expanded under the bill.  
 
Preceptorship Income Tax Credits 
 
The bill allows the nurse income tax credit to be claimed for tax years 2025 through 2029; 
it also allows the nurse practitioner, physician, and physician assistant preceptorship 
income tax credits to be claimed for tax years 2026 through 2029. Moreover, it may expand 
eligibility for two of the income tax credits by reducing the required hours for each rotation. 
 
Each year, MDH may issue the lesser of $100,000 in tax credit certificates or the total 
amount of money in the Nurse Practitioner Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund, the LPN and 
RN Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund, and the Physician Assistant Preceptorship Tax Credit 
Fund. Additionally, each year, MDH may issue up to $100,000 in physician preceptorship 
credits. 
 
Nurse Preceptorship:  Although discretionary, this analysis assumes funding is provided 
for the LPN and RN Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund for each year of the extension under 
the bill. Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by, at most, $100,000 
annually to capitalize the LPN and RN Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund from fiscal 2026 
through 2030, with corresponding increases in revenues to and expenditures from that 
special fund.  
 
Nurse Practitioner, Physician Assistant, and Physician Preceptorships:  As all three of the 
other tax credit extensions apply beginning in fiscal 2027, this analysis assumes that any 
use of them in fiscal 2026 is not due to this bill – despite the possible expansion due to 
reduced hours for nurse practitioner rotations.  
 
Instead, the $15 fees assessed at APRN renewal and at physician assistant renewal are 
assumed to provide as much as $100,000 in ongoing funding for both the Nurse Practitioner 
Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund and the Physician Assistant Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund 
from fiscal 2027 through 2030. Accordingly, special fund revenues and expenditures for 
each of the two funds are assumed to increase by as much as $100,000 annually from 
fiscal 2027 through 2030. DLS notes that, given the number of physician assistant licenses 
renewed each year, it is unlikely that the fee revenue is sufficient to provide that level of 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 19/ Page 10 
funding for tax credit certificates for physician assistant preceptorships. Nevertheless, as 
MDH may only issue the lesser of $100,000 in tax credit certificates or the total amount of 
money in the Physician Assistant Preceptorship Tax Credit Fund, there is no general fund 
capitalization to make up the difference.  
 
Finally, general fund revenues decrease by as much as $100,000 annually from fiscal 2026 
through 2030 due to the extension of the tax credit for physician preceptorships. The impact 
on the general fund is reduced to the extent that HPSIG is used to offset the costs of these 
tax credits. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office reports that the tax credit extensions can be implemented with 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 216 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 20, 2025 
Enrolled - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - December 2, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 19/ Page 11 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Health Occupations - Nursing - Loan Repayment, Education, and Sunset 
Extension (Building Opportunities for Nurses Act of 2025) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 19 
  
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Health/Health Occupations Boards 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 11