START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 9 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 9 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Safety - Food System Resiliency Council - Definitions and Reports 
 
 
This bill alters existing responsibilities of the Food System Resiliency Council and repeals 
outdated one-time reporting requirements, including a previously submitted one-time 
strategic plan. Under the bill, the council must develop equity and sustainability policy 
recommendations to increase the long-term resiliency of the food system that (1) address 
and eliminate limited food options and food scarcity that exist in “healthy food priority 
areas” (rather than food deserts, as specified under current law); (2) reduce “wasted food,” 
as defined under the bill (rather than the current statutory reference to food waste); and 
(3) address the production and procurement of food (previously required as part of the 
one-time strategic plan). The bill also requires the council to include in its annual report 
appropriate policy and legislative changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) can 
implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Healthy food priority areas” means predominantly lower-income areas 
that have limited access to retail outlets that sell affordable, healthy foods. “Wasted food” 
means food not used for its intended purpose that is managed in a variety of ways, including 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 9/ Page 2 
(1) donations to feed people; (2) the creation of animal feed; (3) composting; (4) anaerobic 
digestion; or (5) disposal in landfills or combustion facilities. 
 
Current Law:  Established by Chapters 724 and 725 of 2021, the Maryland Food System 
Resiliency Council must meet regularly for a period of at least two years to address food 
insecurity in the State. Staffed by MDEM, the council must pursue specified goals, 
including developing (by November 1, 2021) equity and sustainability policy 
recommendations to increase the long-term resiliency of the food system, including 
(1) addressing and eliminating racial inequities in the food system; (2) addressing and 
eliminating diet-related public health disparities; (3) addressing and eliminating food 
deserts; and (4) reducing food waste, increasing recycling, and encouraging other relevant 
environmental impacts. 
 
By November 1, 2021, the council was required to develop a strategic plan to increase the 
production and procurement of Maryland certified food, including (1) increasing the 
quality and quantity of production, as well as aggregation, marketing, and distribution of 
local food in urban, suburban, and rural settings; (2) increasing procurement of local food 
through schools, universities, and other institutions; (3) creating additional market 
opportunities for Maryland food businesses; and (4) expanding access to small scale 
manufacturing and food production infrastructure. By November 1, 2021, the council was 
required to submit an interim report to the General Assembly on its key findings and 
activities. By November 1, 2022, the council was required to submit a report to the 
General Assembly on its recommendations for a long-term structure for a statewide food 
policy council, including providing recommendations on (1) appropriate policy and 
legislative changes; (2) potential ways to restructure the council, as specified; and (3) any 
other recommendations of the council. 
 
By November 1, 2023, and each year thereafter, the council must submit an annual report 
to the General Assembly on its key findings and activities. Among other things, the 
council’s fourth annual report includes a discussion on wasted food. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Department 
of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 9/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3