START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 54 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 54 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission – User Fee Assessment – Repeal of 
Sunset 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the June 30, 2025 termination date on the formula used to 
determine the maximum amount of user fees that may be assessed by the Health Services 
Cost Review Commission (HSCRC). Thus, the user fee cap will continue to be based on 
0.1% of budgeted hospital revenue or the largest cap amount determined during the 
immediately preceding five fiscal years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  HSCRC special fund revenues increase by as much as $1.6 million in 
FY 2026 to reflect higher user fees compared with current law; HSCRC special fund 
expenditures likely increase accordingly. Medicaid expenditures increase by up to 
$315,400 in FY 2026 and $963,300 in FY 2030 (60% federal funds, 40% general funds) 
due to increased hospital rates associated with the higher user fees. Federal fund revenues 
increase correspondingly. 
  
($ in Millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$1.6 
$2.3 
$3.1 
$4.0 
$4.8 
FF Revenue 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.4 
$0.5 
$0.6 
GF Expenditure 
$0.1 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.4 
SF Expenditure 
$1.6 
$2.3 
$3.1 
$4.0 
$4.8 
FF Expenditure 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.4 
$0.5 
$0.6 
Net Effect 
($0.1) 
($0.2) 
($0.3) 
($0.3) 
($0.4) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 54/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH 
established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, provide access 
to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in the State. HSCRC 
is responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care (TCOC) Model, the successor to 
the Maryland All Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based 
revenues (commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
User Fee Assessment 
 
HSCRC’s special fund consists of user fees assessed on hospitals and related institutions 
whose rates have been approved by the commission. User fees must be used exclusively to 
cover the actual documented direct costs of fulfilling the statutory and regulatory duties of 
HSCRC, including administrative costs incurred by MDH on behalf of the commission. 
 
HSCRC must assess user fees for each facility equal to the sum of (1) the amount equal to 
one-half of the total user fees times the ratio of admissions of the facility to total admissions 
of all facilities and (2) the amount equal to one-half of the total user fees times the ratio of 
operating revenue of each facility to total gross operating revenues of all facilities. HSCRC 
must assess each facility by June 30 each year. 
 
Chapter 582 of 2011 increased HSCRC’s user fee cap from $5.5 million to $7.0 million, 
Chapter 263 of 2014 increased the cap from $7.0 million to $12.0 million, and the Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2017 increased the cap from $12.0 million to 
$16.0 million. 
 
Chapters 696 and 697 of 2022 altered the cap from $16.0 million to the greater of (1) 0.1% 
of the immediately preceding fiscal year’s budgeted, regulated, gross hospital revenue or 
(2) the largest cap amount determined during the immediately preceding five fiscal years. 
This formula applies to fiscal 2023 through 2025 and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, the total user fees assessed by HSCRC may not exceed the 
average of the amounts determined for fiscal 2023, 2024, and 2025, which results in a 
reduced user fee cap compared with the provisions of Chapters 696 and 697. 
 
Advancing All-Payer Health Equity Approaches and Development Model 
 
The federal Advancing All-Payer Health Equity Approaches and Development (AHEAD) 
Model is an option that would allow Maryland to continue statewide efforts to improve 
health care quality and control costs under the TCOC Model. AHEAD seeks to drive state 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 54/ Page 3 
and regional health care transformation and multi-payer alignment, with the goal of 
improving the total health of a state population and lowering costs across all payers. 
 
On November 1, 2024, Governor Wes Moore and the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) entered into an agreement for the State to participate in the 
AHEAD Model, following which, MDH and HSCRC successfully applied to participate. 
The new model will enable Maryland to build on its unique all-payer hospital rate setting 
system, expanding its focus on primary care, population health, and health equity. 
Implementation of the AHEAD Model is set to begin January 1, 2026. The Maryland 
Commission on Health Equity serves as the AHEAD Model governance body for the State, 
while HSCRC will coordinate implementation in conjunction with CMS. 
 
HSCRC advises that the user fee assessment formula established by Chapters 696 and 697 
ensures that the commission has adequate resources to meet its statutory and regulatory 
duties, including increased responsibilities for implementation of the AHEAD Model. In 
the absence of the bill, HSCRC’s user fee cap is reduced and results in a budget shortfall 
beginning in fiscal 2026, as discussed below. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Impact on Special Fund Revenues and Expenditures 
 
Absent the bill, beginning in fiscal 2026, the total user fees that may be assessed by HSCRC 
may not exceed the average of the amounts determined for fiscal 2023 ($19.6 million), 
fiscal 2024 ($20.3 million), and fiscal 2025 ($21.2 million). Thus, total user fees (and 
subsequently, HSCRC special fund revenues) cannot exceed $20.4 million annually.  
 
HSCRC advises that this cap will not be sufficient to address expenditures likely resulting 
from implementation of the AHEAD Model. For fiscal 2026, HSCRC estimates that 
special fund expenditures will be $21.8 million (approximately $1.4 million more than the 
cap). 
 
Under the bill, HSCRC would retain the current formula that sets the user fee assessment 
as the greater of 0.1% of budgeted hospital revenue or the largest cap amount determined 
during the immediately preceding five fiscal years. HSCRC estimates that, under the 
formula, special fund revenues would be $22.0 million in fiscal 2026, $22.7 million in 
fiscal 2027, $23.5 million in fiscal 2028, $24.3 million in fiscal 2029, and $25.2 million in 
fiscal 2030. 
 
Based on these projections, under the bill, HSCRC special fund revenues increase by 
approximately $1.6 million in fiscal 2026 (and by up to $4.8 million in fiscal 2030) to 
reflect the total fees that may be assessed above the $20.4 million revenue cap under current 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 54/ Page 4 
law. HSCRC special fund expenditures increase accordingly. HSCRC advises that special 
fund expenditures are not anticipated to exceed special fund revenues under this scenario, 
thus avoiding a budget deficit for the commission. 
 
Impact on Medicaid 
 
Medicaid expenditures increase by as much as $315,409 in fiscal 2026, increasing to 
$963,267 in fiscal 2030 (60% federal funds, 40% general funds) due to increased hospital 
rates associated with the higher user fee assessment. Medicaid expenditures account for 
20% of total hospital revenues annually, and increased Medicaid expenditures are therefore 
estimated to equal 20% of the special fund revenues in excess of the current user fee cap 
of $20.4 million. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly to reflect federal matching 
funds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 917 and HB 510 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 229 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 54/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Health Services Cost Review Commission - User Fee Assessment - 
Repeal of Sunset 
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB054 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Health Services Cost Review Commission  
 
 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.   
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5