START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 11 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 11 
(Delegate Sample-Hughes, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Access to Nonparticipating Providers - Referrals, Additional 
Assistance, and Coverage 
 
 
This bill alters and expands existing requirements on health insurance carriers regarding 
referral procedures for nonparticipating specialists and nonphysician specialists. The bill 
also repeals the termination date for Chapters 271 and 272 of 2022. The bill’s provisions 
repealing the termination date take effect June 1, 2025; provisions regarding referral 
procedures take effect January 1, 2026, and apply to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Minimal special fund revenue increase for the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) in FY 2026 from the $125 rate and  
form filing fee. Any additional workload on MIA can likely be handled within existing 
budgeted resources. No impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare 
Benefits Program. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Provider Requirements Regarding Referrals to Nonparticipating Specialists 
 
Under current law, each carrier must establish and implement a procedure by which a 
member may request a referral to a specialist or nonphysician specialist that is not part of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 11/ Page 2 
the carrier’s provider panel if the member is diagnosed with a condition or disease that 
requires specialized health care services or medical care. The procedure must provide for 
a referral if the carrier does not have a specialist or nonphysician specialist with the 
professional training and expertise to treat or provide health care services for the condition 
in its provider panel or cannot provide reasonable access to such a specialist without 
unreasonable delay or travel. (Code of Maryland Regulations 31.10.44.05 and .06 specify 
travel distance standards by provider type and appointment waiting time standards, 
respectively.) 
 
The bill specifies that a referral must also be made if the member is seeking mental health 
or substance use disorder (SUD) care and the carrier cannot provide reasonable access to a 
specialist or nonphysician specialist within the reasonable appointment waiting time and 
travel distance standards established in regulation for mental health and SUD services. The 
bill specifies that the current law “without unreasonable delay or travel” standard includes 
within the reasonable appointment waiting time and travel distance standards established 
in regulation for mental health and SUD services. 
 
The bill further specifies that if a carrier approves a member’s request for a referral, the 
carrier may not require utilization review other than what would be required if the covered 
benefit were provided by a provider on the carrier's provider panel. 
 
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services 
 
Under Chapters 271 and 272, a carrier must ensure that mental health and SUD services 
provided by a nonparticipating specialist or nonphysician specialist to which a member is 
referred are provided at no greater cost to the covered individual than if the services were 
provided by a participating provider. Each carrier must inform members of the procedure 
to request a referral to a specialist or nonphysician specialist. The Consumer Education and 
Advocacy Program must provide public education to inform consumers of such provisions. 
Chapters 271 and 272 also expanded the definition of “nonphysician specialist” to include 
a health care provider that is licensed as a behavioral health program. Chapters 271 and 
272 terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
The bill repeals the termination date of Chapters 271 and 272 and specifies that a carrier 
must ensure that the mental health and SUD services are provided for the duration of the 
treatment plan at no greater cost to the covered individual than if the services were 
provided by a participating provider. 
 
Furthermore, under the bill, if a member cannot access mental health or SUD services 
through the referral procedure, a carrier must provide additional assistance to the member 
in identifying and arranging coverage of mental health or SUD services by a 
nonparticipating specialist or nonphysician specialist. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 11/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care practitioners or practices that are 
nonparticipating providers (including those licensed as a behavioral health program) may 
serve additional patients under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 902 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3