START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 32 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 32 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance and Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Forensic Review Board - Established 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to establish a forensic review 
board at each facility that has persons committed as not criminally responsible (NCR). The 
boards are responsible for reviewing and determining whether to recommend to the court 
that a committed person is eligible for discharge or conditional release, with or without 
proposed conditions. A board may make recommendations relating to the release or 
rehabilitation of a committed person. MDH must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources, as discussed 
below. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Each board must consist of an odd number of licensed health care 
providers. At least once a year, each board must review each committed person’s eligibility 
for release, as specified. If the committed person’s treatment team determines the person 
is eligible for discharge or conditional release before the scheduled annual review, the team 
must notify the board in writing of the need for a release eligibility review; the board must 
conduct a review within 30 days after receiving such notice. Following a review, a board 
must determine whether to recommend to the court that a committed person is eligible for 
discharge or conditional release, with or without proposed conditions. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 32/ Page 2 
The board must notify the committed person and the person’s counsel of record before it 
holds a meeting concerning the committed person and after the board issues a 
recommendation to the court, as specified. When making a recommendation, a forensic 
review board must consider a written statement offered by the committed person to the 
board. Counsel for any party may not attend forensic review board meetings, but a 
committed person may appoint an “authorized agent” to attend the portion of the board’s 
meeting concerning the committed person. An “authorized agent” means an individual who 
is not counsel for the committed person and who is selected by the committed person to 
represent the person’s interests in all board matters. An authorized agent may be a social 
worker or a nonlegal representative employed by the office of the attorney representing the 
committed person. An authorized agent may only give and hear arguments. 
 
A forensic review board must maintain a written record containing (1) its recommendations 
and findings (including the reason for the board’s recommendation and a plan for 
overcoming any barriers to release) and (2) if applicable, the written request for an 
eligibility review by the committed person’s treatment team and the treatment team’s 
written statement of the clinical reasons behind its determination that a committed person 
is eligible for discharge or conditional release.  
 
The board’s written record must be included in the committed person’s medical record, 
and a document or record produced by a board must be provided on request to the 
committed person, counsel for that person, the court, the State’s Attorney, or MDH.  
 
The committed person’s treatment team must implement any recommendations from the 
board and make arrangements for necessary treatment to rehabilitate the committed person, 
as specified. A forensic review board may appoint a representative to testify as to MDH’s 
position at a release hearing. If a forensic review board takes a position that is contrary to 
the position of the committed person’s treatment team, the board’s representative may not 
be a part of the committed person’s treatment team. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Designated Health Facility and Committed Persons 
 
Under applicable statute, a “designated health facility” means a facility owned and operated 
by MDH, a State forensic residential center, or a hospital or private residential facility 
under contract with MDH to house and treat individuals found to be incompetent to stand 
trial or NCR. Section 3-101 of the Criminal Procedure Article defines a “committed 
person” as a person committed to MDH as NCR under the test for criminal responsibility.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 32/ Page 3 
Commitment to Facility After Finding of Not Criminally Responsible 
 
After a verdict of NCR, a court ordinarily is required to order the defendant committed to 
a facility designated by MDH for appropriate care or treatment. MDH is required to admit 
the defendant to a designated facility as soon as possible but no later than 10 business days 
after it receives the order of commitment. While commitment to a facility is typically 
required, the court may release a defendant after a verdict of NCR if (1) MDH has issued 
an evaluation report within 90 days prior to the verdict stating that the defendant would not 
be a danger if released, with or without conditions and (2) the State’s Attorney and the 
defendant agree to the release and any conditions the court chooses to impose.  
 
Release After Commitment of Defendants Found to Be Not Criminally Responsible 
 
A committed defendant is eligible for release only if the defendant proves by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant will not be a danger to self or to the 
person or property of others due to a mental disorder or intellectual disability if released 
from commitment with conditions (conditional release) or without conditions (discharge). 
A detailed administrative and judicial process applies to release decisions. Conditional 
release can be for a term of up to five years, with options to extend for up to five years at 
a time. There is no limit on the number of extensions of conditional release. The 
Community Forensic Aftercare Program (CFAP) within MDH monitors all cases of 
individuals on conditional release. The court must notify the Criminal Justice Information 
System Central Repository whenever it orders conditional release or discharge of a 
committed person. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that all the State forensic hospitals have their own 
forensic review boards; CFAP has a separate forensic review board. MDH further advises 
it can comply with the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 43 (Senator Augustine) - Finance and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Maryland Department of Health; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 32/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4