START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 15 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 15 
(Delegates Qi and Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations and Associations - Limited Worker Cooperative Associations - 
Authorization (Maryland Limited Worker Cooperative Association Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Limited Worker Cooperative Association Act, which 
generally provides for the formation, operation, and dissolution of a limited worker 
cooperative association (LWCA). An LWCA is a Maryland Limited Liability Company 
(LLC) that elects to be an LWCA in accordance with the bill’s provisions. A presently 
existing obligation or contract right may not be impaired in any way by the bill. The bill 
takes effect October 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $278,400 in 
FY 2027 only for one-time programming costs at the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT). Potential minimal increase in filing fee revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
278,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($278,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 15/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Select Definitions 
 
“Collective worker cooperative” means an LWCA that has only one class of members 
consisting of worker members who manage all of the affairs of the association.  
 
“Investor member” means a member of an LWCA who is not required or permitted to 
conduct patronage with the association, in the member’s capacity as an investor member, 
in order to receive or retain the member’s interest in the association.  
 
“Patron member” means a member of an LWCA who is required or permitted to conduct 
patronage with the association.  
 
“Representative” means a person serving on the board of representatives of an LWCA.  
 
“Worker member” means a patron member of an LWCA who is a natural person and whose 
patronage consists of or includes labor contributed to or for the association.  
 
In General 
 
The bill creates a new subtitle within the Corporations and Associations Article (Maryland 
Limited Worker Cooperative Association Act). Its provisions do not affect any statute or 
rule of law (or create any implication that a contrary or different rule of law is or would 
be) applicable to an LLC that is not an LWCA.  
 
An LLC may elect to be an LWCA, and an LWCA may further elect to be a collective 
worker cooperative by including statements to that effect in the articles of organization. An 
LLC must clearly reference it is an LWCA by prominently indicating the fact on legal 
documents, as specified.  
 
Unless an LWCA has elected to be a collective worker cooperative, the articles of 
organization of an LWCA must include the names of those individuals who will serve as 
representatives until their successors are elected and qualify.  
 
Initial Organization 
 
After formation of an LWCA, if initial representatives are named in the articles of 
organization, they must hold an organizational meeting to adopt the cooperative agreement 
and carry out any other necessary business, as specified. If initial representatives are not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 15/ Page 3 
named in the articles of organization, the person who has caused the articles of organization 
to be executed and filed for record must designate the initial representatives and call a 
meeting to adopt an initial cooperative agreement and carry out any other necessary 
business, as specified. The bill includes additional provisions regarding the designation and 
service of the initial representatives.  
 
After formation of a collective worker cooperative, the initial worker members must hold 
an organizational meeting to adopt the cooperative agreement and conduct any other 
necessary business, as specified.  
 
Termination of Status 
 
An LWCA may terminate its status as an LWCA by amending its articles of organization 
to delete the statements required when the LLC made an election to be an LWCA. The 
termination is subject to the approval of two‐thirds of the voting power of worker members 
and two-thirds of all members entitled to vote.  
 
Cooperative Agreement 
 
Among other items, an LWCA cooperative agreement must include information related to:   
 
 
the capital structure of the LWCA; 
 
classes or other types of members’ interests, as specified; 
 
the method for admitting members; 
 
the transferability of a membership interest;  
 
the number and terms of representatives, as specified;  
 
contributions of members; and  
 
the election of the LWCA to be taxed as a partnership or corporation for federal and 
State income tax purposes, as specified.  
 
An LWCA cooperative agreement may include any other provision necessary to manage 
and regulate the affairs of the LWCA, as specified. The bill includes additional provisions 
regarding the effective date and impact of cooperative agreements.  
 
Membership, Assembly, Worker’s Compensation Insurance, and Voting Power 
 
An LWCA may include multiple classes of members whose rights and membership 
interests are determined by the cooperative agreement. To begin business, an LWCA must 
have at least three worker members, unless the sole member is an LWCA. A person 
becomes a member as provided in the articles of organization or cooperative agreement; as 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 15/ Page 4 
the result of a merger or a conversion, as specified; or with the consent of all worker 
members. 
 
An insurer that provides worker’s compensation insurance to members of an LWCA must 
calculate premiums for members who are covered employees, as specified. The Maryland 
Insurance Commissioner must enforce these provisions. An LWCA is not prohibited from 
acquiring other forms of insurance. 
 
Among numerous other provisions, the bill also (1) specifies limitations of membership; 
(2) addresses debt, obligation, or other liability of an LWCA, its members, and voting 
members; (3) establishes requirements for an annual meeting, or special meeting, of the 
assembly; and (4) specifies requirements related to the voting power of members.  
 
Board of Representatives 
 
An LWCA (other than a collective worker cooperative) must have a board of 
representatives consisting of at least three individuals. The board, or individuals delegated 
such duties, must manage the affairs of the LWCA, and the board may adopt policies and 
procedures that do not conflict with the articles of organization, cooperative agreement, or 
the bill’s provisions. An individual is not an agent of an LWCA solely by virtue of being a 
representative. Representatives must be elected for terms determined by the cooperative 
agreement.  
 
Additional Provisions 
 
Among other provisions, the bill also:   
 
 
allows an LWCA to dissolve if specified conditions are met;  
 
requires the last remaining member’s personal representative, guardian, successor, 
or assignee to continue the LLC and to be admitted as a member, if included in the 
cooperative agreement, as specified;  
 
allows a deceased member’s personal representative to exercise the rights of the 
deceased member, as specified;  
 
requires an LWCA to apportion and distribute its profits and losses (and net 
earnings), as specified;  
 
allows a foreign worker cooperative to register and do business in the State, subject 
to applicable statutory provisions in regard to foreign LLCs; and 
 
explicitly includes an LWCA and a collective worker cooperative in certain 
provisions of the Tax-General Article.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 15/ Page 5 
The bill also incorporates LWCAs in other provisions of the Corporations and Associations 
Article, including those related to the definition of a governing document and required 
filing fees. 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes five types of cooperatives (agricultural, consumer, 
electric, transportation, and housing) to do business in the State; these cooperatives are 
generally subject to the Maryland general corporation laws. For example, a consumer 
cooperative is a corporation (stock or nonstock) that is formed to engage in any lawful 
business to acquire, produce, manufacture, furnish, or distribute any goods and services on 
a cooperative basis for the mutual benefit of its members and patrons or the members and 
patrons of any member cooperative, or both. Any five or more adult individuals, or two or 
more entities operating on a cooperative basis, may incorporate as a consumer cooperative. 
Consumer cooperatives are governed by Title 5, Subtitle 5A of the Corporations and 
Associations Article.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $278,400 in fiscal 2027 only 
for one‐time programming costs at SDAT, reflecting the bill’s effective date of 
October 1, 2026. According to SDAT, the delayed effective date allows for planned 
programming changes at the agency to be completed prior to the bill’s implementation, 
thereby negating the need for higher vendor costs that would otherwise be necessary (to 
implement the bill earlier).  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses by 
allowing the formation of worker cooperatives.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 85 of 2024 and SB 870 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 144 (Senator M. Washington) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Insurance Administration; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 15/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 8, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6