START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 33 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 33 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Service and 
Civic Innovation) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation - Maryland Corps Program Service 
Year Option Pathways - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) alters provisions regarding reimbursement of Maryland Corps 
participants; (2) changes eligibility requirements for participants in the Maryland Corps 
Program; (3) expands the Department of Service and Civic Innovation’s (DSCI) flexibility 
in using Maryland Corps funds; (4) repeals the obsolete Executive Fellows Program within 
DSCI; and (5) makes other clarifying and conforming changes to DSCI’s statutory 
authority and responsibilities. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant decrease in general fund revenues and offsetting 
decrease in general fund expenditures due to fund transfers and diminished reversions, as 
discussed below. Potential minimal increase in special fund expenditures for 
Maryland Corps participants’ stipends, but only to the extent that local minimum wage 
rates exceed the State minimum wage in the future.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  DSCI has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 33/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Maryland Corps Program Reimbursements 
 
The Maryland Corps Program was established by Chapter 654 of 2016 and substantially 
restructured by Chapter 37 of 2022, but it received no funding and, thus, was not 
operational through fiscal 2022. Chapter 99 of 2023 again restructured the program, 
placing it within the jurisdiction of DSCI and establishing two pathways:  the Young Adult 
(YA) Service Year Option pathway and corresponding special fund and the Maryland 
Service Year (MSY) Option pathway and corresponding special fund. Although the 
two pathways share some features, they have slightly different purposes and eligibility 
requirements.  
 
Under current law, participants in both pathways must be paid at least $15 per hour or the 
State minimum wage, whichever is greater. Upon completion of at least nine months of 
service in either pathway, participants also earn a completion award of $6,000, payable 
either in cash or as a deposit into a tax-exempt Maryland 529 account for higher education 
expenses.  
 
The bill specifies that participants must be paid at least the applicable county or State 
minimum wage (whichever is greater) and repeals authorization for the completion award 
to be deposited in a Maryland 529 account (making it payable only in cash).  
 
Maryland Corps Eligibility Requirements 
 
Under current law, applicants for the YA pathway must be Maryland residents and within 
three years of graduation from high school or having obtained a similar level of education 
completion, as specified. The bill repeals the requirement that applicants be within 
three years of graduation from high school (but still requires a high school diploma or 
comparable education attainment) and adds a requirement that applicants must be at least 
age 18 and younger than age 25 at the start of their participation in the YA pathway.  
 
Under current law, applicants to the MSY pathway must be interested in performing public 
and community service in the State. DSCI must prioritize for participation in the 
MSY pathway applicants who are Maryland residents and historically underrepresented in 
higher education and employment, as specified. The bill repeals the requirement that 
applicants be interested in performing public and community service in the State and adds 
requirements that they be Maryland residents and at least age 18 at the start of their 
participation in the MSY pathway (and makes conforming changes).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 33/ Page 3 
Pathway Funds 
 
Under current law, the MSY Pathway Fund began receiving mandated appropriations in 
fiscal 2024, with appropriations of $15 million mandated for fiscal 2026 and $20 million 
mandated for each year beginning in fiscal 2027. Beginning in fiscal 2027, any unspent 
funds in either fund revert to the general fund. The YA Pathway Fund does not receive any 
mandated appropriation. With respect to stipends for participants, money in each fund may 
be used to pay stipends only for participants in the corresponding pathway. The bill allows 
money in both funds to be used to pay stipends for participants in either pathway.  
 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation 
 
DSCI was established as a principal department in the Executive Branch in January 2023 
by Executive Order 01.01.2023.02. The executive order established the purpose of the 
department to be promoting service and volunteerism in the State and assigned the 
department eight responsibilities, including promoting the use of volunteers in State and 
local government, businesses, and nonprofit entities. It also transferred all employees of 
the Maryland Corps Program and the Governor’s Office of Service and Volunteerism to 
the new department. DSCI was codified in statute by Chapter 99.  
 
The bill repeals the Executive Fellows Program within DSCI and renames the Governor’s 
Volunteer Council as the Governor’s Commission on Service and Volunteerism.  
 
Background:  DSCI advises that the Executive Fellows Program – initially created to 
provide opportunities for private-sector employees to transition to public-sector 
employment with the State – was never funded, staffed, or implemented. Similarly, the 
duties of the Governor’s Volunteer Council, originally created in 1983, were transferred to 
the Governor’s Commission on Service and Volunteerism in 1994; the council no longer 
exists.  
 
DSCI further advises that the Maryland 529 plan does not allow third parties to deposit 
funds into a 529 account, so direct deposit of the completion award into a 529 account is 
not possible. However, the Maryland Corps Program does make participants aware of the 
benefits of 529 accounts.  
 
Finally, DSCI seeks greater flexibility to use funds across pathways. As the MSY Pathway 
Fund receives mandated annual funding, its fund balance is growing faster than that of the 
YA Pathway Fund.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Chapter 99 requires that, beginning in fiscal 2027, any unspent funds 
in either the YA Pathway Fund or MSY Pathway Fund revert to the general fund. As the 
MSY Pathway Fund receives a mandated appropriation, required to increase to $20 million 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 33/ Page 4 
beginning in fiscal 2027, it is anticipated that unspent funds will be greater in that fund and 
that significant reversions will begin in fiscal 2027. The fiscal and policy note for 
Chapter 99 (Senate Bill 551 of 2023) anticipated that the MSY Pathway Fund would 
accumulate a substantial fund balance in the intervening years because the mandated 
appropriation would far exceed the payments to participants in the initial years of the 
program. Thus, the fiscal and policy note anticipated a reversion of more than $36 million 
from the MSY Pathway Fund in fiscal 2027 and a reversion of $2 million (all the residual 
fund balance) from the YA Pathway Fund. In fiscal 2028, it anticipated a reversion of 
$8 million from the MSY Pathway Fund and no reversion from the YA Pathway Fund.  
 
To the extent that the special fund balance in the MSY Pathway Fund can be used to cover 
expenses in the YA Pathway Fund, general fund expenditures decrease beginning as early 
as fiscal 2027 because fewer general funds are needed to cover ongoing costs for the 
YA pathway. Also, general fund revenues likely decrease by corresponding amounts 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027 because fewer unspent funds from the MSY Pathway 
Fund revert to the general fund each year (as they are transferred to the YA Pathway Fund 
instead). Thus, there is no net effect on the general fund. 
 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2026 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, 
includes a contingent reduction of $6.8 million to the general fund appropriation for the 
Maryland Service Year Option Program (monies that capitalize the MSY Pathway Fund). 
This bill does not effectuate that contingent reduction; however, provisions in 
House Bill 352 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act) do. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 248 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Service and Civic Innovation) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Service and Civic Innovation; Governor’s Office; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 33/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - February 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2025 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 33/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation - Maryland Corps Program 
Service Year Option Pathways - Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 33 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Lisa Bishop, Acting CFO, Department of Service and Civic Innovation 
and Sarah Flammang, Deputy Secretary, Department of Service and Civic 
Innovation 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X    
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The proposed bill will have no economic impact on Maryland’s Small Businesses.  
 

END OF PAGE 6