START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 3 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 3 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners - Revisions 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the definition of “physical therapist assistant” by clarifying that the term 
applies to an individual licensed by the State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners who 
practices limited physical therapy and has passed a specified exam; (2) adds a second 
licensed physical therapist assistant member to the board, subject to the same qualification 
and appointment processes as the existing licensed physical therapist assistant member; 
(3) requires the board to send a license renewal notice via electronic means and provide 
such notice by first class mail only when requested by the licensee; and (4) changes the 
contents of the renewal notice by including the date by which the renewal application must 
be received by the board for the renewal to be issued (rather than issued and mailed) before 
the license expires. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2026, board special fund expenditures increase minimally 
for compensation for the additional board member and decrease minimally as a result of 
switching to electronic renewal notice procedures, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 3/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Physical therapist assistant” means an individual who practices limited 
physical therapy and has passed the national physical therapy licensing examination 
administered or accepted by the board.  
 
State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners 
 
The practice of physical therapy in Maryland is regulated by the State Board of Physical 
Therapy Examiners. As of October 31, 2024, the board oversaw 10,000 active licensees 
and Physical Therapy Licensure Compact privileges, including 7,571 physical therapists 
and 2,429 physical therapist assistants.  
 
The board comprises eight members:  five licensed physical therapists; one licensed 
physical therapist assistant; and two consumers. Members serve for a term of four years 
and may not serve more than two consecutive full year terms. The physical therapist and 
physical therapist assistant members must be appointed by the Governor, with the advice 
of the Secretary of Health, from a list of names of qualified individuals submitted to the 
Secretary and Governor by the American Physical Therapy Association of Maryland. The 
licensed physical therapist assistant member must have five years of experience in limited 
physical therapy and be engaged in the profession of limited physical therapy in the State.  
 
Notification Requirements 
 
Generally, physical therapist and physical therapist assistant licenses expire on the date set 
by the board but may be renewed for a term of up to two years. At least one month before 
a license expires, the board must send a renewal notice to the licensee’s last known address. 
The renewal notice must include the date on which the current license expires, the date by 
which the renewal application must be received by the board for the renewal to be issued 
and mailed before the license expires, and the renewal fee.  
 
If requested by a licensee, the board must send at least two times within the month before 
a license expires, a renewal notice by electronic means to the last known email address of 
the licensee. If a renewal notice by electronic means is returned as undeliverable, the board 
must send the licensee a notice by first-class mail to the last known address of the licensee.  
 
State Expenditures:  Members of the State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners are 
entitled to compensation determined by the board and in accordance with the budget of the 
board and expense reimbursements at a rate determined by the board. While expense 
reimbursements are likely minimal and absorbable with existing resources, additional 
compensation for the new board member increases board special fund expenditures by 
$1,500 annually beginning in fiscal 2026.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 3/ Page 3 
Special fund expenditures decrease minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 due to sending 
notifications electronically instead of via first class mail. The board advises that the cost of 
sending renewal notices via first class mail in 2025 was approximately $5,000.  
 
Thus, the net impact on the board under the bill is estimated to result in special fund 
expenditure savings of up to $3,500 annually.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 47 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3