START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 25 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 25 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Environment) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment – Reservoir Augmentation Permit – Establishment 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes the Reservoir Augmentation Program in the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). A person may not perform “reservoir 
augmentation” without a permit issued by MDE. The bill establishes provisions governing 
permit applications and the issuance, modification, renewal, and terms of the permits. MDE 
must adopt regulations that, among other things, set a reasonable permit application fee. 
All revenues collected by MDE under the program must be distributed to a special fund to 
be used only for the operation and oversight of the program. The bill also extends the 
termination date for the Indirect Potable Reuse (IPR) Pilot Program from June 30, 2028, to 
June 30, 2030, and establishes new reporting requirements for MDE. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $97,300 in FY 2026; out-years reflect 
ongoing costs and termination of contractual staff at the end of FY 2028. Special fund 
revenues increase by $75,000 from permit application fee revenues in FY 2030 only. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$75,000 
GF Expenditure 
$97,300 
$85,800 
$89,500 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($97,300) 
($85,800) 
($89,500) 
$0 
$75,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although voluntary, the bill establishes a potential novel source of drinking 
water for local governments. Local expenditures increase for any participating local 
governments, as discussed below. Local revenues are not materially affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 25/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Reservoir augmentation” means the planned placement of reclaimed 
water into a surface water reservoir used as a source for a drinking water treatment facility. 
 
Permit Applications 
 
A person must submit a written application and obtain a permit from MDE in order to 
perform reservoir augmentation. The application must include specified information, 
including a feasibility study showing the purpose and need for the project (unless the 
application is for a project that was previously approved by MDE under the IPR Pilot 
Program) and any additional information requested by MDE. 
 
Required Regulations, Permit Application Fees, and Distribution of Program Revenues 
 
MDE must adopt regulations that establish (1) the standards for reservoir augmentation; 
(2) the application, issuance, revocation, and modification of a reservoir augmentation 
permit; and (3) a reasonable application fee in an amount designed to cover the cost of 
issuing and administering a reservoir augmentation permit under the program. 
 
All revenues collected by MDE under the program, including application fees, permit fees, 
renewal fees, or any administrative penalty, civil penalty, or fine imposed by a court for 
violations of the provisions governing the program must be distributed to a special fund to 
be used only for the operation and oversight of the program. 
 
Permit Issuance, Terms, Modification, and Renewal 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article, which governs public participation in the 
permitting process, governs the issuance of reservoir augmentation permits.  
 
MDE may issue, modify, or renew a reservoir augmentation permit if it finds that (1) the 
treatment process will meet or surpass MDE standards before water enters the reservoir 
and the distribution system and (2) the applicant gives MDE the right of entry on the permit 
site (at any reasonable time) to inspect or investigate any existing or potential violations of 
the reservoir augmentation permit. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 25/ Page 3 
MDE may include in a reservoir augmentation permit any term, condition, or requirement 
that it deems appropriate to protect public health or the environment. MDE may not issue 
a permit for a term longer than five years. 
 
Permit Denial and Revocation 
 
MDE may refuse to issue a reservoir augmentation permit if certain conditions are met, 
including that (1) the source of the reclaimed water fails to comply with any State or federal 
law, regulation, or permit; (2) MDE finds that issuing the permit would violate any State 
or federal law or regulation; or (3) the applicant fails or refuses to pay the permit application 
fee. 
 
MDE is also authorized to revoke a permit under specified circumstances, including if it 
finds that (1) the application included false or inaccurate information; (2) the conditions or 
requirements of the permit have been or are about to be violated; (3) there is noncompliance 
with a discharge permit or MDE pretreatment regulation that may affect the reclaimed 
water; (4) any requirement established under specified federal and State laws has been or 
is threatened to be violated; or (5) the reclaimed water may threaten public health, safety, 
comfort, or the environment. 
 
Reporting Requirements  
 
MDE must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the implementation of 
(1) the IPR Pilot Program by December 31, 2029, and (2) the Reservoir Augmentation 
Program by December 31, 2035, and every five years thereafter. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program 
 
The IPR Pilot Program was established pursuant to Chapters 122 and 123 of 2023 to 
authorize the regulated use of reclaimed water as a source for drinking water treatment 
facilities. Under the program, MDE may review, permit, and regulate a process to use 
reclaimed water as a source for a drinking water treatment facility through a potable reuse 
permit under certain circumstances. Permittees must also authorize MDE to inspect or 
investigate the site to check for existing or potential violations of the potable refuse permit. 
 
MDE was required to accept applications for potable reuse permits between July 1, 2023, 
and June 30, 2024. A potable refuse permit is effective for five years. Before a permit 
expires, MDE may renew a permit after administrative review in accordance with 
regulations that MDE adopts and in accordance with Title 1 Subtitle 6 of the Environment 
Article. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 25/ Page 4 
Except as otherwise provided statute, a public water system operating under a potable reuse 
permit is subject to requirements for public water systems that use surface water under the 
Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 26.04.01, which, broadly speaking, governs the 
quality of drinking water in the State and is discussed in more detail below. 
 
All of the provisions described above relating to the IPR Pilot Program terminate 
June 30, 2028. However, there are permit renewal terms that do not terminate. More 
specifically, beginning July 1, 2028, MDE is authorized to renew a potable reuse permit if 
(1) the renewal occurs before the previous permit expires and (2) the original potable reuse 
permit was issued by June 30, 2028. If MDE renews a permit in accordance with this 
provision, MDE must renew the permit (1) after administrative review in accordance with 
regulations adopted by MDE and (2) in accordance with Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the 
Environment Article. 
 
Public Water Systems and the Maryland Water Supply Program 
 
Federal and State laws and regulations govern the activities of MDE’s Water Supply 
Program, water utilities, and water users. The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), originally 
passed in 1974 (40 Code of Federal Regulations §§ 141 and 143), is the main federal law 
that ensures the quality of drinking water in the United States. Under SDWA, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sets standards for drinking water quality and 
oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards. 
SDWA was amended in 1986 and 1996 and requires several actions to protect drinking 
water and its sources (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, springs, and ground water wells). These 
standards generally do not apply to private drinking water wells. Rather, private well 
owners are responsible for the safety of their own wells after initial construction and 
certification is completed. MDE is responsible for primary enforcement of SDWA in the 
State. 
 
Specific requirements for public water systems are included under COMAR 26.04.01. 
Among other things, before constructing a new public water system, or increasing the 
capacity or significantly modifying an existing public water system, a construction permit 
must be obtained from the approving authority. There are also several treatment 
requirements and maximum contaminant level standards. 
 
Public water systems are systems that provide the public water for human consumption 
through pipes or other constructed conveyances and have at least 15 service connections 
or regularly serve at least 25 individuals. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 25/ Page 5 
Federal Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. MDE 
issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by controlling industrial 
and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are regulated through 
combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater discharges are regulated 
through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
 
Reclaimed Water  
 
It is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the use of “reclaimed water” in order 
to conserve water supplies and to meet other stated goals. MDE is statutorily required to 
encourage the use of reclaimed water for irrigation. “Reclaimed water” is defined as 
sewage that has been treated to a high quality suitable for various reuses and meets water 
quality standards for certain contaminants. Reclaimed water is authorized for irrigation of 
farmland, golf courses, athletic fields, turf, landscaping, and any other use that 
MDE considers appropriate. 
 
Public Notice for Certain Permit Applications 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article establishes the general public participation 
requirements for a number of permits issued by MDE, including permits to discharge 
pollutants into waters of the State and potable refuse permits.  
 
Relevant Enforcement Provisions 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 of the Environment Article, which are 
established under provisions relating to Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article 
(Water Pollution Control), establish enforcement procedures that govern (1) the ability of 
MDE to issue complaints, conduct hearings, issue corrective orders, and obtain injunctive 
relief and (2) judicial review of final decisions. (Because the bill’s provisions are codified 
under Subtitle 3 of Title 9 of the Environment Article, these enforcement provisions are 
applicable.) 
 
Under § 9-343 of the Environment Article, a person who violates any provision of or fails 
to perform any duty imposed by Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article, or who 
violates any provision or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under that subtitle, is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 25/ Page 6 
is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a 
first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for 
a subsequent offense. The person may also be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
In addition, a person is guilty of misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum 
fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person (1) knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, 
or other document filed or required to be maintained under the subtitle or (2) falsifies, 
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required 
to be maintained under the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or 
issued under the subtitle. 
 
Pursuant to § 9-344 of the Environment Article, the Attorney General is in charge of 
prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf of the State. 
 
Background:  MDE received one application for a potable reuse permit under the 
IPR Pilot Program from the City of Westminster, which was approved. According to MDE, 
that IPR project has been successful and MDE wishes to permanently extend the program 
throughout the State through the Reservoir Augmentation Program established by the bill. 
 
According to MDE’s 2024 IPR Report, potable reuse is the use of reclaimed water as a 
municipal drinking water source. The two types of potable reuse are IPR and direct potable 
reuse. Surface water augmentation is an IPR method that involves discharging reclaimed 
water into a surface water environmental buffer, such as a reservoir, river, stream, lake or 
similar water body above ground. The water is then directed to the water treatment plant, 
where it goes through additional processing before being distributed as drinking water. The 
program under the bill establishes a permanent program specifically for this type of IPR. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues for MDE increase by an estimated $75,000 in 
fiscal 2030. This estimate is based on the following information and assumptions:   
 
 
MDE plans to set the application fee for a reservoir augmentation permit at $75,000; 
and 
 
MDE receives one permit application at the end of fiscal 2030 when the permit for 
the one project that is active under the IPR Pilot Program expires (concurrent with 
the termination date of the pilot program as extended by the bill). 
 
Any permit renewals would likely occur outside the five-year period covered by this fiscal 
and policy note. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 25/ Page 7 
The application of existing monetary penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not 
anticipated to have a material impact on State revenues.  
 
State Expenditures:  Although revenues from permit application fees collected by MDE 
under the bill are contemplated to be used to operate and oversee the Reservoir 
Augmentation Program, because MDE does not anticipate collecting any fees until 
fiscal 2030, as discussed above, general funds are needed to implement the bill. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $97,293 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one contractual natural resources planner to (1) establish the Reservoir Augmentation 
Program, including developing regulations, permitting requirements, permit documents, 
and permit applications; (2) conducting any work related to converting existing permits 
under the IPR Pilot Program; and (3) evaluating initial permit application(s). It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$88,398 
Operating Expenses 
8,895 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$97,293 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and (2) termination of 
the contractual employee at the end of fiscal 2028 once the program is established. MDE 
advises that existing staff can implement the program at that point – including submitting 
the required reports. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
The application of existing incarceration penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not 
anticipated to have a material impact on State expenditures. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Although any participation in the pilot program is voluntary, local 
governments may benefit from the flexibility to use reservoir augmentation as a potential 
source for drinking water. However, to the extent that a local government applies for a 
reservoir augmentation permit, local expenditures increase, potentially significantly, to pay 
permit fees and to adequately treat reclaimed water and fulfill permitting responsibilities 
under the bill.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 25/ Page 8 
The bill is anticipated to benefit the City of Westminster, which MDE expects to continue 
with its IPR project program under the new, permanent, Reservoir Augmentation Program. 
Although local expenditures for the City of Westminster continue (including an anticipated 
$75,000 in costs to pay the reservoir augmentation permit application fee in fiscal 2030), 
the city benefits from the stability of a permanent program under which to continue its 
efforts to engage in potable reuse.  
 
The application of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to have a material impact 
on local finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 265 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Environmental Service; Baltimore City; Harford County; Maryland Association of 
Counties; City of Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 25/ Page 9 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Environment - Reservoir Augmentation Permit – Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 25 
 
PREPARED BY:  MDE 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Many small public water systems including mobile home parks are privately owned. 
Participation is voluntary however this would give these small businesses an additional 
tool when looking for a new potable water source when working on increasing climate 
resiliency, specifically the increasing frequency of droughts. There will also be potential 
financial benefits to small businesses in construction-related businesses as these treatment 
systems are developed and constructed. 
 

END OF PAGE 9