START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 43 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 43 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Federally Qualified Health Centers Grant Program - Acquisition of Land 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of Public Works (BPW), on the recommendation of the 
Secretary of Health, to make grants to counties, municipal corporations, and nonprofit 
organizations for the acquisition of land for the construction or use of a federally qualified 
health center (FQHC) as part of the FQHC Grant Program. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, BPW and the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) can handle them with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that local governments apply for FQHC funding under the 
bill, local government revenues and expenditures may increase.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 277 of 2005 established the FQHC Grant Program. Grants 
awarded under this capital program may be used for projects involving a facility designated 
as an FQHC under § 330 of the federal Public Health Service Act and wholly owned and 
operated by a county, municipal corporation, or nonprofit organization. 
 
Any county, municipal corporation, or nonprofit organization that is sponsoring a project 
involving the construction, acquisition, renovation, or equipping of an FQHC may apply 
to MDH for a State grant toward the cost of the project. A State grant must provide up to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 43/ Page 2 
75% of the eligible costs remaining after any federal grant is applied, or, if the project is 
designated as eligible for poverty area funding, up to 90% of the eligible costs remaining 
after any federal grant is applied. The county, municipal corporation, or nonprofit 
organization sponsoring the project is responsible for providing matching funds for the 
remaining cost. On approval of a project and the project plans, the Secretary of Health must 
promptly report the application to BPW, together with the Secretary’s recommendation 
that BPW make funds available for the project. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1005 (Senator Benson) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, and 
Howard counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Havre de Grace; Maryland 
Department of Health; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2