START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 4 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 4 
(Delegate Smith) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Restrictions on Use - Solar Collector Systems - Alteration 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that prohibit unreasonable restrictions on land use 
related to the installation of a solar collector system under specified circumstances. The 
bill specifies that a restriction on use is unreasonable if application of the restriction to a 
particular proposal (1) increases the installation cost of the system by at least 5% over the 
projected cost of the initially proposed installation or (2) reduces the energy generated by 
the solar collector system by at least 10% below the projected energy generation in the 
initial proposal. The bill further specifies actions that a community association may take in 
regard to the installation of solar collector systems in the common areas or common 
elements of the development. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The owner must provide satisfactory documentation to the community 
association evidencing the unreasonable nature of the restrictions. The documentation must 
be prepared by an independent solar panel design specialist who is certified, as specified, 
or has attested by affidavit to designing at least 30 solar collector systems in the course of 
trade within the prior three years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 4/ Page 2 
A community association may prohibit or restrict the installation of a solar collector system 
in the common area/elements within the real estate development served by the association. 
Additionally, the community association may establish reasonable restrictions as to the 
number, size, place, or manner of placement or installation of a solar collector system 
installed in the common area/elements. Notwithstanding the provisions of the governing 
documents (and provided that the installation is not otherwise prohibited by applicable 
law), the board of directors for a community association must have discretion to install a 
solar collector system in the common area/elements within the real estate development 
served by the community association. 
 
Current Law:  A solar collector system is a solar collector or other solar energy device 
that has the primary purpose of providing for the collection, storage, and distribution of 
solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling, or water heating. A 
restriction on use regarding land use may not impose or act to impose unreasonable 
limitations on the installation of a solar collector system on the roof or exterior walls of 
improvements, provided that the property owner owns or has the right to exclusive use of 
the roof or exterior walls. An unreasonable restriction includes a limitation that 
(1) significantly increases the cost of the solar collector system or (2) significantly 
decreases the efficiency of the solar collector system. 
 
A property owner who has installed or intends to install a solar collector system may 
negotiate to obtain a solar easement in writing. Any written instrument creating a solar 
easement must contain:   
 
 
a description of the dimensions of the solar easement expressed in measurable terms, 
as specified; 
 
the restrictions placed on vegetation, structures, and other objects that would impair 
the passage of sunlight through the solar easement; and 
 
the terms under which the solar easement may be revised or terminated. 
 
A written instrument creating a solar easement must be recorded in the appropriate land 
records. These provisions do not apply to a restriction on use on historic property that is 
listed in, or determined by, the Director of the Maryland Historical Trust to be eligible for 
inclusion in, the Maryland Register of Historic Properties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 49 and HB 366 of 2024 and HB 639 of 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 4/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 120 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Energy Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3