START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 73 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 73 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - General 
Services) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Finance and Procurement - State Leasing of Real Property 
 
 
This departmental bill raises the size limit for real property leases exempt from 
State procurement law from 2,500 square feet to 5,000 square feet. It also decreases the 
number of days that the Department of General Services (DGS) must advertise a need for 
the State to rent building space from 30 days to 20 days before proposals for a lease are 
due. Finally, the bill (1) specifies that newspaper advertisements for leases should be in 
newspapers with circulation sufficient to provide notice at least to the people of the affected 
localities and (2) requires that DGS post notifications of the need to lease space on its 
website and on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Any change in State activities does not materially affect State 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DGS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, DGS must conduct competitive procurements to lease real 
property for the State. However, this requirement does not apply to (1) intergovernmental 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 73/ Page 2 
lease transactions; (2) lease transactions involving property located outside the State; 
(3) emergency leases; (4) lease transactions where the State is the lessor; or (5) lease 
transactions involving less than 2,500 square feet of property. 
 
For nonexempt lease transactions, DGS must advertise any need to rent building space at 
least 30 days before proposals for a lease are due. The advertisements must be in daily or 
weekly newspapers with “circulation sufficient to provide public notice” to people of the 
State and those of the affected locality at least 30 days before proposals for a lease are due. 
The law also mandates the review of proposed leases by the Secretary of General Services 
and the Board of Public Works. 
 
eMM (which has been rebranded as eMaryland Marketplace Advantage), refers to the 
online procurement system managed by DGS. 
 
Background:  DGS advises that the bill expedites procurement for office space and allows 
the department to better compete with other tenants seeking space in the commercial lease 
market. Leases of more than 2,500 square feet must go through a competitive process, 
which takes six to nine months, plus additional time for any construction work necessary 
before occupancy of the space. As such, agencies are not able to receive the property within 
the desired timeframe, or agencies risk losing space to other interested parties who are able 
to move into the space sooner. Increasing the threshold for the amount of space that can be 
noncompetitively procured from 2,500 square feet to 5,000 square feet is expected to 
reduce the timeline to three to four months, enabling agencies to occupy needed space more 
quickly. Additionally, reducing the required advertising period for State rental needs from 
30 to 20 days should further expedite the process of identifying and acquiring new spaces. 
 
Several new small agencies and boards, as well as growth from existing agencies, have 
increased the need for new office space. In fiscal 2024 and 2025, DGS handled more than 
20 new lease procurements, a significant increase from the 5 to 7 new lease procurements 
typical in previous years. The ability to use a noncompetitive lease process for space up to 
5,000 feet assists DGS in managing the increased volume of new lease procurements.  
 
eMM, which provides a centralized online platform for agencies to advertise government 
contracts, has become the primary resource for vendors seeking procurement opportunities 
with the State. Therefore, requiring each proposed lease to be advertised on the DGS 
website and eMM, as is current practice, is expected to be an effective way to reach bidders. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 73/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 194 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - General Services) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 10, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 10, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 73/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Finance and Procurement - State Leasing of Real Property 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 73 
 
PREPARED BY:  Wendy Scott-Napier, Assistant Secretary – DGS, Office of Real Estate 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill will have no impact on Maryland small businesses.   
 

END OF PAGE 4