START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 39 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 39 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Health - Repeal of Prohibition on Transfer of Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (Carlton R. Smith Act) 
 
 
This bill repeals the misdemeanor prohibition against and associated penalty for knowingly 
transferring or attempting to transfer HIV to another. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect governmental finances or 
operations, including the work of the District Court. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual who has HIV may not knowingly transfer or attempt to 
transfer HIV to another individual. An individual who violates this prohibition is guilty of 
a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum penalty of three years 
imprisonment and/or a fine of up to $2,500. 
 
An individual who knowingly transfers or attempts to transfer HIV to another may also be 
subject to prosecution for other criminal offenses, including reckless endangerment, 
first-degree assault, or second-degree assault (felony or misdemeanor). 
 
Reckless Endangerment 
 
An individual commits the offense of reckless endangerment if the individual recklessly 
(1) engages in conduct that creates a substantial risk of death or “serious physical injury” 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 39/ Page 2 
to another or (2) discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle in a manner that creates a 
substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another. A violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a fine of up to 
$5,000. 
 
“Serious physical injury” means physical injury that (1) creates a substantial risk of death 
or (2) causes permanent or protracted serious disfigurement, loss of the function of any 
bodily member or organ, or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
 
First-degree Assault 
 
An individual commits a first-degree assault if the individual (1) intentionally causes or 
attempts to cause “serious physical injury” (as defined above) to another; (2) commits an 
assault with a firearm, as specified; or (3) intentionally strangles another. A violator is 
guilty of a felony and subject to imprisonment for up to 25 years. 
 
Second-degree Assault 
 
In general, an individual who commits an assault is guilty of misdemeanor second-degree 
assault and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up 
to $2,500. Assault means the crimes of assault, battery, and assault and battery, which are 
defined through case law. 
 
An individual commits a felony second-degree assault if the individual intentionally causes 
physical injury to another individual and has reason to know that the other individual is 
(1) a law enforcement officer or a parole or probation agent engaged in the performance of 
their official duties or (2) a firefighter, an emergency medical technician, a rescue squad 
member, or any other first responder engaged in providing emergency medical care or 
rescue services. “Physical injury” means any impairment of physical condition, excluding 
minor injuries. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up 
to $5,000. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Judiciary advises that, from fiscal 2000 through fiscal 2020, 
there were a total of 146 charges and 14 convictions for knowingly transferring or 
attempting to transfer HIV across both District and circuit courts in the State. While the 
offense has been charged 13 times in the District Court over the last four fiscal years  
(two in 2021, four in 2022, three in 2023, and four in 2024), there were 0 convictions during 
this time period. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 39/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1165 and HB 485 of 2024; HB 287 of 2023; and SB 547 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 356 (Senator Smith, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3