START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 40 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 40 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Fishing Licenses and Stamps - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill increases fees for senior sport fishing licenses, angler’s licenses, and 
trout stamps, and repeals the trout stamp exemption for senior sport fishing licensees. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by $565,800 in FY 2025, and by $3.0 million 
in FY 2026 and future years. General fund revenues increase through FY 2028, as 
discussed below. Expenditures are not directly affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0 
SF Revenue 
$565,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$565,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800 
$2,977,800  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill increases recreational fishing license and trout 
stamp fees, as shown in Exhibit 1. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 40/ Page 2 
The bill also repeals an exemption, for a holder of a senior sport fishing license, from the 
requirement that an individual hold a trout stamp to fish for trout in areas designated by 
DNR. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Recreational Fishing License and Stamp Fees 
 
License/Stamp 
Under Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Senior sport fishing license (available to 
residents age 65 and older; authorizes 
recreational fishing in nontidal and tidal 
waters) 
$5.00 
$12.00 
Angler’s license (available to individuals 
age 16 and older; authorizes recreational 
fishing in nontidal waters) 
 
 
Resident 
 
 
Annual 
$20.50 
$32.00 
7-day 
$7.50 
$16.00 
Nonresident 
(**nonresidents 
are 
charged the greater of the fee amounts 
shown or the fee amount charged a 
Maryland resident by the nonresident’s 
home state for a similar license**) 
 
 
Annual 
$30.50 
$55.00 
7-day 
$7.50 
$45.00 
3-day 
$5.00 
$35.00 
Trout stamp (authorizes fishing for trout 
in areas designated by DNR) 
 
 
Resident 
$5.00 
$20.00 
Nonresident 
$10.00 
$30.00 
 
DNR:  Department of Natural Resources 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 40/ Page 3 
Background:   
 
Fisheries Management and Protection Fund Imbalance 
 
Revenues from the fees increased by the bill are deposited into the Fisheries Management 
and Protection Fund (FMPF) (used to fund nontidal fishery management), with the 
exception of 50% of the fee revenues from senior sport fishing licenses, which is deposited 
in the Fisheries Research and Development Fund (FRDF). DNR’s expenditures from 
FMPF are increasing, as shown in Exhibit 2, and fund balance and revenues to the fund 
are not expected to be able to cover expenditures by fiscal 2027. 
 
DNR indicates that the fees increased by the bill have not been increased in many years 
and the additional revenue generated by the fees will support existing nontidal fishery 
management efforts and provide funding for additional nontidal fishery projects and 
infrastructure needs. DNR’s Fishing and Boating Services unit depends heavily on special 
funds derived from fee revenues to operate its nontidal fisheries management. 
 
 
Exhibit 2  
Fisheries Management and Protection Fund 
Fiscal 2024-2026 
 
FY 2024  
(Actual) 
FY 2025  
(Projected) 
FY 2026 
(Projected) 
Beginning Balance 
$3,122,340 
$3,777,390 
$2,821,335 
Revenues 
3,516,354 
3,500,000 
3,500,000 
Fishing and Boating Services Expenditures 
2,609,648 
3,240,070 
3,811,363 
DNR Administrative Expenditures* 
251,656 
1,215,985 
1,816,847 
Ending Balance 
$3,777,390 
$2,821,335 
$693,125 
 
DNR:  Department of Natural Resources 
  
* DNR is authorized, under §§1-103(b)(2) and 4-208(g)(2), to use money in the fund for administrative expenses 
directly relating to the purpose of the fund up to an amount calculated under a generally accepted methodology 
for determining indirect costs. In the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly, the administrative 
expenditures from the fund support costs of (1) Office of the Attorney General legal representation, advice, and 
counsel provided to the department; (2) finance and administrative services; (3) human resources; 
(4) information technology services; (5) communications; (6) licensing and registration services; and (7) the 
Natural Resources Police. 
 
Source:  Department of Natural Resources 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 40/ Page 4 
Fee Increases 
 
DNR indicates that:   
 
 
the fee increases for the senior sport fishing license and the resident annual angler’s 
license are based on inflation; 
 
the fee increases for the resident 7-day angler’s license and the nonresident annual, 
7-day, and 3-day angler’s licenses are based on the fee amounts for similar licenses 
charged in other states; and 
 
the fee increases for the resident and nonresident trout stamps are based on fee 
amounts estimated to be sufficient to cover expected trout management (hatchery 
operations and stocking) costs. 
 
Repeal of Trout Stamp Exemption for Senior Sport Fishing Licensees 
 
DNR indicates that the trout stamp fee is paid by trout anglers to support trout management 
and provide the fish that they catch. The repeal of senior sport fishing licensees’ exemption 
from the trout stamp requirement is intended to have the roughly one-third of senior sport 
fishing licensees who fish for trout contribute toward those costs without the remaining 
licensees having to pay for trout management through a higher overall senior sport fishing 
license fee. Requiring those roughly one-third of licensees to purchase a trout stamp will 
also allow DNR to include them in the department’s communications with trout stamp 
holders about trout management/hatchery changes. 
 
State Revenues:   
 
Special Funds 
 
Special fund revenues increase by $565,783 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 
June 1, 2025 effective date, and by $3.0 million in fiscal 2026 and future years, as shown 
in Exhibit 3. 
 
The fiscal 2025 estimate accounts for 19% of the revenue increase of a full fiscal year, 
which is based on DNR data showing the portion of annual license sales (for the resident 
and nonresident annual angler’s licenses) occurring in June in fiscal 2023 and 2024, and 
an assumption that similar portions of the annual sales of other licenses and stamps affected 
by the bill occur in June. 
 
In fiscal 2025, of the $565,783 in increased revenues, $543,545 is distributed to FMPF and 
$22,238 is distributed to FRDF. In fiscal 2026 and future years, $2.9 million is distributed 
to FMPF and $117,042 is distributed to FRDF. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 40/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 3 
Annual Increase in Special Fund Revenues 
 
Fee Type 
Licenses/ 
Stamps 
(Current 
Law) 
Licenses/ 
Stamps 
(Bill) 
Fee 
(Current 
Law) 
Fee  
(Bill) 
Annual 
Increase in 
Fee 
Revenues 
Senior sport fishing 
34,025 
33,684 
$5.00 
$12.00 
$234,085 
Angler’s 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident – Annual 
107,283 
106,210 
20.50 
32.00 
1,199,419 
Resident – 7-day 
5,172 
5,120 
7.50 
16.00 
43,130 
Nonresident – Annual* 
15,962 
15,803 
30.50 
55.00 
342,090 
Nonresident – 7-day* 
3,414 
3,380 
7.50 
45.00 
81,916 
Nonresident – 3-day* 
7,838 
7,760 
5.00 
35.00 
149,404 
Trout Stamp 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident 
38,818 
48,536 
5.00 
20.00 
776,628 
Nonresident 
7,672 
7,595 
10.00 
30.00 
151,133 
Total 
$2,977,805 
 
* Fee amounts for these licensees are the greater of the fees shown and the fee amounts charged by their 
home state to nonresidents. The estimates of the annual increase in fee revenues for these nonresident 
licenses are based on assumptions mentioned in the narrative below. 
 
Source:  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
This estimate is based on the following assumptions:   
 
 
the number of licenses and stamp holders in fiscal 2025 and future years is similar 
to the average of the number of licensees and stamp holders in fiscal 2022 through 
2024, with the following exceptions:  (1) the number of resident trout stamp holders 
increases by 10,208 (based on a DNR estimate) due to senior sport fishing licensees 
who are no longer exempt from the trout stamp requirement purchasing stamps; and 
(2) the numbers of licensees and stamp holders also decrease by 1% overall due to 
the increased fees causing some individuals to no longer purchase licenses and 
stamps (also based on information provided by DNR); 
 
the percentages of nonresident annual, 7-day, and 3-day licensees who pay the fee 
in Maryland statute as opposed to a higher fee charged to nonresidents by their home 
state increase as follows under the bill:  (1) annual licensees – from 19% to 59%; 
(2) 7-day licensees – from 0% to 93%; and (3) 3-day licensees – from 0% to 97%; 
and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 40/ Page 6 
 
for nonresidents that pay their home state fee under current law but pay the fee in 
Maryland statute under the bill (due to the Maryland fee increasing beyond the home 
state fee, under the bill), their home state fees, on average, are equivalent to the 
midpoint between the fee in Maryland statute under current law and the fee in 
Maryland statute under the bill. 
 
General Fund Revenues 
 
General fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount through fiscal 2028, due to 
interest earnings from the additional fee revenues generated by the bill accruing to the 
general fund. 
 
Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024) 
and § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and Procurement Article require, notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain 
exceptions) accrue to the general fund. Section 8 of Chapter 717 applies from fiscal 2024 
through 2028 and § 6-226(a)(2) applies from fiscal 2029 forward. FMPF and FRDF are not 
exempted from the requirement under Section 8 of Chapter 717 but are exempted from the 
requirement under § 6-226(a)(2). General fund revenues therefore increase through 
fiscal 2028. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 258 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 40/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - Fishing Licenses and Stamps - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 40 
  
PREPARED BY: 
Sarah Widman 
  
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
There is a possibility that certain types of fishing guides could see a small decrease in revenue if 
anglers decide not to buy a license and go fishing with a guide. The businesses selling licenses or 
license related products who receive money from each license sold may also see a small decrease 
in revenue if anglers decide not to buy a license due to price increases. It isn’t possible to know 
for sure if price increases would result in a decrease in license sales. With other licensing changes 
including a new licensing system coming online, it will be difficult to tease out data showing the 
direct impact of the fee increase on angler license buying behavior. It is not unrealistic to think 
that up to 1% of anglers could change their buying behavior. However, since these fees have not 
been increased in over three decades for some of the fees and license fees are a very small percent 
of an angler’s annual spending, a decrease of license purchases may not be statistically measurable. 
Anglers provide economic benefit to the local economy of communities that surround popular 
fishing areas. Investing in the infrastructure and management efforts that enhance fishing 
opportunities and access, are expected to provide economic returns to local communities and 
businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 7