START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 163 
(Delegate Hartman) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Home and Recreational Vehicle Shows in Worcester County - Permit for 
Out-of-State Dealers 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to issue an out-of-state 
motor home and recreational trailer vehicle show permit that allows the permit holder to 
participate in vehicle shows in Worcester County, as specified. The permit may be issued 
to a dealer of motor homes or recreational trailers licensed in another state that reciprocally 
authorizes Maryland dealers of motor homes and recreational trailers to display or exhibit 
motor homes or recreational trailers at vehicle shows in that state.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A permit holder may display or exhibit motor homes or recreational 
trailers at a vehicle show for motor homes or recreational trailers in Worcester County but 
may not execute a buyer’s order or accept a deposit. 
 
To obtain a permit, a licensed out-of-state dealer of motor homes or recreational trailers 
must (1) apply to MVA for a permit and (2) after approval of the permit, file a bond with 
MVA in a form prescribed and furnished by MVA, payable to the State, and conditioned 
on compliance with the conditions and limitations of the permit. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 163/ Page 2 
MVA must determine the amount of the bond and the duration of the permit. The bond 
must be executed by the permit holder and by a corporate surety approved by MVA. 
Liability under the bond must be for the duration of the permit, and a bond may not be fully 
released until all requirements of the bill, associated regulations, and permit conditions 
have been met or complied with. 
 
MVA may suspend or revoke a permit if MVA determines that the permit holder is out of 
compliance with the bill’s provisions or any permit conditions. 
 
Current Law:  An out-of-state dealer may not display or exhibit motor homes or 
recreational trailers, including executing a buyer’s order or accepting a deposit, at a vehicle 
show for motor homes and recreational trailers in Maryland. Licensed Maryland dealers 
and their salespersons who participate in a vehicle show may execute a buyer’s order and 
accept a deposit, except a licensed dealer may not accept a deposit that (1) for an order for 
any vehicle, except a Class M motor home, exceeds 5% of the cost of the vehicle or (2) for 
an order of a Class M motor home, exceeds 10% of the cost of the motor home. Also, 
licensed dealers and their salespersons must conduct activities involved in a vehicle sale, 
including the completion of the sales contract, the issuance of temporary registration plates 
and a temporary registration certificate, and delivery of the vehicle, at the dealer’s fixed 
location as shown in the dealer’s application for the license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 60 and HB 56 of 2024 and SB 642 and HB 545 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 79 (Senator Carozza) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2