START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 121 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 121 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Electric Companies - Regional Transmission Organizations - Report (Utility 
Transparency and Accountability Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each electric company, other than a municipal electric utility, to submit 
a report to the Public Service Commission (PSC) by February 1 each year containing 
information related to recent votes cast at a meeting of a regional transmission organization 
(RTO). The report must include (1) all recorded votes cast by the electric company, 
regardless of whether the vote is otherwise disclosed and (2) all votes cast by a State 
affiliate of the electric company if the electric company itself does not vote on the matter. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies, which includes 
electric companies, subject to its jurisdiction to (1) ensure their operation in the interest of 
the public and (2) promote adequate, economical, and efficient delivery of utility services 
in the State without unjust discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, 
the economy of the State, the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected 
workers, the conservation of natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, 
the achievement of the State’s climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions, and the protection of a public service company’s infrastructure against 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 121/ Page 2 
cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce compliance with legal requirements by public 
service companies. 
 
State law does not require electric companies to be a member of an RTO, nor does it require 
that votes be disclosed. 
 
Additional Comments:  PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM) is the RTO for all or parts of 
13 states plus the District of Columbia, including Maryland. Most electric companies in 
the State are members, including all investor-owned utilities. PJM members take part in 
PJM’s stakeholder process, which provides a forum for those who have a stake in the 
wholesale electric industry to discuss and work through issues related to PJM markets, 
operations, public policies, and current and future industry matters. The process uses 
committees, subcommittees, user groups, and task forces to conduct business. The Office 
of People’s Counsel advises that some high-level votes are disclosed, but numerous 
lower-level committee and task force votes are not. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 682 and HB 505 of 2024 and HB 1186 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 37 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
PJM Interconnection, LLC; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2