START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 131 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 131 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Bay Restoration Fund - Septic System Upgrade Program 
 
 
This bill modifies the prioritization and eligibility for projects that receive funding from 
the Bay Restoration Fund’s (BRF) Septics Account. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall Septics Account finances are not affected; the bill merely modifies 
the prioritization and eligibility for projects that receive funding. The Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) can implement the bill with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Although the total amount of grant funding provided to local governments 
from the Septics Account is not affected, the distribution of such funding across 
jurisdictions may be affected. Local grant revenues and expenditures are commensurately 
affected. There is also an operational impact on local health departments (LHDs) that 
distribute block grants from MDE, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on some small 
businesses depending on the projects that receive funding under the bill. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Bay Restoration Fund – Generally 
 
Chapter 428 of 2004 established BRF. Under current law and the bill, the primary purpose 
of the fund is to support upgrades to Maryland’s 67 major publicly owned wastewater 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 131/ Page 2 
treatment plants (WWTP) with enhanced nutrient removal (ENR) technology; funds are 
also used for on-site sewage disposal system (septic system) upgrade grants, among other 
things, and the Cover Crop Program within the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA). As a revenue source for the fund, Chapter 428 established a bay restoration fee on 
users of wastewater facilities, septic systems, and sewage holding tanks. Chapter 150 
of 2012 doubled the fee for most users (until July 1, 2030). 
 
Under current law and the bill, of the fee revenues collected from users of septic systems 
and sewage holding tanks, 60% must be deposited into the BRF Septics Account, and the 
remaining funds (40%) must be transferred to MDA to provide financial assistance to 
farmers for planting cover crops. 
 
Bay Restoration Fund Septics Account – Uses and Priority  
 
Authorized Uses of the Septics Account:  Under current law and the bill, the 
Septics Account may be used to provide grants or loans for up to 100% of (1) the cost of 
upgrading septic systems to a system that uses the best available technology for nitrogen 
removal (BAT); (2) the cost difference between a conventional septic system and one that 
uses BAT; (3) the cost of repairing or replacing a failing septic system with one that uses 
BAT; (4) the cost of replacing multiple septic systems in the same community with a new 
community sewerage system that meets ENR standards and other specified conditions; or 
(5) the cost of connecting a property served by a septic system to a wastewater facility 
meeting specified levels of treatment. 
 
Under current law and the bill, the Septics Account may also be used (1) for specified 
administrative costs for MDE (up to 8% of funds deposited) and for certain local entities 
(up to 10% of funds deposited); (2) to provide financial assistance to qualifying 
low-income homeowners for up to 50% of the cost of an operating and maintenance 
contract of up to five years for a BAT system; (3) to provide financial assistance (not to 
exceed 10% of the funds allocated to the local jurisdiction) to eligible homeowners for the 
reasonable cost of pumping out a septic system under certain circumstances; and 
(4) in fiscal 2020 and 2021, to provide financial assistance to a local jurisdiction to develop 
a qualifying septic stewardship plan. 
 
Project Prioritization:  Under current law, statutory priority for funding from the Septics 
Account is as follows:  (1) first, for failing systems in the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal 
Bays Critical Area (Critical Area); and (2) then, for other failing systems that MDE 
determines are a threat to public health or water quality. Under the bill, statutory priority 
for funding from the Septics Account is as follows:  (1) first, for failing systems in the 
Critical Area; (2) second, to failing systems that are located within a Maryland Chesapeake 
Bay 8-digit watershed that has a relative effectiveness for total nitrogen reduction of 9.24 
or higher based on the Chesapeake Bay watershed model; (3) third, to failing systems that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 131/ Page 3 
are located within the 500-year floodplain; and (4) fourth, to other failing systems that 
MDE determines are a threat to public health or water quality. 
 
Under current law, priority is then given to low-income owners, as defined by MDE, for 
the costs of repairing or replacing a failing septic system with a BAT septic system and 
other wastewater treatment systems. Under the bill, priority is then given to low- and 
moderate-income owners, as defined by MDE, for the same purposes as under current law. 
Under current law and the bill, the balance of funds in the Septics Account is then awarded 
by MDE to LHDs as block grants for BAT septic system upgrades. 
 
Bay Restoration Fund Septics Account – Grant Eligibility 
 
Under current law, there are eligibility restrictions for grant awards for septic system 
upgrades. Among other things, grants for the costs of replacing multiple septic systems in 
the same community with a new community sewerage system may only be provided if the 
new system will only serve lots that have received a certificate of occupancy, or equivalent 
certificate, by October 1, 2008. Under the bill, the lots served by a new system must have 
received a certificate of occupancy, or equivalent certificate, at least 15 years before July 1 
of the year in which the application for funding is made. 
 
Under current law, among other requirements, grants for the cost of connecting a property 
that uses a septic system to an existing WWTP that is achieving or has signed a funding 
agreement with MDE and is under construction to achieve, ENR or biological nutrient 
removal level treatment may only be issued if the septic system on the property was 
installed by October 1, 2008. Under the bill, the septic system must have been installed at 
least 15 years before July 1 of the year in which the application for funding is made. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Overall grant funding for local governments from the 
Septics Account is unchanged under the bill, but local grant revenues and expenditures 
increase for some local governments and decrease for others based on the bill’s changes to 
the priority ranking and eligibility for projects. 
 
Additionally, the Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) notes that 
there is an operational impact on some LHDs, which are responsible for distributing county 
block grants from MDE in many counties. MACHO anticipates that there may be an 
increase in workload to implement the bill’s changes, particularly for counties that do not 
currently use the Chesapeake Bay watershed model to evaluate the effectiveness of 
nitrogen reductions. However, the overall impacts on LHDs are anticipated to be minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 131/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 117 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore, 
Cecil, and Frederick counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Annapolis; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General 
Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4