START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

Chapter 609

(House Bill 176)

AN ACT concerning

~~Labor~~ ~~and~~ ~~Employment~~ ~~–~~ ~~Occupational~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~Revisions~~
(Davis Martinez Public Employee Safety and Health Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~of~~ ~~Labor~~ ~~and~~ ~~Industry~~ ~~to~~ ~~appoint~~ ~~an~~
~~Assistant~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~for~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Employees’~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~Health~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~
~~purposes;~~ requiring the Correctional Training Commission to adopt certain
regulations for the training, issuance, and use of body–worn cameras; requiring each
correctional unit to develop and maintain a certain written policy for the use of
body–worn cameras by correctional officers, subject to a certain exception;
establishing that it is lawful for a correctional officer to intercept certain
communications by use of a body–worn camera under certain circumstances;
establishing the Public Employees’ Safety and Health Unit in the Division of Labor
and Industry to administer and enforce certain provisions regarding the oversight of
workplace safety and health of employees of certain public bodies; altering the
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Act as it applies to certain public bodies;
repealing the prohibition on certain penalties being applied to public bodies;
requiring the Attorney General to provide certain notices and prioritize certain
requests for administrative warrants; requiring the revenues from certain civil
penalties to be used for the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program;
requiring the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, in consultation with the
Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board, to adopt regulations that protect
employees of public bodies from workplace violence; providing that certain penalties
do not apply with respect to an elevator unit owned by a public body; and generally
relating to ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Occupational~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Act~~ public employee safety
and health.

BY adding to
Article – Correctional Services
Section 8–211
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 10–402(c)(11)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section ~~2–104(b),~~ 5–101, 5–102, 5–104, ~~5–202,~~ 5–202(b)(1), 5–205(h), 5–206, 5–207,
~~5–208,~~ 5–211, 5–212, 5–308, ~~5–702,~~ ~~5–804,~~ ~~5–811,~~ 5–702(a), and 5–812
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 5–801
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 5–1301 and 5–1302 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 13. Standards for
Preventing Workplace Violence”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 12–804(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

8–211.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS FOR THE TRAINING, ISSUANCE, AND USE OF A BODY–WORN CAMERA
BY A CORRECTIONAL OFFICER THAT ADDRESSES:

(1) THE TESTING OF BODY–WORN CAMERAS TO ENSURE ADEQUATE
FUNCTIONING;

(2) THE PROCEDURE FOR THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICER TO FOLLOW
IF THE CAMERA FAILS TO PROPERLY OPERATE AT THE BEGINNING OF OR DURING
THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICER’S SHIFT;

(3) WHEN RECORDING IS MANDATORY;

(4) WHEN RECORDING IS PROHIBITED;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(5) WHEN RECORDING IS DISCRETIONARY;

(6) WHEN RECORDING MAY REQUIRE CONSENT OF A SUBJECT BEING
RECORDED;

(7) WHEN A RECORDING MAY BE ENDED;

(8) PROVIDING NOTICE OF RECORDING;

(9) ACCESS TO AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDINGS;

(10) THE SECURE STORAGE OF DATA FROM A BODY–WORN CAMERA;

(11) REVIEW AND USE OF RECORDINGS;

(12) RETENTION OF RECORDINGS;

(13) DISSEMINATION AND RELEASE OF RECORDINGS;

(14) NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS WHEN ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL
BECOMES A PARTY TO THE COMMUNICATION FOLLOWING THE INITIAL
NOTIFICATION;

(15) SPECIFIC PROTECTIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHEN THERE IS AN
EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY IN PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PLACES; AND

(16) THE PROCEDURES FOR A CORRECTIONAL OFFICER TO FOLLOW IF
THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICER REGULARLY INTERACTS WITH MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC OUTSIDE AS PART OF THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICER’S OFFICIAL DUTIES.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, EACH
CORRECTIONAL UNIT SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A WRITTEN POLICY
CONSISTENT WITH THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR THE USE OF BODY–WORN CAMERAS.

(2) A POLICY DEVELOPED AND MAINTAINED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~A~~ ~~MANDATORY~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~COLLECTIVE~~
~~BARGAINING~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~CERTIFIED~~ ~~AS~~ ~~EXCLUSIVE~~
~~REPRESENTATIVE.~~

(C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A LOCAL CORRECTIONAL
FACILITY.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO
ADOPT THE USE OF BODY–WORN CAMERAS BY CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS.

(3) IF A LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY ADOPTS THE USE OF
BODY–WORN CAMERAS, THE LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SHALL DEVELOP AND
MAINTAIN A WRITTEN POLICY CONSISTENT WITH THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY
THE COMMISSION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR THE USE OF
BODY–WORN CAMERAS.

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

10–402.

(c) (11) (i) 1. In this paragraph the following words have the meanings
indicated.

2. “Body–worn digital recording device” means a device worn
on the person of a law enforcement officer OR A CORRECTIONAL OFFICER that is capable
of recording video and intercepting oral communications.

3. “Electronic control device” has the meaning stated in §
4–109 of the Criminal Law Article.

(ii) It is lawful under this subtitle for a law enforcement officer OR
A CORRECTIONAL OFFICER in the course of the officer’s regular duty to intercept an oral
communication with a body–worn digital recording device or an electronic control device
capable of recording video and oral communications if:

1. The law enforcement officer OR CORRECTIONAL
OFFICER is in uniform or prominently displaying the officer’s badge or other insignia;

2. The law enforcement officer OR CORRECTIONAL
OFFICER is making reasonable efforts to conform to standards in accordance with § 3–511
of the Public Safety Article OR § 8–211 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE for
the use of body–worn digital recording devices or electronic control devices capable of
recording video and oral communications;

3. The law enforcement officer OR CORRECTIONAL
OFFICER is a party to the oral communication;

4. Law enforcement OR THE CORRECTIONAL OFFICER
notifies, as soon as is practicable, the individual that the individual is being recorded,
unless it is unsafe, impractical, or impossible to do so; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

5. The oral interception is being made as part of a videotape
or digital recording.

(iii) Failure to notify under subparagraph (ii)4 of this paragraph does
not affect the admissibility in court of the recording if the failure to notify involved an
individual who joined a discussion in progress for which proper notification was previously
given.

Article – Labor and Employment

~~2–104.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~shall~~ ~~appoint~~ ~~an~~ ~~Assistant~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~for~~
Occupational Safety and Health AND AN ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER FOR PUBLIC
EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH, subject to the approval of the Secretary.

(2) The [Assistant Commissioner is] ASSISTANT COMMISSIONERS ARE
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~management~~ ~~service~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Personnel~~ ~~Management~~ ~~System~~ ~~and~~ ~~serves~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~
~~pleasure~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner.~~

(3) The [Assistant Commissioner is] ASSISTANT COMMISSIONERS ARE
~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~salary~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget.~~

5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Labor and Industry.

(c) (1) “Employee” means, except as provided in § 5–401 of this title, an
individual whom an employer employs, for a wage or other compensation, in the business
of the employer.

(2) “Employee” includes:

(i) an individual whom a [governmental unit] PUBLIC BODY
employs;

(ii) an individual who is licensed as a taxicab driver and leases or
rents a taxicab from a person who operates or owns a taxicab business in Baltimore City;

(iii) an individual who is employed for part–time or temporary help
by a [governmental unit] PUBLIC BODY or person who engages in a business that directly
employs individuals to provide part–time or temporary help to another [governmental unit]
PUBLIC BODY or person; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) an individual who performs work for a [governmental unit]
PUBLIC BODY or person to whom the individual is provided by another [governmental
unit] PUBLIC BODY or person who engages in a business that directly employs individuals
to provide part–time or temporary help.

(d) (1) “Employer” means:

(i) except as provided in § 5–401 of this title, a person who is
engaged in commerce, industry, trade, or other business in the State and employs at least
one employee in that business; or

(ii) a public body.

(2) “Employer” includes:

(i) a person who operates or owns a taxicab business in Baltimore
City and leases or rents a taxicab to a licensed taxicab driver, to provide services to the
public;

(ii) a governmental unit PUBLIC BODY or person who engages in a
business that directly employs individuals to provide part–time or temporary help to
another governmental unit PUBLIC BODY or person; and

(iii) a governmental unit PUBLIC BODY or person who contracts
directly with another governmental unit PUBLIC BODY or person who engages in a
business that directly employs individuals to provide part–time or temporary help to
another governmental unit PUBLIC BODY or person.

(e) (1) “FIELDWORK LOCATION” MEANS A PLACE WHERE AN EMPLOYEE
~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~BODY~~ ~~GOES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~ON~~ ~~BEHALF~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~BODY~~ ~~THAT~~
IS AWAY FROM A FACILITY THAT IS RENTED, LEASED, OR OWNED BY A PUBLIC BODY.

(2) “FIELDWORK LOCATION” INCLUDES A DRIVING ROUTE THAT AN
~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~REGULARLY~~ ~~TRAVELS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERFORMANCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~DUTIES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
PUBLIC BODY.

(F) “Occupational safety and health standard” means a regulation that requires:

(1) a condition that is reasonably appropriate or necessary to make
employment and places of employment safe and healthful; or

(2) the adoption or use of a means, method, operation, practice, or process
that is reasonably appropriate or necessary to make employment and places of employment
safe and healthful.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

[(f)] (G) “Person” includes a successor.

[(g)] (H) (1) “Place of employment” means a place in or about which an
employee is allowed to work.

(2) “PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT” INCLUDES:

(I) A FACILITY THAT IS RENTED, LEASED, OR OWNED BY A
PUBLIC BODY; AND

(II) A FIELDWORK LOCATION.

[(h)] (I) “Public body” means:

(1) a governmental unit;

(2) a public or quasi–public corporation of the State;

(3) a school district in the State or any unit of the district; or

(4) a special district in the State or any unit of the district.

(J) (I)(1) “WORKPLACE VIOLENCE” MEANS AN ACT OF VIOLENCE OR A
THREAT OF VIOLENCE THAT OCCURS AT A PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT AND THAT IS NOT
A LAWFUL ACT OF SELF–DEFENSE OR DEFENSE OF ANOTHER PERSON.

(2) “WORKPLACE VIOLENCE” INCLUDES, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
THE EMPLOYEE IS PHYSICALLY OR PSYCHOLOGICALLY INJURED:

(I) USING OR THREATENING TO USE PHYSICAL FORCE AGAINST
AN EMPLOYEE; OR

(II) AN INCIDENT INVOLVING THE USE OF OR THREATENING THE
USE OF A FIREARM OR OTHER DANGEROUS WEAPON.

5–102.

(a) The General Assembly finds that:

(1) personal injuries and illnesses that arise out of conditions of
employment substantially burden employers and employees in terms of lost production,
medical expenses, disability compensation payments, and lost wages; [and]

(2) the prevention of these injuries and illnesses is in the best interest and
welfare of the people and the State; AND

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) PUBLIC BODIES SHOULD BE LEADERS IN CREATING AND
MAINTAINING SAFE AND HEALTHY WORKPLACES.

(b) The purposes of this title are to ensure, to the extent practicable, that each
working [man and woman] INDIVIDUAL in the State has working conditions that are safe
and healthful and to preserve human resources by:

(1) providing that employers and employees have separate but dependent
responsibilities and rights with respect to making working conditions safe and healthful;

(2) providing for the development and adoption of occupational safety and
health standards, INCLUDING STANDARDS THAT ADDRESS WORKPLACE VIOLENCE;

(3) providing for training and other education of personnel so that
occupational safety and health standards are administered fairly and efficiently;

(4) providing an effective compliance and enforcement program under this
title;

(5) encouraging employers and employees to:

(i) reduce the number of occupational health and safety hazards at
their places of employment; and

(ii) create or improve programs to make working conditions safe and
healthful;

(6) encouraging joint efforts of labor and management to reduce diseases
and injuries that arise out of employment;

(7) building on advances already made through the initiatives of employers
and employees to make working conditions safe and healthful;

(8) developing innovative approaches, methods, and techniques to deal
with occupational safety and health problems;

(9) providing for research in the field of occupational safety and health;

(10) conducting research on occupational health problems, including
research to:

(i) identify causal connections between diseases and work in
environmental conditions; and

(ii) explore ways to discover latent diseases;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(11) providing medical criteria to ensure, to the extent practicable, that
work does not diminish the functional capacity, health, or life expectancy of an employee;

(12) providing for reporting procedures on occupational safety and health
that are appropriate to help to achieve the purposes of this title and to describe accurately
the nature of occupational safety and health problems;

(13) providing for the dissemination of information about health and safety
hazards posed by toxic and hazardous substances to which workers are exposed;

(14) requiring employers to educate employees who work with hazardous
substances about the hazards of the substances and about safe procedures;

(15) requiring employers to give information to governmental units PUBLIC
BODIES that are charged with fire protection, to protect the health and safety of firefighters
and the public; [and]

(16) providing information and incentives for employers and employees to
make ridesharing arrangements; AND

(17) MAKING WORKPLACES OF PUBLIC BODIES SAFER AND MORE
HEALTHFUL BY REQUIRING:

(I) PUBLIC BODIES TO CREATE OR IMPROVE PROGRAMS AND
PLANS RELATED TO WORKPLACE VIOLENCE;

(II) THAT WORKPLACES OF PUBLIC BODIES BE INSPECTED
REGULARLY; AND

(III) THAT WORKPLACES OF PUBLIC BODIES BE MAINTAINED SO
THAT:

1. RESIDENTS AND THOSE SERVED BY PUBLIC BODIES
ARE SAFE AND HEALTHY; AND

2. EMPLOYEES ARE PROVIDED PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
THAT ARE SAFE, HEALTHY, AND PRODUCTIVE OVER THE COURSE OF THEIR
CAREERS.

5–104.

(a) Each employer shall provide each employee of the employer with employment
and a place of employment that are:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) safe and healthful; and

(2) free from each recognized hazard that is causing or likely to cause death
or serious physical harm to the employee.

(b) (1) Each employer shall comply with this title, each applicable regulation
that the Commissioner adopts to carry out this title, and each applicable order that the
Commissioner passes under this title.

(2) Each employee shall comply with this title and, when applicable to the
employee’s actions and conduct in the course of employment, each regulation that the
Commissioner passes under this title.

(c) (1) Each employer shall keep its employees informed of their protections
and duties under this title, including each applicable occupational safety and health
standard, by:

[(1)] (I) posting notice where notices to employees normally are posted;
or

[(2)] (II) using other appropriate means.

(2) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, EACH PUBLIC BODY ANNUALLY SHALL SEND BY E–MAIL MAKE
AVAILABLE TO EACH OF ITS EMPLOYEES A COPY OF:

(I) THE REPORT ISSUED BY THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER
FOR PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH UNDER § 5–206(F) OF THIS TITLE;
AND

(II) CITATIONS ISSUED BY THE COMMISSIONER TO THE PUBLIC
BODY IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR, IF ANY.

5–202.

(a) (1) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE Commissioner may delegate to the [assistant commissioner]
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER for [occupational safety] OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY and
[health] HEALTH any duty or function of the Commissioner under this title.

(2) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL DELEGATE TO THE ASSISTANT
COMMISSIONER FOR PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH ANY DUTY OR
~~FUNCTION~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ADMINISTRATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ENFORCEMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~TITLE~~
WITH RESPECT TO PUBLIC BODIES.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(b) (1) The Commissioner may enter into a written agreement with a
governmental unit PUBLIC BODY to delegate any power of inspection under this title.

~~(2)~~ ~~An~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~shall:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~specify~~ ~~the~~ ~~procedure~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~
~~agreement;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~enable~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~to~~ ~~monitor~~ ~~an~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~power~~ ~~under~~
~~the~~ ~~agreement;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~enable~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~to~~ ~~revoke~~ ~~the~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~time.~~

5–205.

(h) With the consent of a [governmental unit] PUBLIC BODY, the Commissioner
may use an employee, facility, or service of the [governmental unit] PUBLIC BODY, with or
without reimbursement, to help the Commissioner carry out a function under this title.

5–206.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER” MEANS THE ASSISTANT
COMMISSIONER FOR PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH.

(3), “UNIT” MEANS THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH
UNIT.

(B) THERE IS A PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ SAFETY AND HEALTH UNIT IN THE
DIVISION OF LABOR AND INDUSTRY.

(C) THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER SHALL BE THE HEAD OF THE UNIT.

[(a)] (D) The ASSISTANT Commissioner shall, SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL
OF THE COMMISSIONER, provide for and maintain a comprehensive and effective
program on occupational safety and health for employees of public bodies THAT IS
ADMINISTERED AND ENFORCED BY THE UNIT.

[(b)] (E) The program under this section shall:

(1) be generally consistent with this title; [and]

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) require each public body to:

(i) provide conditions and places of employment that are safe and
healthful;

(ii) develop, conduct, and maintain in each unit of the public body a
program of self–inspection that the ASSISTANT Commissioner approves AND MONITORS;

(iii) keep and make available to the ASSISTANT Commissioner each
record that the Commissioner requires under this title and for development of information
about occupational accidents, illnesses, and injuries, to allow proper evaluation and
necessary corrective action; and

(iv) submit each report that the Commissioner requires; AND

(3) IN ADDITION TO A SELF–INSPECTION REQUIRED UNDER ITEM
(2)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION, INCLUDE AN INSPECTION PROGRAM DEVELOPED,
CONDUCTED, AND MAINTAINED BY THE UNIT THAT:

(I) REQUIRES THE UNIT TO ROUTINELY INSPECT THE
WORKPLACES OF PUBLIC BODIES, INCLUDING FIELDWORK LOCATIONS;

(II) PRIORITIZES WORKPLACES AND OCCUPATIONS THAT
PRODUCE THE MOST COMPLAINTS AND CITATIONS;

(III) INCLUDES RANDOM INSPECTIONS THAT OCCUR WITHOUT
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC BODY THAT OWNS OR OPERATES THE WORKPLACE;

(IV) ASSESSES THE FIELDWORK LOCATIONS AND
~~CIRCUMSTANCES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~BODIES~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~DO~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~
~~TRADITIONAL~~ ~~WORKPLACE~~ ~~BUT~~ ~~INSTEAD~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~AT~~ ~~VARYING~~ ~~ASSIGNED~~ ~~FIELDWORK~~
LOCATIONS; AND

(V) OTHERWISE COMPLIES WITH THE INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS OF § 5–208 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(c) The Commissioner shall monitor the program of each public body for
self–inspection.

(d) The penalties under Subtitle 8 of this title do not apply to a public body.]

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, ON OR
BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER SHALL PUBLISH
ONLINE A WRITTEN REPORT ON SAFETY AND HEALTH IN PUBLIC BODIES.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(2) THE REPORT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE:

(I) A SUMMARY OF THE WORK AND FINDINGS OF THE UNIT;

(II) A SUMMARY OF ANY NEW REGULATIONS ADOPTED DURING
THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR;

(III) A SUMMARY OF TRENDING SAFETY AND HEALTH ISSUES
RELATED TO EMPLOYEES OF PUBLIC BODIES; AND

(IV) A LIST OF ANY:

1. HAZARDOUS WORKPLACE CIRCUMSTANCES FOUND AT
THE WORKPLACES OF PUBLIC BODIES DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR;
AND

2. CITATIONS ISSUED TO PUBLIC BODIES DURING THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR.

(3) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL
SUBMIT THE REPORT REQUIRED TO BE PUBLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(G) THIS SECTION DOES NOT LIMIT OR PRECLUDE THE COMMISSIONER OR
AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMMISSIONER FROM INSPECTING A
PUBLIC BODY IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY OTHER PROVISION UNDER THIS TITLE.

5–207.

(A) On request of the Commissioner, the Attorney General may proceed in a State
or federal court or before any other federal unit:

(1) to enforce a decision of the Commissioner under this title;

(2) subject to § 3–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, to
collect a civil penalty that is assessed by order of the Commissioner under this title; or

(3) to enforce any other order of the Commissioner under this title.

(B) IF THE REQUEST UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION CONCERNS
A PUBLIC BODY, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE REQUEST TO ALL AFFECTED EMPLOYEES
OF THE PUBLIC BODY AND ANY EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATIVES; AND

(2) PROVIDE NOTICE OF THE REQUEST TO THE GOVERNOR, THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES.

~~5–208.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~or~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~may~~
~~enter~~ ~~a~~ ~~place~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment~~ ~~where~~ ~~work~~ ~~is~~ ~~performed,~~ ~~without~~ ~~delay~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~reasonable~~
~~time,~~ ~~to:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~inspect~~ ~~the~~ ~~place~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~investigate~~ ~~all~~ ~~pertinent~~ ~~apparatus,~~ ~~conditions,~~ ~~devices,~~ ~~equipment,~~
materials, [and] structures, AND VEHICLES at the place of employment; and

~~(3)~~ ~~question~~ ~~privately~~ ~~an~~ ~~agent,~~ ~~employee,~~ ~~or~~ ~~employer.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~any~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~adopts~~ ~~to~~ ~~carry~~ ~~out~~
~~this~~ ~~title,~~ ~~a~~ ~~representative~~ ~~chosen~~ ~~by~~ ~~employees~~ ~~and~~ ~~a~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~employer~~ ~~shall~~
~~be~~ ~~given~~ ~~an~~ ~~opportunity~~ ~~to~~ ~~accompany~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~or~~ ~~an~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~representative~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~during~~ ~~an~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~If~~ ~~there~~ ~~is~~ ~~no~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~employee~~ ~~representative,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~
~~shall~~ ~~consult~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~reasonable~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~employees~~ ~~about~~ ~~safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~health~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~place~~
~~of~~ ~~employment.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Before~~ ~~or~~ ~~during~~ ~~an~~ ~~inspection,~~ ~~an~~ ~~employee~~ ~~or~~ ~~authorized~~
~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~employees~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~place~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment~~ ~~or~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Commissioner~~ ~~may~~ ~~give~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~written~~ ~~notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~that~~
~~the~~ ~~employee~~ ~~or~~ ~~representative~~ ~~has~~ ~~reason~~ ~~to~~ ~~believe~~ ~~exists~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~place~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~employee.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~shall~~ ~~set,~~ ~~by~~ ~~regulation,~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~for~~ ~~informal~~
~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~refusal~~ ~~to~~ ~~issue~~ ~~a~~ ~~citation~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~basis~~ ~~of~~ ~~notice~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~If~~ ~~an~~ ~~employee~~ ~~or~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~employees~~ ~~asks~~ ~~for~~
~~informal~~ ~~review~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~shall~~ ~~give~~ ~~the~~ ~~employee~~ ~~or~~
~~representative~~ ~~a~~ ~~written~~ ~~statement~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~reasons~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~final~~ ~~disposition.~~

(D) THE COMMISSIONER OR AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
~~COMMISSIONER~~ ~~MAY:~~

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(1) ACCOMPANY AND FOLLOW AN EMPLOYEE OF A PUBLIC BODY TO
~~ANY~~ ~~FIELDWORK~~ ~~LOCATIONS~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~CONDUCTING~~ ~~WORK~~ ~~ON~~
BEHALF OF THE PUBLIC BODY; AND

(2) ENTER ANY FIELDWORK LOCATIONS THAT THE EMPLOYEE OF A
PUBLIC BODY HAS CAUSE TO ENTER WHILE ACCOMPANYING THE EMPLOYEE.

5–211.

(a) Whenever an individual who is authorized to inspect property in the State is
denied access after the individual makes a proper request to the owner, lessee, or other
person in charge of the property, the individual may apply to the District Court for an
administrative search warrant under this section.

(b) Each application under this section shall:

(1) state the nature, purpose, and scope of the inspection; and

(2) show that:

(i) the applicant:

1. is authorized by law to inspect the property to which
access was denied; and

2. requested access at a reasonable time;

(ii) access was denied; and

(iii) the inspection is for a purpose related to safety or health.

(c) (1) An application may not be submitted to the District Court unless
approved by the Attorney General.

(2) IF THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’
SAFETY AND HEALTH OR AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ASSISTANT
COMMISSIONER APPLIES FOR AN ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANT UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PRIORITIZE
AND EXPEDITE REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION.

(d) On application in accordance with this section, the District Court may issue
an administrative search warrant.

5–212.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, if after an
inspection or investigation, the Commissioner or authorized representative of the
Commissioner is of the opinion that an employer has violated a duty under this title or an
order passed under this title or an occupational safety and health standard or other
regulation adopted to carry out this title, the Commissioner or authorized representative
shall issue a citation to the employer with reasonable promptness, not to exceed the earlier
of 90 days from the date of the closing conference on the inspection or investigation or 6
months from the occurrence of the violation.

(2) If the incident investigated by the Commissioner involves a fatality or
serious physical harm, the Commissioner shall issue a citation with reasonable
promptness, not to exceed 6 months from occurrence of the violation.

(3) If an employer to whom a citation is issued is a unit of the State
government, the Commissioner or authorized representative shall send a copy of the
citation to the secretary of the principal department to which the unit is assigned or, if the
unit is not part of a principal department, the head of the unit.

(4) IF AN EMPLOYER TO WHOM A CITATION IS ISSUED IS A PUBLIC
BODY OTHER THAN A UNIT OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT, THE COMMISSIONER OR
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE SHALL SEND A COPY OF THE CITATION TO THE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE PUBLIC BODY AND ANY LEGISLATIVE BODY THAT
HAS OVERSIGHT OF THE PUBLIC BODY.

(b) Each citation under this section shall:

(1) be in writing;

(2) describe, with particularity, the nature of the alleged violation;

(3) reference the provision of this title, order, or occupational safety and
health standard or other regulation that the employer is alleged to have violated; and

(4) set a reasonable period for abatement and correction of the alleged
violation.

(c) (1) In accordance with any regulation that the Commissioner adopts to
carry out this title, an employer who is issued a citation shall post the citation or a copy of
it conspicuously at or near each place where the citation alleges a violation occurred.

(2) IN ADDITION TO THE POSTING REQUIREMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PUBLIC BODY THAT IS ISSUED A CITATION SHALL SEND
BY E–MAIL MAKE AVAILABLE A COPY OF THE CITATION TO ALL AFFECTED
EMPLOYEES.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(d) The Commissioner may establish, by regulation, procedures for issuance of a
notice instead of a citation for a de minimis violation that has no direct or immediate
relationship to safety or health.

(E) (1) IF A PUBLIC BODY, AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE FROM THE
COMMISSIONER, DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION
(C) OF THIS SECTION, THE PUBLIC BODY IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY OF $500
PER DAY FOR EACH DAY DURING A 30–DAY PERIOD THAT THE PUBLIC BODY IS NOT
IN COMPLIANCE.

(2) A CIVIL PENALTY ASSESSED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCREASE TO $1,000 FOR EACH DAY, BEGINNING ON THE 31ST
DAY, THAT THE PUBLIC BODY IS NOT IN COMPLIANCE.

5–308.

(A) [The] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE Board shall
advise, consult with, propose, and recommend to the Commissioner reasonable regulations:

(1) to prevent conditions that are detrimental to safety and health in each
employment or place of employment in the State; and

(2) that the Board finds are necessary to protect and to improve the safety
and health of employees on the basis of circumstantial evidence and information that:

(i) is developed by the Commissioner;

(ii) is available to the Commissioner; or

(iii) is submitted by an interested person to the Board at a public
hearing held under § 5–310(d) of this subtitle.

(B) TO CARRY OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION WITH RESPECT TO PUBLIC BODIES, THE BOARD SHALL:

(1) GIVE SPECIFIC CONSIDERATION TO THE WORKPLACE CONDITIONS
AND SAFETY AND HEALTH CONCERNS OF EMPLOYEES; AND

(2) RECOMMEND HIGHER STANDARDS, IF WARRANTED.

5–702.

(a) (1) [The] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
Commissioner may require, by regulation, that an employer keep:

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(1)] (I) an accurate record of:

[(i)] 1. each work–related death;

[(ii)] 2. each work–related illness; and

[(iii)] 3. each work–related injury other than a minor injury that
requires only first aid treatment and does not involve loss of consciousness, medical
treatment, restriction of motion or work, or transfer to another job; and

[(2)] (II) each other record about an activity of the employer under this
title that the Commissioner considers appropriate or necessary to develop information
about the causes and prevention of occupational accidents, illnesses, and injuries.

(2) (I) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REQUIRE BY REGULATION
THAT EACH PUBLIC BODY KEEP AN ACCURATE RECORD OF THE INFORMATION
DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) EACH PUBLIC BODY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSIONER
A QUARTERLY REPORT OF THE RECORDS REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH IN THE FORM AND MANNER THE COMMISSIONER REQUIRES.

~~(b)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~employer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~make~~ ~~available~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~each~~ ~~record~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~
employer is required to keep under subsection [(a)(2)] (A)(1)(II) of this section.

~~(c)~~ ~~An~~ ~~employer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~report~~ ~~orally~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~an~~ ~~employment~~ ~~accident~~
~~within~~ ~~8~~ ~~hours~~ ~~after~~ ~~it~~ ~~occurs~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~accident~~ ~~results~~ ~~in:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~death~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~employee;~~ ~~or~~

~~(2)~~ ~~hospitalization~~ ~~of~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~three~~ ~~employees.~~

[5–801.

The penalties in this subtitle do not apply to a public body.]

~~5–804.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~A~~ ~~person~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~knowingly~~ ~~make~~ ~~a~~ ~~false~~ ~~certification,~~ ~~false~~ ~~representation,~~
~~or~~ ~~false~~ ~~statement~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~application,~~ ~~plan,~~ ~~record,~~ ~~report,~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~document~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~filed~~ ~~or~~
~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~kept~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~title.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~A~~ ~~person~~ ~~who~~ ~~violates~~ ~~any~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(a)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~is~~ ~~guilty~~
~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~misdemeanor~~ ~~and~~ ~~on~~ ~~conviction~~ ~~is~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~fine~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceeding~~ ~~$5,000~~ ~~or~~
~~imprisonment~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceeding~~ ~~6~~ ~~months~~ ~~or~~ ~~both.~~

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(C) (1) A PERSON WHO HOLDS POLITICAL OFFICE IN THE STATE,
WHETHER ELECTED OR APPOINTED, OR ANY OTHER POSITION OF PROFIT OR TRUST
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GOVERNMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~OR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ADMINISTRATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BUSINESS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
STATE OR ANY COUNTY, MUNICIPALITY, OR OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT
VIOLATES ANY PROVISION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A
MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $20,000
OR IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 1 YEAR OR BOTH.

(2) A SENTENCE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
~~SEPARATE~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CONSECUTIVE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~SENTENCE~~ ~~IMPOSED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~CRIME~~
BASED ON THE ACT ESTABLISHING THE VIOLATION OF THIS SUBSECTION.

~~5–811.~~

(a) (1) If a civil penalty that is assessed under this title is not paid in full
~~within~~ ~~30~~ ~~days~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~becomes~~ ~~final,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~Central~~ ~~Collection~~
~~Unit~~ ~~may~~ ~~proceed~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~District~~ ~~Court~~ ~~to~~ ~~enforce~~ ~~payment.~~

(2) IF A CIVIL PENALTY THAT IS ASSESSED AGAINST A PUBLIC BODY
UNDER THIS TITLE IS NOT PAID IN FULL:

(I) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE PENALTY BECOMES FINAL, THE
COMMISSIONER SHALL NOTIFY THE GOVERNOR, THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE,
AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES OF THE UNDERLYING VIOLATION,
THE PENALTY ASSESSED, AND THE PUBLIC BODY’S FAILURE TO PAY THE PENALTY;
~~AND~~

(II) WITHIN 75 DAYS AFTER THE PENALTY BECOMES FINAL, THE
COMMISSIONER MAY INCREASE THE PENALTY BY UP TO FIVE TIMES THE INITIAL
PENALTY AMOUNT.

~~(b)~~ ~~In~~ ~~a~~ ~~proceeding~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~Central~~
~~Collection~~ ~~Unit~~ ~~is~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~judgment~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~civil~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~that~~ ~~remains~~
~~unpaid~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~showing~~ ~~that:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~was~~ ~~assessed~~ ~~against~~ ~~the~~ ~~defendant;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~has~~ ~~become~~ ~~final;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~no~~ ~~appeal~~ ~~is~~ ~~pending;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~the~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~is~~ ~~wholly~~ ~~or~~ ~~partly~~ ~~unpaid;~~ ~~and~~

~~(5)~~ ~~the~~ ~~defendant:~~
– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 609 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(i)~~ ~~was~~ ~~duly~~ ~~served~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~copy~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~citation~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~
~~the~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~contested~~ ~~the~~ ~~citation~~ ~~for~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~penalty~~ ~~was~~ ~~assessed.~~

5–812.

(A) [Each] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
EACH civil penalty under this title shall be paid into the General Fund of the State.

(B) THE REVENUES FROM THE CIVIL PENALTIES ASSESSED AGAINST A
PUBLIC BODY UNDER THIS TITLE SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO A SPECIAL FUND TO BE
USED ONLY FOR THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING PROGRAM.

SUBTITLE 13. STANDARDS FOR PREVENTING WORKPLACE VIOLENCE.

5–1301.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “BOARD” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–301 OF THIS
TITLE.

5–1302.

(A) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL INCLUDE AS PART OF THE OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS TITLE STANDARDS
FOR PROTECTING EMPLOYEES OF PUBLIC BODIES FROM WORKPLACE VIOLENCE.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, ON OR BEFORE
OCTOBER 1, 2026, THE COMMISSIONER, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE BOARD,
SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(C) BEFORE ADOPTING REGULATIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL:

(1) REVIEW AND CONSIDER THE RECOMMENDATIONS ON
PREVENTING WORKPLACE VIOLENCE CREATED BY THE FEDERAL OCCUPATIONAL
SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION AND THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH;

(2) HOLD AT LEAST FOUR MEETINGS SOLICITING INPUT FROM
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVES OF EMPLOYEES OF PUBLIC BODIES ON
THE BEST WAYS TO PREVENT WORKPLACE VIOLENCE; AND

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 609

(3) HOLD MEETINGS IN AT LEAST FOUR GEOGRAPHICALLY DIVERSE
LOCATIONS IN THE STATE TO RECEIVE INPUT FROM INTERESTED PARTIES ON THE
BEST WAYS TO PREVENT WORKPLACE VIOLENCE.

Article – Public Safety

12–804.

(b) (1) [Sections] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, §§ 5–205(j), 5–207, 5–214, 5–215, and 5–216 and Title 5, Subtitle 8 of the
Labor and Employment Article apply to Part II of this subtitle.

(2) THE PENALTIES ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AND TITLE
5, SUBTITLE 8 OF THE LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE DO NOT APPLY WITH
RESPECT TO AN ELEVATOR UNIT OWNED BY A PUBLIC BODY, AS DEFINED IN § 5–101
OF THE LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21