START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 245

Chapter 245

(House Bill 161)

AN ACT concerning

~~Primary~~ ~~and~~ ~~Secondary~~ ~~Education~~ ~~–~~ ~~Comprehensive~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Education~~
~~Framework~~ ~~–~~ ~~Established~~
County Boards of Education – Curriculum Guides and Courses of Study –
Discrepancies

FOR the purpose of requiring ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education,~~ ~~in~~ ~~collaboration~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health,~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~a~~ ~~comprehensive~~ ~~health~~ ~~education~~
~~framework;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~each~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~of~~ ~~education~~ ~~to~~ ~~create~~ ~~an~~ ~~age–appropriate~~
~~curriculum~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~consistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~comprehensive~~ ~~health~~ ~~education~~ ~~framework;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~each~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~to~~ ~~establish~~ ~~policies,~~ ~~guidelines,~~ ~~and~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~
~~parent~~ ~~or~~ ~~guardian~~ ~~to~~ ~~opt~~ ~~out~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~topic~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~parent’s~~ ~~or~~ ~~guardian’s~~ ~~student,~~
~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~prohibition~~ ~~and~~ ~~requirement;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~establishment~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~comprehensive~~ ~~health~~ ~~education~~ ~~framework~~ ~~in~~ ~~public~~ ~~schools.~~
each county board of education to adopt curriculum guides and courses of study
aligned with content standards established by the State Department of Education;
establishing a process for correcting discrepancies identified by the State
Superintendent of Schools in a county board’s curriculum guides and courses of
study, including the imposition of certain penalties; and generally relating to a county
board of education’s curriculum guides and courses of study.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~7–401~~ 4–111 and 7–202.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

~~7–401.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~With~~ ~~the~~ ~~assistance~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~health~~ ~~department,~~ ~~each~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~shall~~
~~provide:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~Adequate~~ ~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~services;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Instruction~~ ~~in~~ ~~health~~ ~~education,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~importance~~ ~~of~~ ~~physical~~
~~activity~~ ~~in~~ ~~maintaining~~ ~~good~~ ~~health;~~ ~~and~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 245 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~A~~ ~~healthful~~ ~~school~~ ~~environment.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Department~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~jointly~~ ~~shall:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~Develop~~ ~~public~~ ~~standards~~ ~~and~~ ~~guidelines~~ ~~for~~ ~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~programs;~~
~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Offer~~ ~~assistance~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~boards~~ ~~and~~ ~~county~~ ~~health~~ ~~departments~~
~~in~~ ~~their~~ ~~implementation.~~

(c) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, SHALL DEVELOP A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
EDUCATION FRAMEWORK.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL UPDATE THE COMPREHENSIVE
HEALTH EDUCATION FRAMEWORK IN THE MANNER AND AT THE TIME THE STATE
BOARD DETERMINES IS NECESSARY.

(3) THE COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION FRAMEWORK SHALL,
AT A MINIMUM, INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING TOPICS:

~~(I)~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~PROMOTION;~~

(II) MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL HEALTH;

(III) SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION;

(IV) FAMILY LIFE AND HUMAN SEXUALITY;

(V) GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION;

(VI) SAFETY AND VIOLENCE PREVENTION;

(VII) SAFE AND APPROPRIATE SOCIAL MEDIA AND INTERNET
~~USE;~~

(VIII) HEALTHY EATING; AND

(IX) DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL.

(4) (I) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL CREATE AN
AGE–APPROPRIATE CURRICULUM THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE
HEALTH EDUCATION FRAMEWORK.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 245

(II) IN DEVELOPING A CURRICULUM UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH,
EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH A COMMITTEE COMPOSED OF EDUCATORS,
HEALTH EXPERTS, AND MEMBERS OF THE LOCAL COMMUNITY TO REVIEW AND
~~COMMENT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~WHETHER~~ ~~CURRICULUM~~ ~~MATERIALS~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~CONSISTENT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~
COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH EDUCATION FRAMEWORK.

(5) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPHS (II) AND (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL ESTABLISH POLICIES, GUIDELINES, AND
~~PROCEDURES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~PARENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~GUARDIAN~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OPT~~ ~~OUT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~LIFE~~ ~~AND~~
HUMAN SEXUALITY TOPIC FOR THE PARENT’S OR GUARDIAN’S STUDENT IN EACH
GRADE IN WHICH THE TOPIC IS TAUGHT.

(II) THE COUNTY BOARD MAY NOT AUTHORIZE A PARENT OR
GUARDIAN TO OPT THE PARENT’S OR GUARDIAN’S STUDENT OUT OF EDUCATION
RELATING TO HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION.

(III) EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL IDENTIFY APPROPRIATE
ALTERNATIVE LEARNING OBJECTIVES AND MEASURABLE GOALS THAT MEET STATE
AND LOCAL HEALTH EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE TOPIC THE STUDENT’S
~~PARENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~GUARDIAN~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~ELECTED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OPT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~OUT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(6) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 15, 2026, AND EACH JUNE 15 THEREAFTER,
EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT DESCRIBING
~~THE~~ ~~ACTIONS~~ ~~TAKEN~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPLY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~
IN PARAGRAPHS (4) AND (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) (1) (i) Each county board shall designate a school health services
~~program~~ ~~coordinator.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~A~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~may~~ ~~authorize~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~health~~ ~~department~~ ~~to~~
~~designate~~ ~~the~~ ~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~services~~ ~~program~~ ~~coordinator.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~services~~ ~~program~~ ~~coordinator~~ ~~shall:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~Implement~~ ~~State~~ ~~and~~ ~~local~~ ~~health~~ ~~policies~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~public~~ ~~schools;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~Ensure~~ ~~that~~ ~~public~~ ~~schools~~ ~~adhere~~ ~~to~~ ~~local~~ ~~health~~ ~~services~~
~~guidelines;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~Communicate~~ ~~State~~ ~~and~~ ~~local~~ ~~health~~ ~~policies~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~parents~~ ~~and~~
~~guardians~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~school~~ ~~students.~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 245 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~(ii)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~paragraph,~~ ~~the~~
~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~grant~~ ~~the~~ ~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~services~~ ~~program~~ ~~coordinator~~ ~~the~~ ~~authority~~ ~~to~~
~~carry~~ ~~out~~ ~~the~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~consult~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~superintendent~~
~~before~~ ~~any~~ ~~change~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~hiring~~ ~~or~~ ~~termination~~ ~~of~~ ~~personnel~~ ~~in~~ ~~connection~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~school~~
~~health~~ ~~services~~ ~~program.~~

~~(4)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Department~~ ~~shall~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~two~~ ~~meetings~~ ~~annually~~ ~~with~~ ~~all~~
~~school~~ ~~health~~ ~~services~~ ~~program~~ ~~coordinators~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

[(d)] (E) On or before December 1, 2015, and every 5 years thereafter, the
~~Department~~ ~~shall~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~and,~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~
~~Article,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~a~~ ~~summary~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~information~~ ~~reported~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~Superintendent~~ ~~during~~ ~~the~~ ~~COMAR~~ ~~certification~~ ~~process.~~

4–111.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CONTENT STANDARDS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–202.1
OF THIS ARTICLE.

(3) “CURRICULUM RESOURCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–202.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(4) “CURRICULUM STANDARDS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–202.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) Subject to the applicable provisions of this article and the bylaws, basic
policies, and guidelines established by the State Board, each county board, on the written
recommendation of the county superintendent, shall:

(1) Establish curriculum guides and courses of study ALIGNED WITH THE
CONTENT STANDARDS DEVELOPED UNDER § 7–202.1 OF THIS ARTICLE for the schools
under its jurisdiction, including appropriate programs of instruction or training for
[mentally or physically handicapped children] CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES; and

(2) Supply printed copies of these materials to any teacher or interested
[citizen] INDIVIDUAL.

(C) (1) IF THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT RECEIVES NOTICE OR
DETERMINES THAT A COUNTY BOARD HAS ESTABLISHED CURRICULUM GUIDES AND
COURSES OF STUDY CONTRARY TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 245

SECTION, THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT SHALL SEND A WRITTEN NOTICE OF
DISCREPANCY TO THE COUNTY BOARD.

(2) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE COUNTY BOARD RECEIVED
NOTICE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT SHALL MEET WITH THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT TO:

(I) DISCUSS THE DISCREPANCIES IDENTIFIED BY THE STATE
SUPERINTENDENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(II) DEVELOP A CORRECTIVE PLAN, INCLUDING AN
IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINE, SUBJECT TO APPROVAL OF THE STATE
SUPERINTENDENT.

(3) (I) IF THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT DETERMINES THAT THE
COUNTY BOARD HAS NOT SATISFACTORILY IMPLEMENTED THE CORRECTIVE PLAN
APPROVED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY BOARD
SHALL ADOPT AND USE THE CURRICULUM STANDARDS AND CURRICULUM
RESOURCES ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 7–202.1 OF THIS ARTICLE
ONLY IN SUBJECTS OR COURSES IDENTIFIED IN THE CORRECTIVE PLAN.

(II) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT SHALL SEND A COUNTY
BOARD A WRITTEN NOTICE OF A DETERMINATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE END OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINE
APPROVED IN THE CORRECTIVE PLAN UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(III) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL SEND THE STATE
SUPERINTENDENT WRITTEN CONFIRMATION OF RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, INCLUDING DOCUMENTATION OF THE
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF THE COUNTY BOARD’S ADOPTION OF THE DEPARTMENT’S
CURRICULUM STANDARDS AND CURRICULUM RESOURCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(4) IF A COUNTY BOARD FAILS TO ADOPT THE DEPARTMENT’S
CURRICULUM STANDARDS AND CURRICULUM RESOURCES AS REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION WITHIN 60 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE COUNTY
BOARD RECEIVED THE WRITTEN NOTICE FROM THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT
UNDER PARAGRAPH (3)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT
SHALL WITHHOLD STATE FUNDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 2–303 AND 5–205 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

[(b)] (D) A county board may give academic credit for the study of American Sign
Language.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 245 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

7–202.1.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CONTENT STANDARDS” MEANS THE STATEMENTS FOR THE
PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION THAT DESCRIBE THE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS
STUDENTS ARE EXPECTED TO ATTAIN FOR EACH CONTENT AREA AND GRADE LEVEL.

(3) “CURRICULUM RESOURCES” MEANS GUIDANCE DOCUMENTS AND
FRAMEWORKS USED BY A COUNTY BOARD TO DEVELOP CURRICULA TO IMPLEMENT
CONTENT STANDARDS.

(4) “CURRICULUM STANDARDS” MEANS THE STATEMENTS THAT
OUTLINE APPROACHES TO LEARNING FOR EACH CONTENT AREA ACROSS GRADE
LEVELS.

(B) The Department shall, in consultation with experienced and highly effective
teachers, including teachers on the career ladder under Title 6, Subtitle 10 of this article,
develop CONTENT STANDARDS, curriculum standards, and curriculum resources for each
subject at each grade level, that build on one another in logical sequence, in core subjects
that may be used by local school systems and public school teachers.

[(b)] (C) (1) The purpose of the curriculum standards and curriculum
resources developed under this section is to provide county boards with technical assistance
to inform high–quality instruction that will ultimately result in students meeting the college
and career readiness standards in the manner described under § 7–205.1 of this subtitle.

(2) The curriculum resources developed under this section shall include, for
each core subject at each grade level:

(i) Course syllabi;

(ii) Sample lessons for teachers to use as models;

(iii) Examples of student work that meet standards for proficiency;

(iv) Explanations of why student work examples meet proficiency
standards so that teachers know what student knowledge is required; and

(v) Curriculum units aligned with the course syllabi.

(3) In developing the curriculum resources under this subsection, the
Department:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 245

(i) May use as a model a course or unit developed by a teacher in or
out of the State; but

(ii) Shall review each model course and unit for quality, using
accepted benchmarks such as approval by EdReports or Tier 1 and Tier 2 evidence–based
standards established by the federal Every Student Succeeds Act.

(4) The Department shall compile curriculum units in such a manner that:

(i) Complete courses are formed; and

(ii) When taken by a student in sequence, the student can achieve the
college and career readiness standard adopted under § 7–205.1 of this subtitle by the end of
grade 10.

[(c)] (D) The Department shall submit curriculum resources and curriculum
standards developed under this section to the State Board for adoption.

[(d)] (E) The State Board shall establish a system of assessments to ensure that
students are acquiring the knowledge contained in the curriculum standards in English,
Mathematics, Science, and History or Social Studies.

[(e)] (F) (1) Using the assessments established under subsection [(d)] (E) of
this section, the Department shall identify low–performing schools.

(2) An Expert Review Team established under § 5–411 of this article, under
the supervision of the Department, shall visit schools identified under paragraph (1) of this
subsection according to the criteria established under § 5–411 of this article.

(3) If the Department, based on a recommendation of an Expert Review
Team, determines that a school’s low performance on assessments is, largely, due to
curricular problems, the school shall adopt the curriculum resources developed under this
section.

(4) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, this section does
not require a public school or county board to adopt the Department’s curriculum standards
and curriculum resources and may not be construed to restrict a county board’s authority to
adopt curricula under § 4–111 of this article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7