START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 102 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 102 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program - Revisions 
 
This departmental bill delays the Family and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) Program’s 
start dates by 18 months to January 1, 2027, for required contributions and by at least  
six months to a date that is between January 1, 2027, and January 3, 2028, as determined 
and announced by the Secretary of Labor, for benefit payments. The bill alters/adds other 
dates, definitions, prohibitions, and components of program administration, including 
delaying optional participation in the program for self-employed individuals until 
regulations are adopted by July 1, 2028. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. FAMLI special fund revenues decrease by up to 
$1.3 billion annually in FY 2026 and 2027, and expenditures decrease by up to $1.8 billion 
in FY 2027 and $0.9 billion in FY 2028 due to delayed contributions and benefits. The bill 
effectuates contingent language in the FY 2026 budget as introduced, as amended by 
Supplemental Budget No. 1. As a result, in FY 2026, FAMLI special fund expenditures for 
administration decrease by $66.8 million, general fund expenditures increase by 
$37.3 million, and general fund and federal fund provider reimbursement expenditures 
decrease by $14.8 million and $14.9 million, respectively; the net effect on general fund 
expenditures is a $22.5 million increase. Out-year impacts for provider reimbursements 
and FAMLI revenues/expenditures from regulations are not quantified below. This bill 
eliminates a mandated appropriation for FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
($1,272.5) 
($1,316.9) 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$22.5 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
($66.8) 
($1,753.5) 
($946.7) 
(-) 
(-) 
FF Expenditure 
($14.9) 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($1,213.2) 
$436.6 
$946.7 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 102/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures decrease in FY 2026 and 2027 due to employer 
contributions being delayed by 18 months until January 1, 2027. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services disagrees with this assessment due to the amendments, as discussed 
below. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
FAMLI Definitions 
 
The bill defines “anchor date” as the earlier of the date on which (1) an application for 
benefits is complete or (2) leave begins for a covered individual for which FAMLI benefits 
may be paid. The bill alters the definition of “application year” to mean the  
12-month period beginning on the Sunday of the calendar week in which FAMLI leave 
begins instead of when benefits are approved. The definition of a “covered employee” is 
altered to be based on performing services under employment in the State over the  
four most recently completed calendar quarters for which quarterly reports have been 
required immediately preceding the anchor date, as opposed to the date on which leave is 
to begin. 
 
A covered employee’s average weekly wage must be calculated based on wages in the 
highest of the previous four completed calendar quarters that immediately precede the 
anchor date as specified. 
 
FAMLI Self-employed Enrollment Program 
 
The Secretary of Labor must adopt regulations by July 1, 2028, that establish an optional 
self-employed enrollment program for the FAMLI Program, which must include 
contribution amounts, benefit amounts, and enrollment procedures. 
 
The bill repeals the election process for self-employed individuals to participate in the 
FAMLI Program, and self-employed individuals are excluded from receiving benefit 
payments as outlined in statute. Accordingly, self-employed individuals who subsequently 
elect to participate in the FAMLI Program must contribute to the FAMLI Fund in 
accordance with adopted regulations instead of contributing an amount equal to the total 
rate of contribution. The bill also makes conforming changes. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 102/ Page 3 
Deadlines and Administration of the FAMLI Program 
 
By May 1, 2026, instead of February 1, 2025, the Secretary of Labor must set the total rate 
of FAMLI contribution, which must be in effect from January 1, 2027, through 
December 31, 2027, instead of being in effect from July 1, 2025, through June 30, 2026. 
Beginning November 1, 2027, instead of February 1, 2026, the Secretary of Labor must 
annually set the FAMLI contribution rate for the following calendar year. 
 
Beginning by October 1, 2027, instead of November 15, 2026, the Secretary must annually 
conduct a cost analysis of the program and report to specified committees on the results. 
 
The Secretary of Labor must submit an annual report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by October 1 instead of November 15 each year. 
 
The weekly maximum benefit is indexed to inflation beginning January 1, 2029, instead of 
January 1, 2027, and the bill makes conforming changes. An increase in the weekly benefit 
amount applies only to an application year with an anchor date that occurs on or after the 
effective date of the increase, instead of only to a claim for benefits that begins after the 
effective date of the increase. 
 
Instead of notifying each employer, MD Labor must announce the increase to the 
maximum weekly benefit. After the initial payment, MD Labor must make subsequent 
payments at least every two weeks until the benefit period ends. 
 
MD Labor may not require employers who are allowed to pool together with other 
employers under current law to purchase insurance to escrow employer and employee 
contributions before the issuance of FAMLI benefits. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 48 of 2022 established the FAMLI Program, to be administered 
by MD Labor. Chapters 258 and 259 of 2023 and Chapters 266 and 267 of 2024 made 
several modifications to the program, including delaying the program’s start date. 
Employer, employee, and self-employed individual contributions to the program begin 
July 1, 2025, and employees can begin filing claims for benefits on July 1, 2026. 
 
The program generally provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to a covered individual who is 
taking leave from employment due to caring for or bonding with certain family members, 
the individual’s own serious health condition, or a qualifying exigency arising out of a 
family member’s military deployment. The weekly benefit is based on an individual’s 
average weekly wage and is indexed to inflation. 
 
A self-employed individual who is a State resident may elect to participate in the  
FAMLI Program by filing a written notice with the Secretary of Labor in accordance with 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 102/ Page 4 
regulations adopted by the Secretary. An election becomes effective on the date the written 
notice is filed. The self-employed individual making an initial election must participate for 
at least three years, after which the self-employed individual may renew participation in 
the program for a period of at least one year. Self-employed individuals who elect to 
participate in the program must contribute an amount equal to the total contribution rate. 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund 
 
Chapter 48 also establishes the FAMLI Fund, which is a special fund administered by the 
Secretary of Labor consisting of employee, employer, and self-employed individual 
contributions, specified application and renewal fees, money collected from specified 
assessments and hearings, and other specified sources of funds. Funds must be used to pay 
FAMLI benefits and may be used to pay for public education on the FAMLI Program and 
any other costs associated with the initial implementation and ongoing administration of 
the FAMLI Program. 
 
Contributions 
 
Required contributions to the program, which are shared equally between employers and 
employees, are also based on employee wages, although employers with 14 or fewer 
employees are not required to contribute. The total rate of contribution may not exceed 
1.2% of an employee’s wages up to and including the Social Security wage base, and the 
rate is annually adjusted based on a required cost analysis. In September 2023, MD Labor 
set the initial total rate of contribution at 0.9% of covered wages. This rate will apply for 
fiscal 2026; thus, beginning July 1, 2025, each employee, each employer with 15 or more 
employees, and each participating self-employed individual must pay to the Secretary of 
Labor 0.9% of covered wages up to the Social Security cap, equally divided between 
employees and employers (self-employed individuals pay the total 0.9% contribution rate). 
 
Benefits 
 
A covered individual may not receive more than 12 weeks of benefits in an application 
year, except under specified circumstances. A covered individual may take eligible leave 
on an intermittent leave schedule under specified conditions. The weekly benefit payable 
to a covered individual is calculated based on the employee’s average weekly wage and 
ranges from a minimum of $50 to a maximum of $1,000 for the six-month period beginning  
July 1, 2026. Beginning January 1, 2027, the maximum weekly benefit must be increased 
by the annual percentage growth in the Consumer Price Index, subject to a determination 
by the Board of Public Works based on expected economic conditions. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 102/ Page 5 
Provider Reimbursements for Employer Share of Family and Medical Leave Insurance 
Contributions 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is required to reimburse certain service 
providers for some or all of the employer share of FAMLI contributions on at least a 
quarterly basis, as follows:   
 
 
for a community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7 of 
the Health-General Article, 100% of the employer FAMLI contribution; 
 
for a community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7.5 
of the Health-General Article, for a percentage of the employer FAMLI contribution 
that is equal to the percentage of revenue that is attributable to federal and State 
Medicaid funding and any other State funding received by the provider for the 
services during the period covered by the reimbursement; or 
 
for a provider, as defined in § 16-201.4 of the Health-General Article, a percentage 
of the FAMLI employer contribution that is equal to the percentage of revenue 
attributable to federal and State Medicaid funding and any other State funding 
received by the provider for the services during the period covered by the 
reimbursement. 
 
Background:  Along with Maryland, 12 other states (California, Colorado, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, 
Rhode Island, and Washington) and the District of Columbia have passed paid family and 
medical leave laws. Of these states, Delaware, Maryland, Maine, and Minnesota have not 
yet implemented their programs. 
 
The Center for American Progress estimates that in states that allow self-employed 
individuals to opt in to paid FAMLI programs, the take-up rate is less than 2%. The center 
speculates that self-employed individuals may not be opting into FAMLI programs due to 
low awareness of FAMLI programs and that they may not seek out information on 
FAMLI programs until there is an urgent need for it, at which point it may be too late to 
enroll. 
 
Maryland, Massachusetts, and Minnesota require self-employed individuals who opt into 
their FAMLI program to pay the total contribution rate, while states like Colorado, Maine, 
Oregon, and Washington require self-employed individuals to only pay the employee rate. 
 
State Revenues:  Delaying required contributions for the FAMLI Program by 18 months 
from July 1, 2025, to January 1, 2027, decreases special fund revenues from employer and 
employee contributions. Contributions are due the month after the quarter ends, so delaying 
the FAMLI Program by 18 months reflects not receiving FAMLI contribution payments 
from employers and employees for three quarters in both fiscal 2026 and 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 102/ Page 6 
In September 2023, MD Labor set the initial total rate of contribution at 0.9% of covered 
wages, but the bill requires MD Labor to set the initial rate by May 1, 2026. Assuming the 
0.9% rate remains unchanged and based on the timing of when quarterly contributions are 
collected, FAMLI special fund revenues decrease by $1.3 billion annually in fiscal 2026 
and 2027 as a result of the delay. Further, this estimate reflects the State as an employer 
self-insuring, but all other employers participating in the FAMLI Program. To the extent 
that other employers participate in private plans, the actual decrease in revenues is less. 
 
Under current law, self-employed individuals may opt into the FAMLI Program. If they 
opt in, they must pay the full contribution rate beginning on July 1, 2025, and are eligible 
to receive benefits beginning on July 1, 2026. Under the bill, self-employed individuals 
may not opt into the FAMLI Program until MD Labor adopts regulations, which could be 
as late as July 1, 2028. Thus, FAMLI special fund revenues may further decrease minimally 
in fiscal 2026 through 2028 due to delaying the commencement of contributions by any 
participating self-employed individuals in the FAMLI Program. The impact is lessened to 
the extent that MD Labor adopts regulations earlier than July 1, 2028. Once MD Labor 
adopts regulations, likely beginning in fiscal 2029, FAMLI special fund revenues may 
annually increase or decrease depending on the regulations that MD Labor adopts, but the 
overall effect is likely minimal due to anticipated low participation rates of self-employed 
individuals, as realized in other states. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Maryland Department of Labor Operating Expenses 
 
MD Labor advises that the bill results in operational savings in fiscal 2026, primarily 
related to delaying staffing for customer care, claims, and employer services. While 
delaying the FAMLI Program by 18 months results in operational savings, the delay in 
FAMLI contributions means that FAMLI Fund revenues are not available to support the 
program. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as introduced includes $66.8 million in special fund expenditures 
and $14.8 million in federal fund expenditures, with 369 authorized positions and 
8 contractual positions. However, the fiscal 2026 budget as introduced as amended by 
Supplemental Budget No. 1 eliminates the special fund appropriation of $66.8 million and 
appropriates $37.3 million in general funds to MD Labor, both contingent on the enactment 
of legislation delaying the implementation of the FAMLI Act. The bill effectuates these 
contingent actions. Thus, special fund expenditures decrease by $66.8 million in 
fiscal 2026 and general fund expenditures increase by $37.3 million in fiscal 2026 to fund 
existing personnel, contracts, and related FAMLI expenses that cannot be deferred. 
MD Labor advises that there is no cost savings for fiscal 2027 as the unfilled authorized 
positions will be filled in fiscal 2027, with the delay of the program enabling a longer 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 102/ Page 7 
employee onboarding and training program for customer care, employer services, and 
claims and benefits teams. 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Benefits 
 
Delaying the start of FAMLI benefits by up to 18 months to January 3, 2028 (at the latest), 
results in no FAMLI benefits being paid in fiscal 2027 and for half of fiscal 2028. Thus, 
based on existing projections of future benefit payments under current law, special fund 
expenditures for FAMLI benefits decrease by at most $1.8 billion in fiscal 2027 and 
$0.9 billion in fiscal 2028, assuming benefits commence January 3, 2028, and no 
employers participate in private plans. However, the actual decrease in benefit payments 
will be less (1) since the State as an employer will self-insure, along with other employers 
participating in private plans, thereby lowering benefit payments and (2) if benefit 
payments commence before January 3, 2028 (but after January 1, 2027). Neither the 
individual nor the combined impact of these two factors on expenditures can be reliably 
quantified at this time, particularly as the actual start date for benefits is to be decided in 
the future. 
 
Under current law, the $1,000 maximum weekly benefit amount increases with inflation 
beginning January 1, 2027, but the bill delays the increase in inflation by two years until  
January 1, 2029. As a result of delaying the adjustment to maximum weekly benefit 
amounts, FAMLI special fund expenditures further decrease annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027, depending on inflation. 
 
Employer Contributions for State Employees 
 
The State is opting to self-insure for the FAMLI Program so there is no material cost 
savings to the State as an employer from delaying the start of contributions. Likewise, 
delaying the start of benefits likely does not have a material impact on the State as an 
employer. 
 
Self-employed Individuals 
 
FAMLI special fund expenditures may minimally decrease in fiscal 2027 and 2028 due to 
delaying the commencement of FAMLI benefits to self-employed individuals. The impact 
is lessened to the extent that MD Labor adopts regulations earlier than July 1, 2028. 
 
Once MD Labor adopts regulations, likely beginning in fiscal 2029, FAMLI special fund 
expenditures may annually increase or decrease depending on the regulations that  
MD Labor adopts, but the overall effect is likely minimal due to anticipated low 
participation rates of self-employed individuals, as realized in other states. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 102/ Page 8 
Service Providers 
 
MDH must reimburse certain service providers for some or all of the employer share of 
FAMLI contributions on at least a quarterly basis. The fiscal 2026 budget as introduced as 
amended by Supplemental Budget No. 1 reduces MDH general fund and federal fund 
expenditures by $14,838,755 and $14,949,024, respectively, in fiscal 2026 contingent on 
legislation delaying the implementation of the FAMLI Act. Thus, MDH general fund and 
federal fund expenditures decrease by $14.8 million and $14.9 million, respectively, in 
fiscal 2026, with additional cost savings in fiscal 2027. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local jurisdictions experience savings from FAMLI contributions 
being delayed by 18 months until January 1, 2027. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill delays employer FAMLI contributions by 18 months. 
Thus, small businesses with at least 15 employees benefit from not having to pay employer 
FAMLI contributions. Self-employed individuals are unable to participate in the  
FAMLI Program until MD Labor adopts regulations, which could be as late as fiscal 2029. 
 
Additional Comments:  House Bill 352 of 2025 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act of 2025) as amended by the House of Delegates, transfers $37.3 million from the Local 
Reserve Account to the Division of Paid Leave within MD Labor and requires MD Labor 
to reimburse the Local Reserve Account within two years after FAMLI contributions begin. 
The impact of this alternative approach to funding MD Labor in fiscal 2026 has not been 
accounted for in this analysis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 225 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Center for American Progress; National 
Conference of State Legislatures; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 102/ Page 9 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 3, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 102/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program - Application Year and 
Participation of Self-Employed Individuals 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 102 
 
PREPARED BY: 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
Summary (if applicable): 
 

END OF PAGE 10