START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 240

Chapter 240

(House Bill 197)

AN ACT concerning

Public Schools – Restorative Practices Schools – Comprehensive Plan

FOR the purpose of requiring the State Department of Education to develop a
comprehensive plan to implement requirements for the establishment of Restorative
Practices Schools; requiring a county board of education to use the comprehensive
plan if the county board chooses to establish a Restorative Practices School; and
generally relating to Restorative Practices Schools.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–306
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–306.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–306.

(a) (1) In this section, “restorative [approaches”] PRACTICES” means a
COMMUNALLY AND CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE, relationship–focused student discipline
model that:

(i) Is preventive and proactive;

(ii) Emphasizes building strong relationships and setting clear
behavioral expectations that contribute to the well–being of the school community;

(iii) In response to behavior that violates the clear behavioral
expectations that contribute to the well–being of the school community, focuses on
accountability for any harm done by the problem behavior; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 240 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) Addresses ways to repair the relationships affected by the
problem behavior with the voluntary participation of an individual who was harmed.

(2) “Restorative [approaches”] PRACTICES” may include:

(i) Conflict resolution;

(ii) Mediation;

(iii) Peer mediation;

(iv) Circle processes;

(v) Restorative conferences;

(vi) Social emotional learning;

(vii) Trauma–informed care;

(viii) Positive behavioral intervention supports; and

(ix) [Rehabilitation] PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY.

(b) Notwithstanding any bylaw, rule, or regulation made or approved by the State
Board, a principal, vice principal, or other employee may not administer corporal
punishment to discipline a student in a public school in the State.

(c) The State Board shall:

(1) Establish guidelines that define a State code of discipline for all public
schools with standards of conduct and consequences for violations of the standards;

(2) On request, provide technical assistance and training to county boards
regarding the use of restorative [approaches] PRACTICES, INCLUDING TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE IN BECOMING A RESTORATIVE PRACTICES SCHOOL IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 7–306.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE; and

(3) Assist each county board with the implementation of the guidelines.

(d) (1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, each
county board shall adopt regulations designed to create and maintain within the schools
under its jurisdiction the atmosphere of order and discipline necessary for effective
learning.

(2) The regulations adopted by a county board under this subsection:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 240

(i) Shall provide for educational and behavioral interventions,
restorative [approaches] PRACTICES, counseling, and student and parent conferencing;

(ii) Shall provide alternative programs, which may include in–school
suspension, suspension, expulsion, or other disciplinary measures that are deemed
appropriate; and

(iii) Shall state that the primary purpose of any disciplinary measure
is rehabilitative, restorative, and educational.

(e) (1) On or before October 1 each year, the Department shall submit to the
Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General
Assembly, a student discipline data report that includes a description of the uses of
restorative [approaches] PRACTICES in the State and a review of disciplinary practices
and policies in the State.

(2) The Department shall disaggregate the information in any student
discipline data report prepared by the Department by race, ethnicity, gender, disability
status, eligibility for free or reduced price meals or an equivalent measure of socioeconomic
status, English language proficiency, and type of discipline for:

(i) The State;

(ii) Each local school system; and

(iii) Each public school.

(3) Special education–related data in any report prepared under this
subsection shall be disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and gender.

(f) (1) In this subsection, “alternative school discipline practice” means a
discipline practice used in a public school that is not an in–school suspension or an
out–of–school suspension.

(2) The Department shall collect data on alternative school discipline
practices in public schools for each local school system, including:

(i) The types of alternative school discipline practices that are used
in a local school system; and

(ii) The type of misconduct for which an alternative discipline
practice is used.

7–306.1.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 240 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “RESTORATIVE PRACTICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–306 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) “RESTORATIVE PRACTICES SCHOOL” MEANS A PUBLIC SCHOOL
THAT INTEGRATES RESTORATIVE PRACTICES INTO DAILY PRACTICES AND
ACTIVITIES OF THE WHOLE SCHOOL.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF RESTORATIVE PRACTICES
SCHOOLS.

(2) IN DEVELOPING A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL CONSULT WITH AND SEEK INSIGHT FROM:

(I) EDUCATORS AND ADMINISTRATORS WHO HAVE
EFFECTIVELY ESTABLISHED AND OPERATED SCHOOLS THAT INTEGRATE
RESTORATIVE PRACTICES INTO THE DAILY PRACTICES AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
WHOLE SCHOOL; AND

(II) STATE AND NATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS THAT HAVE
STUDIED THE EFFECTIVE USE OF RESTORATIVE PRACTICES AND HAVE
ESTABLISHED THE MOST APPROPRIATE METHODS OF INTEGRATING RESTORATIVE
PRACTICES IN THE SCHOOL SETTING.

(C) THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) PROVIDE A FRAMEWORK FOR LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO
IDENTIFY SCHOOL PERSONNEL QUALIFIED TO PROVIDE INITIAL RESTORATIVE
PRACTICES TRAINING AS RESTORATIVE PRACTICE COACHES TO OTHER SCHOOL
STAFF;

(2) ESTABLISH MODEL TRAINING MATERIAL IN RESTORATIVE
PRACTICES FOR PERSONNEL IDENTIFIED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO
USE IN TRAINING OTHER SCHOOL STAFF IN A MANNER THAT RESULTS IN
RESTORATIVE PRACTICES BEING INTEGRATED INTO SCHOOLWIDE PRACTICES AND
ACTIVITIES;

(3) ESTABLISH STANDARDS FOR WHEN A SCHOOL MAY BE
DESIGNATED A RESTORATIVE PRACTICES SCHOOL; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 240

(4) DEVELOP THE INTENDED OUTCOMES AND PERFORMANCE
METRICS THAT THE USE OF RESTORATIVE PRACTICES ARE DESIGNED TO ACHIEVE,
INCLUDING IMPROVEMENTS IN THE FOLLOWING AREAS:

(I) STUDENT CONDUCT THAT LEADS TO DISCIPLINARY
ACTIONS, INCLUDING STUDENT OFFICE REFERRALS, SUSPENSIONS, EXPULSIONS,
AND SCHOOL ARRESTS;

(II) STUDENT ABSENTEEISM AND TRUANCY;

(III) RATES OF TEACHER TURNOVER AND ABSENTEEISM;

(IV) RELEVANT MENTAL HEALTH INDICATORS; AND

(V) SCHOOL CLIMATE INDICATORS.

(D) IF A COUNTY BOARD CHOOSES TO ESTABLISH A RESTORATIVE
PRACTICES SCHOOL WITHIN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM, THE COUNTY BOARD
SHALL USE THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DEVELOPED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2026, the State Department of Education shall report to the Governor and, in accordance
with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly on its comprehensive
plan for the establishment of Restorative Practices Schools required by § 7–306.1 of the
Education Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025. ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~2~~ ~~years~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~
~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2027,~~ ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5