START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 100 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 100 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Insurance Pooling - Public Entity - Definition 
 
 
This bill explicitly authorizes a resilience authority to pool together with other public 
entities, including other resilience authorities, to purchase casualty insurance, property 
insurance, or health insurance or to self-insure against casualty, property, or health risks. 
The bill effectuates this explicit authority by including “resilience authority” into the 
definition of “public entity.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State government operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures decrease to the extent that the insurance pooling 
authorized by the bill takes place and results in decreased premium costs for resilience 
authorities. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Public entities are authorized to pool together for the purpose of purchasing 
casualty insurance, property insurance, health insurance, or to self-insure against casualty, 
property, or health risks. “Public entity” means a:   
 
 
political subdivision of the State; 
 
unit of the State or a local government; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 100/ Page 2 
 
nonprofit or nonstock corporation that receives 50% or more of its budget from the 
State or local government and is a tax exempt under specified federal law. 
 
“Resilience Authority” means an authority incorporated by one or more local governments 
for the purpose of undertaking or supporting resilience infrastructure projects. 
 
A county or municipality of the State may enter into an agreement to fund an insurance 
pool and may determine by resolution the provisions, terms, conditions, and duration of 
the agreement, under certain circumstances. In making these funding and payment 
agreements, a county or municipality of the State must comply with all provisions of the 
Maryland Constitution. However, barring specified limitations, a county or municipality 
may undertake a payment obligation related to insurance pooling without regard to any 
limitations or procedures contained in its charter or other applicable public laws that 
otherwise would be required. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 102 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2