START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 197 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 197 
(Delegate Pasteur, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Restorative Practices Schools - Comprehensive Plan 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), by July 1, 2026, 
to (1) develop a comprehensive plan for the establishment of restorative practices schools 
and (2) upon request, provide technical assistance on becoming a restorative practice 
school. In developing the plan, MSDE must seek insight from subject matter experts. If a 
local board of education chooses to establish a restorative practices school within the local 
school system, the board must use the comprehensive plan. By December 1, 2026, MSDE 
must report to the Governor and General Assembly on its comprehensive plan for the 
establishment of restorative practices schools. This bill also updates the requirements for 
the State’s school discipline guidelines and regulations to include restorative practices 
(instead of approaches). The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2026 for contractual 
support. MSDE can otherwise carry out the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures are not directly affected. Local school 
systems with existing restorative approaches schools may face operational burdens to 
conform their practices to the new comprehensive plan, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 197/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill replaces the term “restorative approaches” as it relates to school 
discipline guidelines with the term “restorative practices” and makes the following changes 
or additions to the term’s definition (changes/additions are italicized):   
 
 
“restorative practices” means a communally and culturally responsive, 
relationship-focused student discipline model; and 
 
“personal accountability” replaces “rehabilitation” as a specified item included 
under the term “restorative practices.” 
 
Comprehensive Plan 
 
In developing the comprehensive plan, MSDE must consult with and seek insight from 
(1) educators and administrators who have effectively established and operated schools 
that integrate restorative practices into the daily practices and activities of the whole school 
and (2) State and national organizations that have studied the effective use of restorative 
practices and have established the most appropriate methods of integrating restorative 
practices in the school setting. The comprehensive plan developed by MSDE must:   
 
 
provide a framework for local school systems to identify school personnel qualified 
to provide initial restorative practices training as restorative practices coaches to 
other school staff; 
 
establish model training material for personnel identified as restorative practices 
coaches; 
 
establish standards for when a school may be designated a restorative practices 
school; and 
 
develop the intended outcomes and performance metrics that the use of restorative 
practices are designed to achieve, including student conduct that leads to 
disciplinary actions, student absenteeism and truancy, rates of teacher turnover and 
absenteeism, relevant mental health indicators, and school climate indicators. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Discipline Guidelines and “Restorative Approaches” 
 
The State Board of Education must establish guidelines that define a State code of 
discipline for all public schools with standards of conduct and consequences for violations 
of the standards. The guidelines were last updated in 2014. The State board must also 
(1) upon request, provide technical assistance and training to local school boards on the 
use of restorative approaches and (2) assist each local school board with implementing the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 197/ Page 3 
guidelines. Each local school board must adopt regulations designed to create and maintain 
within schools the atmosphere of order and discipline necessary for effective learning. The 
local regulations must state that the primary purpose of any disciplinary measure is 
rehabilitative, restorative, and educational. They must also provide for educational and 
behavioral interventions, restorative approaches, counseling, student and parent 
conferencing, and alternative programs. On or before October 1 each year, MSDE must 
submit a report to the Governor and General Assembly on student discipline data, including 
a description of the use of restorative approaches in the State and a review of disciplinary 
practices and policies in the State. 
 
“Restorative approaches” means a relationship-focused student discipline model that (1) is 
preventative and proactive; (2) emphasizes building strong relationships and setting clear 
behavioral expectations that contribute to the well-being of the school community; (3) in 
response to behavior that violates the clear behavioral expectations that contribute to the 
well-being of the school community, focuses on accountability for any harm done by the 
problem behavior; and (4) addresses ways to repair the relationships affected by the 
problem behavior with the voluntary participation of an individual who was harmed. 
“Restorative approaches” may include conflict resolution, mediation, peer mediation, 
circle processes, restorative conferences, social emotional learning, trauma-informed care, 
positive behavioral intervention supports, and rehabilitation. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE does not have the resources necessary to manage a 
workgroup of diverse stakeholders and develop a comprehensive plan for restorative 
practices schools as specified in the bill. MSDE further advises that one full-time education 
program specialist is needed to develop the comprehensive plan and provide subsequent 
technical assistance to local school systems. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS), however, advises that MSDE must already provide technical assistance and training 
on request under current law. Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $100,000 
only in fiscal 2026 to retain contractual services that enable MSDE to facilitate a 
workgroup of stakeholders and complete a comprehensive plan for restorative practices 
schools by July 1, 2026. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Baltimore City and Prince George’s County public schools advises 
that, depending on the substance of the final comprehensive plan adopted by MSDE, the 
school system may face additional operational burdens and expenditures to conform its 
existing schools to the plan. In the case of Prince George’s County, the school system 
anticipates significant additional staffing expenditures should the comprehensive plan 
require additional support at each restorative practices school. However, DLS advises that, 
given the requirement for the comprehensive plan to consider insight from persons with 
experience establishing restorative practices schools and the likelihood that the plan 
provides for some meaningful adaptation to local circumstances, any effect is assumed to 
be purely operational for existing restorative approaches schools. Anne Arundel County 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 197/ Page 4 
Public Schools advises that, because the district already employes a full-time position to 
provide restorative practices trainings, it does not anticipate any fiscal impact from the 
creation of comprehensive plan. 
 
Although the act of establishing a restorative practices school may entail meaningful 
expenditures on the part of a local school system, the bill leaves the creation of such schools 
to the discretion of local boards of education. Further, to the extent local boards of 
education choose to establish restorative practices schools in future years, local boards can 
likely conform the development of such schools to the comprehensive plan without the 
need for additional expenditures beyond those already required to establish a restorative 
approaches school. Therefore, the bill has no practical effect on local expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 917 and HB 1257 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 68 (Senators Brooks and A. Washington) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4