START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 161 
(Delegates Atterbeary and Fair) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
County Boards of Education - Curriculum Guides and Courses of Study - 
Discrepancies 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to develop content 
standards (in addition to curriculum standards and resources required under current law) 
for each subject at each grade level and further requires each local board of education to 
adopt curriculum guides and courses of study aligned with content standards developed by 
MSDE. The bill also (1) establishes a process for correcting discrepancies identified by the 
State Superintendent of Schools in a local board’s curriculum guides and courses of study, 
including the imposition of penalties and (2) makes conforming and technical changes. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can develop content standards and provide required notice and 
corrective plans to local superintendents using existing resources. However, a more 
extensive review of local curriculum guides and courses of study likely requires additional 
staff or the redirection of existing staff from current priorities. The Comptroller can 
withhold State funds from local boards of education, if necessary, using existing resources. 
Any withholding of State funds is not anticipated to materially affect State expenditures. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local board of education expenditures may increase, likely minimally for 
most local school systems, to update curriculum guides and courses of study to align with 
content standards established by MSDE. Failure to comply will result in the withholding 
of State funds (revenues); however, assuming that local curricula generally comply with 
the bill’s requirements, the withholding of funds is anticipated to occur rarely. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 161/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Content standards” are statements for the program of instruction that 
describe the knowledge and skills students are expected to attain for each content area and 
grade level. “Curriculum resources” are guidance documents and frameworks used by a 
local school board to develop curricula to implement content standards. “Curriculum 
standards” are statements that outline approaches to learning for each content area across 
grade levels. 
 
If the State Superintendent of Schools receives notice or determines that a local board has 
adopted curriculum guides and courses of study that conflict with MSDE’s content 
standards, the Superintendent must send a written notice of discrepancy to the local board. 
Within 30 days of receiving the notice, the local superintendent must meet with the 
State Superintendent to address the discrepancies and develop a corrective plan with an 
implementation timeline, subject to approval by the State Superintendent. 
 
If the State Superintendent later determines that the local board has not satisfactorily 
implemented the approved corrective plan, the local board must adopt and use MSDE’s 
curriculum standards and resources for the identified subjects or courses. The 
State Superintendent must notify the local board in writing within 30 days after the plan’s 
implementation deadline. The local board must confirm receipt in writing and include 
documentation of its vote to adopt the curriculum. If a local board fails to adopt the 
curriculum within 60 days of receiving the notice, the State Superintendent must withhold 
State funds, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Model Curriculum 
 
MSDE, in consultation with experienced teachers, must develop specified curriculum 
standards and curriculum resources that include specified elements and meet specified 
standards, for each subject at each grade level, that build on one another in logical sequence 
in core subjects. MSDE must submit the curriculum resources and curriculum standards 
developed to the State Board of Education (SBE) for adoption. 
 
Using specified assessments in specified core subjects, SBE must identify low-performing 
schools. If MSDE, based on a recommendation by the Expert Review Team, determines 
that a low-performing school’s performance is largely due to curricular problems, then the 
school must use the model curriculum. Otherwise, local school systems and public schools 
are not required to adopt the curriculum standards and resources developed by MSDE. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 161/ Page 3 
Curriculum Guides and Courses of Study 
 
Each local board of education, on the written recommendation of the local superintendent 
of education, must (1) establish curriculum guides and courses of study for the schools 
under its jurisdiction, including appropriate programs of instruction or training for mentally 
or physically handicapped children and (2) supply printed copies of these materials to any 
teacher or interested citizen. 
 
Withholding Funds 
 
The State Superintendent must enforce the provisions of the Education Article within the 
Superintendent’s jurisdiction and the bylaws, rules, and regulations of SBE. If an 
educational institution, a local board of education, a nonpublic prekindergarten program, 
or nonpublic school violates any of these provisions, the State Superintendent, by written 
notice, may require the State Comptroller to withhold from that institution, board, program, 
or school (1) all or any part of an appropriation made by the General Assembly and (2) all 
or any part of any other payment from funds budgeted by the State. 
 
The State distributes major education aid to county boards on a bimonthly basis. Ten days 
before the end of July, September, November, January, March, and May, the 
State Superintendent must certify the amount due to each local board. These payments are 
equal in size and made every two months. The State Comptroller then draws a warrant for 
the funds within five days before each deadline, and the State Treasurer disburses the funds 
immediately upon receiving the warrant. 
 
However, if a local board is found not to be complying with the State’s public education 
program, the State Comptroller must withhold payments, as directed by the  
State Superintendent. Additionally, if a notification is received as specified, the  
State Superintendent determines whether funds should be released or withheld and certifies 
that decision to the Comptroller. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been not introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Baltimore City Public Schools; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 161/ Page 4 
Baltimore County Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County 
Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - February 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4