START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 107 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 107 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Automatic Renewals 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory framework to govern “automatic renewals,” which the 
bill defines as any contract, plan, or agreement between a consumer and a seller in which 
a paid subscription or purchasing agreement is automatically renewed for a subsequent 
term. The bill does not apply to (1) any business or person (or any affiliated entities) with 
contract renewal practices subject to regulations, rules, procedures, or guidelines 
established by the Maryland Insurance Administration; (2) any entity (or any affiliate) 
regulated under the Maryland Service Contracts and Consumer Products Guaranty Act; or 
(3) a service regulated by the Maryland Public Service Commission, the Federal 
Communications Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Violation 
of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer 
Protection Act (MCPA), generally subject to MCPA’s civil penalty provisions. However, 
a violation is not subject to an action for damages under MCPA. Nothing in the bill may 
be construed to authorize a private right of action under the bill or any other law. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division (CPD), can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 107/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the bill prohibits a person from making an automatic renewal 
offer to a consumer unless the person:   
 
 
presents the consumer with the terms of the offer in a clear and conspicuous manner 
before the subscription or purchasing agreement is fulfilled and in visual proximity 
to, or in the case of an offer conveyed orally, at the same time as, the request for 
consent to the offer, including (1) the price that will be charged after the initial term 
ends or (2) the manner in which the subscription or purchasing agreement will 
change at the end of the initial term; 
 
presents the consumer with an easily accessible disclosure of the methods that the 
consumer may use to cancel the automatic renewal; and 
 
allows the consumer to terminate the offer in a manner that does not unreasonably 
delay, hinder, or obstruct the consumer’s ability to terminate the automatic renewal. 
 
If the offer also includes a free gift or trial, the offer must include a clear and conspicuous 
explanation of the price that will be charged after the trial ends and the manner in which 
the subscription or purchasing agreement pricing will change at the end of the trial. 
 
A person that makes an automatic renewal offer must allow a consumer who accepts the 
offer to terminate the automatic renewal by providing the consumer a cost-effective, 
timely, and easy-to-use mechanism to (1) cancel the automatic renewal; (2) avoid being 
charged (or avoid being charged an increased amount); and (3) immediately stop any 
recurring charges. Any such mechanism must: 
 
 
be at least as easy to use as the mechanism the consumer used to consent to the 
automatic renewal; 
 
be available through the same medium the consumer used to consent to the 
automatic renewal; 
 
in the case of cancellation by electronic medium, be easy to find, not require 
interaction with a live or virtual representative (unless the consumer interacted with 
such a representative to consent to the automatic renewal), and meet other specified 
requirements; 
 
in the case of cancellation by telephone call, be promptly performed through calls 
received at a telephone number that is answered (or records messages) and that is 
made available during normal business hours; and 
 
in the case of cancellation performed in person, be performed in a manner similar 
to the in-person method the consumer used to consent to the automatic renewal, 
which may include mail to a postal address (if the person bills the consumer at the 
consumer’s postal address). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 107/ Page 3 
Certain alternative mechanisms described above (i.e., cancellation via electronic medium 
and cancellation via telephone) must also be made available for an in-person cancellation. 
 
If a consumer has an account with a business, the business may require the consumer to 
enter account information or otherwise authenticate the account online before online 
termination of the automatic renewal or continuous service. If a consumer is unwilling or 
unable to do so before online termination of the automatic renewal or continuous service, 
the consumer may not be precluded from authenticating the consumer’s account or 
terminating the automatic renewal or continuous service using another method that the 
business provides in a clear and conspicuous manner. 
 
A person that makes an automatic renewal offer or an offer that includes a free gift or trial 
lasting more than 14 days must, before the end of the automatic renewal or free trial, 
provide clear and conspicuous notice of certain information (e.g., that the offer will 
automatically renew unless canceled, the duration and any additional terms of the renewal 
period, methods by which a consumer may cancel, etc.). 
 
If an automatic renewal or offer includes a free gift or trial lasting more than 14 days, the 
required notice must be provided between 3 and 21 days before the date when the automatic 
renewal is scheduled to take effect. 
 
If the consumer has accepted an automatic renewal offer with an initial term of at least 
one year, the required notice must be provided between 15 and 45 days before the 
automatic renewal date. 
 
The bill prohibits a person that makes an automatic renewal offer with an initial definite 
term of more than one month from automatically charging the consumer’s credit card 
unless (1) clear and conspicuous notice is provided to the consumer and (2) the consumer 
provides consent to the automatic charge of the consumer’s credit card. 
 
A person that complies with the requirements for contract renewal procedures established 
by the State or federal regulatory agency that is responsible for regulating the person (or 
that is licensed under specified provisions of the Business Occupations and 
Professions Article) must be deemed to be in compliance with the bill. 
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or 
effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 107/ Page 4 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
CPD is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved 
consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease and desist 
order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of 
up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. 
In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1040 and HB 1049 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 49 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4