START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 136 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 136 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Office of Crime Prevention and Policy) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Sexual Assault Exam and Treatment Reimbursement 
 
 
This departmental bill clarifies that specified health care entities that provide services to 
victims of sexual assault are entitled to be paid by the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy (GOCPP), rather than the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board 
(CICB). The bill also makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. GOCPP advises 
that the bill clarifies existing practice, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  GOCPP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Services for Victims of Alleged Rape, Sexual Offense, or Child Abuse 
 
If a physician, qualified health care provider, or hospital provides any of the following 
services to a victim of an alleged rape, sexual offense, or child sexual abuse, the services 
must be provided without charge and the physician/provider or hospital is entitled to be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 136/ Page 2 
reimbursed by CICB, a board within GOCPP, for the costs of providing the services:  (1) a 
physical and sexual assault forensic examination to gather information and evidence as to 
an alleged crime, as specified; (2) emergency hospital treatment and follow-up medical 
testing for up to 90 days after the initial physical examination; (3) up to five hours of 
professional time to gather information and evidence, as specified; and (4) a sexual assault 
forensic exam conducted through peer-to-peer telehealth. 
 
A physician or a qualified health care provider who examines a victim of alleged child 
sexual abuse is immune from civil liability that may result from the failure of the physician 
or qualified health care provider to obtain consent from the child’s parent, guardian, or 
custodian for the examination or treatment of the child. This immunity extends to any 
hospital with which the physician or qualified health care provider is affiliated or to which 
the child is brought, and any individual working under the control or supervision of the 
hospital. 
 
Program for Preventing HIV Infection for Rape Victims 
 
The Program for Preventing HIV Infection for Rape Victims works to prevent human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection for victims of an alleged rape or sexual offense 
or victims of alleged child sexual abuse. Administered by GOCPP, a qualifying victim 
must be provided with a full course of treatment and follow-up care for (nonoccupational) 
postexposure prophylaxis (nPEP) for the prevention of HIV, at the victim’s request, and as 
prescribed by a health care provider. 
 
A victim who receives treatment under the program may decline to provide health 
insurance information or submit personal information to a payment assistance program if 
the victim believes that providing the information would interfere with personal privacy or 
safety. The physician, health care provider, or hospital providing the victim with treatment 
and follow-up care must inform the victim of the victim’s right to decline to provide this 
information. If a victim declines to provide this information, the treatment and follow-up 
care must be provided free of charge. The physician, qualified health care provider, or 
hospital is entitled to be paid by CICB. 
 
A physician or a health care provider who examines a victim of alleged child sexual abuse 
is immune from civil liability that may arise from the failure to obtain consent from a 
child’s parent, guardian, or custodian for the examination or treatment of the child. This 
immunity extends to any hospital where the provider is affiliated, or the child is brought, 
and any individual working under the control or supervision of the hospital. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 136/ Page 3 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board – In General 
 
CICB awards grants to innocent victims of crime who incur financial hardship as a result 
of crime. Those eligible for awards include (1) a victim; (2) a dependent of a victim who 
died as a result of a crime or delinquent act, trying to prevent a crime or specified acts, or 
helping a law enforcement officer perform the officer’s duties or specified emergency 
services personnel who is obstructed in their duties; (3) any person who paid or assumed 
responsibility for the funeral expenses of a victim who died as a result of specified acts; 
and (4) family members of a victim, as specified. Awards may be made for lost wages, 
medical expenses, counseling, crime scene cleanup, and, for homicide victims, funeral 
expenses. The board may make an award only if the claimant, as a result of the injury on 
which the claim is based, has (1) incurred at least $100 in unreimbursed and 
unreimbursable expenses or indebtedness reasonably incurred or claimed for specified 
necessary expenses or (2) lost at least $100 in earnings or support. Compensation awarded 
may not exceed specified limitations, and funding for these awards is provided by the 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund, which receives funding from fees assessed by 
circuit and District courts. The fund is also supplemented by federal funds. 
 
GOCPP advises that while statute specifies that CICB must reimburse physicians, qualified 
health care providers, and hospitals for administering sexual assault forensic exams and 
providing treatment to victims, in practice, the Sexual Assault Reimbursement Unit 
(another unit within GOCPP) processes the reimbursements and GOCPP provides 
payment. Accordingly, GOCPP advises that the bill is intended to clarify existing practice 
and to reduce confusion among those seeking reimbursement from the office. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 199 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Office of Crime Prevention and Policy) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 136/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 10, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 136/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Criminal Procedure - Sexual Assault Exam and Treatment 
Reimbursement 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 136 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Bethany Young 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
OR 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
NA 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5