START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 104 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 104 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Agriculture) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Maryland Farms and Families Fund – Purpose and Use – Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill modifies the stated purpose and authorized uses of the Maryland 
Farms and Families Fund within the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA). It also 
makes other related and technical changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. It primarily alters the 
purposes for which existing funds may be used. MDA can implement the bill’s changes 
using existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the purpose of the Maryland Farms and 
Families Program within MDA is to double the purchasing power of food-insecure 
Maryland residents with limited access to fresh fruits and vegetables and to increase 
revenue for farmers through redemption of federal nutrition benefits at Maryland farmers’ 
markets. The bill does not alter the purpose of the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 104/ Page 2 
Under current law, the stated purpose of the Maryland Farms and Families Fund is to 
provide grants to (1) nonprofit organizations that match purchases made with the federal 
Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP), the federal Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program (SNAP), and federal Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, 
Infants, and Children (WIC) benefits at participating farmers markets and farm stands; 
(2) nonprofit farmers markets to implement the program at the farmers markets; and 
(3) local nonprofit organizations to implement the program in partnership with one or more 
participating local farmers markets. 
 
The bill alters the stated purpose of the fund. Under the bill, the purpose of the fund is to 
(1) match purchases made with FMNP, SNAP, and WIC benefits at participating farmers 
markets and farm stands; (2) support nonprofit farmers markets to implement the program 
by providing logistical and marketing support to increase the use of federal nutrition 
programs at these farmers markets; and (3) support nonprofit organizations and other 
responsible persons to implement the program in partnership with one or more participating 
local farmers markets. 
 
Under current law and the bill, the fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the 
State budget to the fund and (2) any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. The Governor is required to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation to the fund of $300,000. 
 
Under current law, the fund must be used to provide grants to (1) nonprofit organizations 
that meet specified qualifications and distribute the grant money to farmers markets and 
local nonprofit organizations, as specified; (2) nonprofit farmers to implement the program 
at the farmers markets; and (3) local nonprofit organizations to implement the program in 
partnership with one or more local farmers markets. 
 
The bill alters the authorized uses of the fund. Under the bill, MDA may use the fund for 
either one or both of the following purposes:  (1) to implement, in whole or in part, the 
program within MDA; and (2) to provide funds to a qualified nonprofit organization or 
other responsible person to implement, in whole or in part, the program. The bill makes 
corresponding changes to related provisions. 
 
Background:  According to MDA, the Maryland Farms and Families Program supports 
Maryland Market Money (MMM), a statewide food access program that feeds Marylanders 
and supports farmers. MDA advises that MMM removes economic barriers for 
Marylanders experiencing food insecurity, providing a dollar-for-dollar match for 
purchases made using federal nutrition benefits at participating Maryland farmers markets 
and farm stands while providing extensive technical assistance, training, marketing, and 
additional services to stakeholders. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 104/ Page 3 
MDA advises that since the establishment of the Maryland Farms and Families Program, 
the sole applicant and recipient of grant funds was the Maryland Farmers Market 
Association until its dissolution in 2020. Since then, the Southern Maryland Agricultural 
Development Commission (SMADC) has partnered with the Maryland Agricultural and 
Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation (MARBIDCO) to administer MMM 
statewide. According to MDA, because SMADC is legally prohibited from directly 
receiving funds, MARBIDCO serves as the grant applicant and collaborates with SMADC 
to manage the program. 
 
MDA advises that the bill is intended to streamline the process by allowing the department 
to manage the program directly through an existing interagency agreement with the 
Tri-County Council for Southern Maryland, which oversees SMADC, eliminating the need 
to route funds through MARBIDCO. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 226 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Agriculture) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 104/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Farms and Families Fund - Purpose and Use - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 104 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Mark Powell 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This legislation will keep intact current $300,000 fund supporting programs that match 
purchases made with Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP) funds, Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) funds and Special Supplemental Nutrition Program 
for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) funds.  
 

END OF PAGE 4