START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 158 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 158 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Aging) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Department of Aging - Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program 
 
 
This departmental bill renames the Senior Call-Check Service and Notification Program in 
the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to be the Senior Call-Check and Social 
Connections Program and broadens the program to provide “regular, direct 
communication” from MDOA (or the department’s designee) to an “eligible participant” 
to promote wellness and purposeful social engagement. MDOA must integrate services 
with the Telecommunications Access of Maryland (TAM) Program within the Maryland 
Department of Disabilities (MDOD). The bill must be construed to apply only 
prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to 
any estate or a decedent who died before the bill’s effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, MDOA can handle them with existing 
budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that MDOA contracts with local governments to provide 
services through the Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program as authorized 
under the bill, local government revenues and expenditures may increase.  
 
Small Business Effect:  MDOA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 158/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Eligible participant” means a resident of the State who is at least 60 years 
old. 
 
“Person of record” includes a local law enforcement unit or other local government agency 
or a designee of the participant that chooses to participate in the program.  
 
“Regular, direct communication” means regular interactions initiated or received by 
MDOA or the department’s designee that (1) may include telephone calls, text messages, 
and web-based, virtual, video, or in-person communications, and other forms of 
communication approved by MDOA and (2) are accessible to eligible participants with 
disabilities.  
 
“Village” means local, volunteer-led organizations that aim to support community 
members who choose to age in place, including by organizing events and fostering social 
connections through activities and coordinating volunteer help at home using the 
neighbor-helping-neighbor model.  
 
Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program 
 
The Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program includes (1) an automated or live 
telephone call or other direct communication initiated or received by an eligible participant 
at a regularly scheduled time each day; (2) if the eligible participant does not answer or 
initiate the regularly scheduled call or other direct communication and the Secretary of 
Aging designs the program to require this action, one or more automated or live telephone 
calls or other direct communication to the eligible participant; (3) if the eligible participant 
does not answer a telephone call or other direct communication, an additional automated 
or live telephone call or other direct communication to notify a person of record whose 
name has been provided to MDOA; and (4) a notification to the eligible participant 
regarding information that the Secretary of Aging has determined to be relevant.  
 
MDOA must integrate services with the TAM Program by promoting awareness of the 
availability of accessible telecommunications equipment and using educational outreach 
materials produced by TAM.  
 
MDOA may enter into agreements or contracts as appropriate with a private vendor, a 
nonprofit organization, a village incorporated in and serving older adults in the State, an 
area agency on aging (AAA), or any other person to provide program services. MDOA 
may enter into interagency agreements with other State or local governmental entities to 
provide program services. MDOA may accept funds provided by other public and private 
sources, including gifts and grants to be used to provide program services.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 158/ Page 3 
The Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA) and the Local Government Tort Claims Act 
(LGTCA), as appropriate, apply to a State or local unit and to an employee or agency of a 
State or local unit that participates in the program for services provided under the program 
in accordance with adopted regulations. A person of record, a private vendor, a nonprofit 
organization, a village incorporated in and serving older adults in the State, an AAA, or 
any other entity under an agreement or contract with MDOA, or a volunteer may not be 
liable for reasonable acts or omissions directly arising from services provided under the 
program in accordance with regulations.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Senior Call-Check Service Notification Program 
 
“Senior call-check service and notification” means a telephone call made or received each 
day at a regularly scheduled time by MDOA or MDOA’s designee to the residence of an 
eligible participant (a resident of the state who is at least age 65) to verify that the 
participant is able to receive notifications and answer the telephone or place a call from the 
telephone. MDOA may contract with a private vendor or nonprofit organization to provide 
the senior call-check and notification service. “Senior call-check service and notification” 
includes: 
 
 
an automated or live telephone call placed by an eligible participant or received by 
an eligible participant at a regularly scheduled time each day;  
 
if the eligible participant does not answer or place the regularly scheduled call and 
the Secretary of Aging designs the program to require this action, one or more 
automated or live telephone calls to the eligible participant;  
 
if the eligible participant does not answer a telephone call from the service, an 
additional automated or live telephone call to notify a person of record whose name 
has been provided to MDOA; and  
 
a notification to the eligible participant regarding information that the Secretary of 
Aging has determined to be relevant.  
 
MTCA and LGTCA, as appropriate, apply to a State or local unit and to an employee or 
agency of a State or local unit that participates in the program for services the unit or person 
provides under the program in accordance with regulations adopted by MDOA.  
 
A person of record and a volunteer may not be liable for reasonable acts or omissions 
directly arising from services the person provides under the program in accordance with 
regulations adopted by MDOA. “Person of record” includes a local law enforcement unit 
or other local government agency that chooses to participate in the program.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 158/ Page 4 
Universal Service Trust Fund 
 
The costs of the Senior Call-Check Service Notification Program may be paid from the 
Universal Service Trust Fund (USTF). The program must be funded at an amount that (1) is 
equal to the cost that MDOA is expected to incur for the upcoming fiscal year to provide 
the service and administer the program and (2) is no more than five cents per month for 
each account that pays the USTF surcharge. Money in the USTF may only be used to fund 
the costs of specified programs and to pay for the administration of the fund.  
 
The costs of the programs funded by USTF must be funded by revenues generated by a 
surcharge to be paid by the subscribers to a communications service and other funds as 
provided in the State budget. The surcharge may not exceed 18 cents per month for each 
account and must be applied to all current bills rendered for a communications service in 
the State. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own 
common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or 
omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel performed in the course 
of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made without malice or gross 
negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign or governmental 
immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the state employee 
committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004).  
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable.  
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). Higher liability 
limits apply to claims involving law enforcement officers that arise on or after July 1, 2022, 
and claims involving child sexual abuse. 
 
LGTCA further establishes that the local government is liable for tortious acts or omissions 
of its employees acting within the scope of employment, so long as the employee did not 
act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA prevents local governments from asserting a 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 158/ Page 5 
common law claim of governmental immunity from liability for such acts or omissions of 
its employees. 
 
Telecommunications Access of Maryland  
 
MDOD, in consultation with the Governor’s Advisory Board for Telecommunications 
Relay, must establish and administer a program to provide specialized customer telephone 
equipment to eligible program participants and provide reimbursement of costs.  
 
Background:  MDOA advises that renaming the Senior Call-Check Service Notification 
Program to be the Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program and broadening the 
scope of the program offers the department greater flexibility for providing regular, direct, 
communication services to older adults and the deaf and hard of hearing community in the 
State. The current program is inequitable to the deaf and hard of hearing community, as 
well as individuals with limited English proficiency, who would likely benefit from the 
addition of video calls, text messages, and other forms of direct communications. MDOA 
estimates that approximately 2,000 older Marylanders are served by the Senior Call-Check 
Service Notification Program per year. Additionally, MDOA advises that the bill confirms 
the integration of program services with TAM within MDOD.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$419,967 in special funds expenditures from USTF for the Senior Call-Check Service and 
Notification Program. This analysis assumes that these funds will be used for the renamed 
Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program beginning in fiscal 2026, after the 
October 1, 2025 effective date of the bill. MDOA advises that existing staff resources 
allocated to the Senior Call-Check Service and Notification Program are sufficient to meet 
the requirements of the bill for the new Senior Call-Check and Social Connections 
Program.  
 
Under the bill, MDOA may enter into specified agreements or contracts with a private 
vendor, a nonprofit organization, a village incorporated in and serving older adults in the 
State, an AAA, other State or local governmental entities or any other person to provide 
program services. To the extent that MDOA enters into such agreements, special fund 
expenditures from USTF may increase beginning in fiscal 2026.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  AAAs and other local organizations that operate under the 
Senior Call-Check Service Notification Program must update their operations to adhere to 
Senior Call-Check and Social Connections Program guidelines and regulations. As 
mentioned above, under the bill, MDOA may enter into agreements or contracts as 
appropriate with AAAs, some of which may be units of local government. MDOA may 
also enter into interagency agreements with other local governmental entities to provide 
program services. Under such agreements, local government revenues and expenditures 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 158/ Page 6 
increase to provide services through the Senior Call-Check and Social Connections 
Program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 223 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Aging) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of 
Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 29, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 158/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Aging - Social Connections Program – Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 158 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Andrea Nunez 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This change will have an overall minimal impact on Maryland small businesses. This is 
broadening of a state program that currently utilizes a state master contract for automated 
phone calls. It will be broadened to allow the Department to grant and/or contract out 
funds to nonprofit organizations including Senior Villages located in Maryland, 
Maryland Area Agencies on Aging 
 
(AAAs, which are located typically in County government within human service 
agencies), for-profit businesses or other entities to achieve the program goals.  
 
Thus, small businesses may have new opportunities to pursue competitive funding 
opportunities under this program. The Department envisions developing grant 
opportunities first, but as needed, may turn to for-profit businesses in the form of 
appropriate small procurement opportunities to provide certain communication and 
engagement services aligned with the program goals.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7