START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 176 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 176 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Davis Martinez Public Employee Safety and Health Act 
 
 
This bill establishes a Public Employees’ Safety and Health (PESH) Unit in the Division 
of Labor and Industry within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) and requires 
the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to head the unit. The bill expands the existing 
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health (MOSH) program by subjecting public bodies 
to existing penalties and enhancing notice and reporting requirements associated with 
public bodies, among other requirements and specifications. In addition, the bill establishes 
provisions relating to the use of body-worn cameras (BWCs) by correctional officers and 
a related exception to Maryland’s Wiretap Act.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund and general fund expenditures increase by $69,400 and 
$106,700, respectively, for staffing in FY 2026; future years reflect annualization. 
State expenditures (all funds) increase for compliance. The bill effectuates contingent 
language in the FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly; as a result, general 
fund expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) 
increase by $428,800 in FY 2026 for BWCs. Special fund revenues increase, likely by 
$30,000 in FY 2026 and by $40,000 annually thereafter.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$535,400 
$128,700 
$134,300 
$140,300 
$146,300 
SF Expenditure 
$69,400 
$81,300 
$84,800 
$88,500 
$92,200 
GF/SF/NB/HE Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($604,800) 
($210,000) 
($219,200) 
($228,800) 
($238,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 176/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Expenditures for local governments may increase beginning in FY 2026 
from penalties and for compliance. Local correctional facilities and the circuit courts are 
not materially affected. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Program and the Public Employees’ Safety and 
Health Unit 
 
The bill expands the purpose of MOSH to include standards that address workplace 
violence and making public bodies’ workplaces safer and more healthful, as defined by the 
bill. Therefore, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry must include standards for 
protecting employees of public bodies from workplace violence as part of the MOSH 
standards. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry, in consultation with the MOSH 
Advisory Board, must adopt, by October 1, 2026, regulations to include these standards. 
Prior to adopting regulations, the commissioner must review and consider specified 
recommendations and hold meetings with stakeholders as specified. With respect to public 
bodies, the MOSH Advisory Board must give specific consideration to the workplace 
conditions and safety and health concerns of employees and recommend higher standards, 
if warranted. 
 
In addition to a self-inspection required under current law, there must be an inspection 
program developed, conducted, and maintained by PESH that otherwise complies with 
specified inspection requirements under current law.  
 
By July 1 each year, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry must publish online a written 
report with specified information on safety and health in public bodies and submit it to the 
General Assembly. 
 
The bill does not limit or preclude the commissioner or the commissioner’s authorized 
representative from inspecting a public body in accordance with any other provision under 
MOSH. 
 
 
Requirements of Public Bodies 
 
Each public body must annually make available to each employee a copy of the report 
issued by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, and any citations issued by the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 176/ Page 3 
commissioner to the public body in the immediately preceding year. The bill specifies 
notice requirements when PESH issues citations to public bodies. The commissioner must 
require by regulation that each public body keep an accurate record of, among other things, 
the incidence of workplace injuries or illnesses. 
 
 
Attorney General 
 
The Attorney General must provide notice to all affected employees of the public body, 
any employee representatives, the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the 
Speaker of the House of Delegates if the Commissioner of Labor and Industry requests that 
the Attorney General proceed in a State or federal court or before any other federal unit to 
enforce workplace safety requirements for public bodies. 
 
The Attorney General must prioritize and expedite review of an application if the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry or an authorized representative applies for an 
administrative search warrant. 
 
 
Penalties 
 
Public bodies are no longer exempt from existing MOSH penalties. The revenues from the 
civil penalties assessed against a public body must be distributed to a special fund to be 
used only for the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program (MATP). 
 
However, the penalties do not apply with respect to an elevator unit owned by a public 
body. Also, penalties established in current law related to elevator safety do not apply to 
an elevator unit owned by a public body, which codifies existing practice. 
 
Body-worn Cameras 
 
The bill requires the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC), by 
January 1, 2026, to adopt regulations for the training, issuance, and use of a BWC by a 
correctional officer that address specified issues and procedures. 
 
Each correctional unit must develop and maintain a written policy consistent with the 
regulations adopted by MPTSC for the use of BWCs. 
 
A local correctional facility may not be required to adopt the use of BWCs by correctional 
officers; however, if a local correctional facility does so, the local correctional facility must 
develop and maintain a written policy consistent with the regulations adopted by MPTSC 
under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 176/ Page 4 
The bill makes it lawful for a correctional officer, in the course of the officer’s regular duty, 
to intercept an oral communication with a “body-worn digital recording device” or an 
“electronic control device” capable of recording video and oral communications if (1) the 
correctional officer is in uniform or prominently displaying the correctional officer’s badge 
or other insignia; (2) the correctional officer is making reasonable efforts to conform to the 
standards for the use of the devices developed pursuant to the bill; (3) the correctional 
officer is a party to the oral communication; (4) the correctional officer notifies, as soon as 
practicable, the individual that the individual is being recorded, unless it is unsafe, 
impractical, or impossible to do so; and (5) the oral interception is being made as part of a 
videotape or digital recording. 
 
“Body-worn digital recording device” means a device worn on the person of a law 
enforcement officer or a correctional officer that is capable of recording video and 
intercepting oral communications. “Electronic control device” means a portable device 
designed as a weapon capable of injuring, immobilizing, or inflicting pain on an individual 
by the discharge of electrical current, as under current law. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Program 
 
The Division of Labor and Industry within MD Labor administers the MOSH program. 
The requirements of the MOSH program are codified by the MOSH Act. In general, these 
requirements parallel the safety standards established by the federal Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA) within the U.S. Department of Labor. OSHA specifies 
that states may elect to assume the responsibility for development and management of a 
state occupational safety and health program as long as the standards under the state 
program are “at least as effective as” OSHA standards. 
 
Employers (which include public bodies) must provide each employee with a place of 
employment that is safe and healthful and free from each recognized hazard that is causing 
or likely to cause death or serious physical harm to the employee. 
 
The MOSH Act applies to public bodies, but its penalty provisions do not apply to them. 
The MOSH Act defines “public body” as a governmental unit, a public or quasi-public 
corporation of the State, a school district in the State or any unit of the district, or a special 
district in the State or any unit of the district. Specifically, regarding public bodies, the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry must provide for and maintain a comprehensive and 
effective program on occupational safety and health for public employees. The program 
must be generally consistent with the MOSH Act and require each public body to:   
 
 
provide conditions and places of employment that are safe and healthful; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 176/ Page 5 
 
develop, conduct, and maintain in each unit of the public body a program of 
self-inspection that the commissioner approves; 
 
keep and make available any record that the commissioner requires for the 
development of information about occupational accidents, illnesses, and injuries, to 
allow proper evaluation and necessary corrective action; and 
 
submit each report that the commissioner requires. 
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must monitor the self-inspection program of each 
public body. 
 
The MOSH Act defines a “place of employment” as a place in or about which an employee 
is allowed to work. 
 
Maryland’s Wiretap Act and Body-worn Cameras 
 
Under Maryland’s Wiretap Act, it is unlawful to willfully intercept any wire, oral, or 
electronic communication. Under the Wiretap Act, “intercept” is defined to mean the aural 
or other acquisition of the contents of any wire, electronic, or oral communication through 
the use of any electronic, mechanical, or other device. However, statute does authorize the 
interception of an oral communication if all participants have given prior consent 
(sometimes called “two-party consent”). Maryland is 1 of 12 two-party consent states, most 
of which spell out clearly that the consent is required only in circumstances where there is 
a “reasonable expectation of privacy.” 
 
The Wiretap Act does provide specified exceptions, including one for a law enforcement 
officer who intercepts an oral communication in the course of the law enforcement officer’s 
regular duty, so long as the law enforcement officer (1) initially lawfully detained a vehicle 
during a criminal investigation or for a traffic violation; (2) is a party to the oral 
communication; (3) has been identified as a law enforcement officer to the other parties to 
the communication prior to any interception; (4) informs all other parties to the 
communication of the interception at the beginning of the communication; and (5) makes 
the interception as part of a videotape recording. In addition, the interception of an oral 
communication by a law enforcement officer in the course of the officer’s regular duty is 
lawful if (1) the law enforcement officer is in uniform or prominently displaying the law 
enforcement officer’s badge or other insignia; (2) the law enforcement officer is making 
reasonable efforts to conform to standards for the use of a body-worn digital recording 
device or an electronic control device capable of recording video and oral communications; 
(3) the law enforcement officer is a party to the oral communication; (4) the law 
enforcement officer notifies, as soon as practicable, the individual that the individual is 
being recorded, unless it is unsafe, impractical, or impossible to do so; and (5) the oral 
interception is being made as part of a videotape or digital recording. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 176/ Page 6 
The failure of a law enforcement officer to provide notice, as specified, to an individual 
who is being recorded in accordance with the requirements for lawful interception of an 
oral communication with a body-worn digital recording device, does not affect the 
admissibility in court of the recording if the failure to notify involved an individual who 
joined the discussion in progress for which proper notification was previously given. 
 
Each interception in violation of the Wiretap Act may be prosecuted as a felony, punishable 
by up to five years imprisonment, and/or a $10,000 fine. A person who is the victim of a 
violation of the Wiretap Act has a civil cause of action against the wiretapper for damages, 
attorney’s fees, and litigation costs. 
 
Chapters 128 and 129 of 2015 established the Commission Regarding the Implementation 
and Use of Body Cameras by Law Enforcement Officers. Through the examination of 
model policies and discussion, the commission compiled a list of best practices for BWCs 
and submitted a report to the General Assembly and the Police Training Commission (now 
known as MPTSC) in September 2015. The commission’s report addresses (1) procedures 
for testing and operating equipment, including when BWCs must be activated and when 
their use is prohibited; (2) notification responsibilities of law enforcement officers to 
individuals being recorded; (3) confidentiality and ownership of data; (4) procedures and 
requirements for data storage; (5) the review of recordings by parties in interest; and (6) the 
establishment of retention periods, the release of recordings as required by the Public 
Information Act, and the development of written policies for BWC usage consistent with 
State law and regulations issued by MPTSC. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 128 and 129, MPTSC developed a policy for the issuance and use of 
BWCs by law enforcement officers, which incorporated the recommendations of the 
commission. 
 
Elevator Safety 
 
In general, if the Commissioner of Labor and Industry determines that an elevator owner 
violated the safety code, the commissioner may assess a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for 
each elevator unit in violation of the code. If, after an investigation, the commissioner 
determines that the owner willfully or repeatedly violated the safety code, the 
commissioner may impose a civil penalty up to $1,000 for each day a violation continues. 
Penalties are paid to the general fund. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill subjects the public sector to civil penalties, so MATP special 
fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2026. Under its authority to monitor 
self-inspection programs by public bodies, MOSH currently completes between 83 and 
100 inspections or investigations in the public sector per year, resulting in an average of 
approximately 200 citations to public-sector employers annually. If similar levels of 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 176/ Page 7 
violations continue to occur under the bill, MD Labor estimates receiving $30,000 to 
$40,000 in penalties per year, noting this estimate reflects a reduction in penalties that 
occur during an informal settlement once hazards are abated. 
 
Exempting an elevator unit owned by a public body from penalties established in current 
law does not have a fiscal effect as it codifies existing practice. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal impact for State agencies associated with the MOSH 
provisions of the bill and the fiscal impact for DPSCS associated with BWCs are discussed 
below. 
 
Provisions Related to the Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Program 
 
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
MOSH already has authority under current law to inspect workplaces of public bodies. 
MOSH currently investigates and issues violations of the general duty clause in 
investigations where an employer could have reasonably predicted employee exposure to 
workplace violence and did not take common industry practice/reasonable steps to protect 
an employee. Thus, MOSH can develop workplace violence standards for public bodies 
and investigate workplace violence in public bodies with existing resources. 
 
However, under the bill, MOSH must comply with notice and reporting requirements and 
assess penalties on public bodies. The cost of administering the MOSH program is covered 
through an appropriation from the Workers’ Compensation Commission and MOSH may 
accept federal OSHA grant awards. Thus, special fund expenditures increase by $69,385 
in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring an administrative officer to carry out administrative functions 
related to penalty issuance. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$59,788 
Operating Expenses 
    9,597 
Total MD Labor FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$69,385 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
Under current law, MOSH can cite public-sector employers, but they rarely request a 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 176/ Page 8 
contested case hearing because there is no financial penalty. Under the bill, the Office of 
the Attorney General (OAG) expects a greater volume of employers contesting citations, 
which it cannot handle with existing resources. Thus, general fund expenditures increase 
by $106,659 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring an assistant Attorney General to assist with 
contested case hearings. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$99,290 
Operating Expenses 
      7,369 
Total OAG FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$106,659 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary does not anticipate that the MOSH provisions of the bill will have a 
significant fiscal or operational impact on the courts. 
 
 
State Agencies 
 
Public bodies must make available to each of their employees a copy of the annual PESH 
report published online by the commissioner and any citations issued by the commissioner 
to the public body in the preceding year. Additionally, public bodies must make available 
a copy of any citation received to all affected employees in addition to the existing 
requirement to post the citation conspicuously at or near each place where the citation 
alleges a violation occurred. Thus, State expenditures (all funds) may increase beginning 
in fiscal 2026 to comply with these notice as well as recordkeeping requirements and may 
increase further due to public bodies being subject to civil penalties under MOSH. 
 
Provisions Related to Body-worn Cameras 
 
MPTSC can adopt regulations for the training, issuance, and use of BWCs by correctional 
officers with existing budgeted resources. The bill does not require the use of body-worn 
digital recording devices or electronic control devices by State correctional officers; 
however, the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $428,790 for 
the purchase of BWCs for correctional officers within DPSCS, contingent on the enactment 
of legislation allowing the use of a body-worn digital recording device by a correctional 
officer. Thus, general fund expenditures for DPSCS increase by $428,790 in fiscal 2026. 
DPSCS can likely acquire any additional BWCs in the out-years with existing resources, 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 176/ Page 9 
but to the extent that it cannot, DPSCS can request additional resources through the annual 
budget process.  
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly expresses the intent of the 
General Assembly that BWC policies and procedures be a mandatory subject of collective 
bargaining in any agreement between DPSCS and the employee union authorized to act on 
behalf of parole and probation agents. Additionally, $150,000 of DPSCS’s appropriation 
is restricted until DPSCS, in consultation with the employee union, submits a report to the 
budget committees on BWCs for community supervision agents. 
 
Otherwise, the bill’s exceptions to wiretapping and electronic surveillance provisions are 
not expected to have a material operational or fiscal impact on the Judiciary. Likewise, the 
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) advises that the bill has no fiscal impact. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures for local governments may increase to comply with 
the bill’s notice and recordkeeping requirements and may increase further to the extent that 
local governments fail to comply with MOSH requirements and are subject to civil 
penalties. 
 
The bill’s exceptions to wiretapping and electronic surveillance provisions are not expected 
to have a material operational or fiscal impact on local correctional facilities or the circuit 
courts. 
 
The bill does not require the use of body-worn digital recording devices or electronic 
control devices by local correctional officers. It is assumed that no local jurisdiction would 
put such a program in place without the operational and fiscal wherewithal to do so. It is 
also assumed that local correctional facilities can develop the required policy using existing 
resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  This analysis assumes no material effect on assessments for 
workers’ compensation. 
 
Davis Martinez was a parole and probation agent employed by DPSCS who was allegedly 
killed by a client during a home visit in Chevy Chase in 2024. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that the BWC provisions of the bill also 
apply to DJS, as the bill requires each correctional unit (which includes DJS) to develop 
and maintain a written policy. Likewise, “correctional officer” is defined by reference to 
“correctional unit.” 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 176/ Page 10 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 26 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Talbot counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; 
Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland Environmental Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 16, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10