START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 133 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 133 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Notification of Constant Yield 
Tax Rate - Alteration 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the requirement that the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) calculate the constant yield tax rate for each taxable year and notify each 
jurisdiction of its constant yield tax rate. Under the bill, the department only has to calculate 
the constant yield tax rate for a jurisdiction if requested to do so by a taxing authority by 
February 1. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal administrative cost savings for SDAT related to not 
calculating the constant yield tax rate for each jurisdiction. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not alter any local notification requirements related to 
local property tax rates. 
 
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The “constant yield” is a concept that, as property values fluctuate, the 
tax rate would be adjusted so that the revenue derived from the property tax stays at a 
constant level from year to year, thus assuring a local government a “constant yield” from 
its tax source. The constant yield tax rate is the rate that, when applied to the current 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 133/ Page 2 
assessable base, yields the same property tax revenue as in the prior year. Generally, when 
there is growth in the real property assessable base, the constant yield tax rate is lower than 
the existing tax rate. SDAT must notify all counties and municipalities by February 14 of 
their constant yield tax rates for the upcoming fiscal year. 
 
Baltimore City and county governments must set or alter the homestead property tax credit 
percentage in a taxable year by March 15 and then notify SDAT of any changes. 
Municipalities must do the same by March 25. The department is authorized to recalculate 
the constant yield tax rate by April 15 if a county or municipality changes the homestead 
tax credit percentage. In addition, assessment notices must include a statement that the 
taxable assessment may change if a county or municipality changes the homestead 
tax credit percentage, and that the final taxable assessment will be stated on the next 
property tax bill. 
 
Public Notice Requirements 
 
Chapter 531 of 2023 repealed the public notice requirements for when a taxing authority 
set a real property tax rate that exceeds the constant yield rate. Instead, a taxing authority 
must provide public notice of increases in the real property tax rate. A taxing authority that 
intends to increase its real property tax rate must (1) place a public notice in a newspaper 
of general circulation in the taxing authority’s jurisdiction and (2) publish a copy of the 
notice on the taxing authority’s website; or, if the taxing authority does not have a website, 
post a copy of the notice in a place that is easily accessible to the public. A property 
taxpayer must be notified of increases in the real property tax rate on their property tax bill. 
Information about the effect of rising assessments on the amount of taxes owed must be 
included with assessment notices and property tax bills. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SDAT indicates that the constant yield tax rates are becoming less 
accurate as more jurisdictions apply different property tax rates to vacant properties, as 
authorized by Chapter 277 of 2024. Currently, the department has one analyst who is 
responsible for tabulating and reporting all real property data, including the calculation of 
the constant yield property tax rates. As a result, the department anticipates minimal 
administrative cost savings, beginning in fiscal 2026, resulting from only having to 
calculate the constant yield property tax rate and notify a jurisdiction of the constant yield 
tax rate upon request of the jurisdiction. 
 
For fiscal 2025, Baltimore City and all 23 counties have a property tax rate that exceeds 
the constant yield rate. The revenue yield from property tax rates above the constant yield 
is estimated at $437.3 million in fiscal 2025. Information on constant yield property tax 
rates for county governments can be found on the Department of Legislative Services 
website. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 133/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 183 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Worcester County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 133/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Notification of 
Constant Yield Tax Rate - Repeal 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 133 
PREPARED BY:  Joshua Greenberg 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
  X    
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS  
OR 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4