START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 199 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 199 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Board of Elections) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Notice to Permanent Absentee Voters 
 
 
This departmental bill alters provisions governing State Board of Elections (SBE) outreach 
to permanent absentee voters, prior to an election, to confirm that they are on the permanent 
absentee list and to confirm their address and the method by which they wish to receive 
their absentee ballot. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  SBE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill alters existing requirements that SBE:   
 
 
send a written communication, prior to each election, to each voter who is on the 
permanent absentee ballot list as of a date that is at least 90 days before the 
upcoming election, to confirm that they are on the list and to confirm their address 
and the method by which they wish to receive their absentee ballot; and 
 
send the written communication not less than 75 days before the day a local board 
begins to send absentee ballots to voters. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 199/ Page 2 
The bill alters the timing of those requirements by simply requiring instead that SBE send 
the written communication to each voter on the permanent absentee ballot list during the 
period beginning 120 days before an election and ending 90 days before an election. 
 
Additionally, the bill alters a requirement that SBE, if it is unable to contact a voter using 
the method of communication chosen by the voter when they requested to be placed on the 
permanent absentee ballot list, send the written communication (described above) using 
another method if SBE has other contact information for the voter. The bill alters the 
requirement by simply requiring SBE to attempt to contact the voter using another method. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Permanent Absentee Ballot Status 
 
Chapters 56 and 514 of 2021 allow for a voter to request permanent absentee ballot status 
and be placed on a permanent absentee ballot list, in which case a local board of elections 
sends the voter an absentee ballot each time there is an election. 
 
All voters are eligible for permanent absentee ballot status. To request permanent absentee 
ballot status a voter must complete and submit (1) the SBE-approved absentee ballot 
application and indicate on the form that the voter wishes to have permanent absentee ballot 
status; (2) a written request that includes the voter’s name, residence address, and signature; 
or (3) the online absentee ballot application provided by SBE and indicate on the form that 
the voter wishes to have permanent absentee ballot status. 
 
A voter must specify in an absentee ballot application in which the voter requests 
permanent absentee ballot status (1) the method by which the voter chooses to receive an 
absentee ballot (mail, facsimile transmission, or the Internet) and (2) the method by which 
the voter chooses to be contacted by SBE before each election (nonforwardable mail, email, 
or text message). 
 
Communication Before Each Election 
 
Not less than 75 days before the day on which a local board of elections begins to send 
absentee ballots to voters, SBE must send a written communication to each voter who is 
on the permanent absentee ballot list as of a date that is at least 90 days before the upcoming 
election, using the method chosen by the voter on their absentee ballot application. 
 
The communication must include (1) confirmation that the voter is included on the 
permanent absentee ballot list; (2) the address of the voter; (3) the method by which the 
voter has chosen to receive an absentee ballot; and (4) a statement that the voter must notify 
the local board if anything should be changed. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 199/ Page 3 
If SBE is unable to contact a voter using the method of communication chosen by the voter, 
it must send the written communication using another method if the board has other contact 
information for the voter. 
 
If the communication is sent by mail, the envelope must include a statement, prominently 
placed, requesting that the recipient return the communication to SBE if the intended 
recipient no longer lives at that address. 
 
Removal from Permanent Absentee Ballot List 
 
A voter who has permanent absentee ballot status must be removed from the permanent 
absentee ballot list if (1) the voter requests to be removed; (2) the voter is removed from 
the statewide voter registration list; (3) the voter fails to return an absentee ballot for 
two consecutive statewide general elections; or (4) any mail sent to the voter by SBE or a 
local board is returned undeliverable. 
 
Background:  According to SBE, as of January 16, 2025, 598,339 registered voters are on 
the permanent absentee ballot list. SBE indicates that the bill’s change to the timeframe to 
send a written communication to each voter who is on the list is needed to remove 
inconsistency and ambiguity in existing law regarding that timeframe. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 257 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 199/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Election Law - Notice to Permanent Absentee Voters 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB 199 
PREPARED BY:  
Jennifer McLaughlin, Policy Analyst and Mail-in Ballot Lead, Maryland 
State Board of Elections, Jennifer.mclaughlin@maryland.gov, 410-271-6939 mobile 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
 
       WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4