START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 191 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 191 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Towed, Removed, or Abandoned Vehicles - Electronic Notice to 
Owner 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person who tows or removes a vehicle from a parking lot and a police 
department that takes an abandoned vehicle into custody to send specified notices to a 
vehicle owner electronically through the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA). MVA 
must adopt regulations to allow authorized electronic notifications to vehicle owners under 
the bill. The bill makes corresponding statutory changes to reflect the authorized electronic 
notices and alters requirements for an existing MVA database. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Towing Services – Notices 
 
Under current law, towing services are required to notify police (with specified 
information) within one hour of the tow or removal of the vehicle from the parking lot. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 191/ Page 2 
Also, the tower must provide notice by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, and 
first-class mail to the owner of the vehicle, as well as any secured party, and the insurer of 
record, within seven days of the vehicle’s removal from a parking lot, not including days 
that the towing business is closed. The notice sent to any secured party or insurer of record 
may be electronic if that form of notice is agreed to by the tower and the secured party or 
insurer of record in writing or by electronic communication; the agreement to provide 
notice electronically remains in effect until terminated by either party. 
 
The bill authorizes a tower to notify the owner of the vehicle electronically through MVA 
if (1) MVA sends the notice to the owner using the email address the owner provided to 
MVA, as shown in MVA’s records and (2) the tower sends the owner a notice by certified 
mail, return receipt requested, and first class mail, if the owner does not respond within 
seven days after the electronic notice was sent by MVA. 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration Database 
 
Under current law, MVA must establish and maintain a database containing the proper 
address of an insurer for the certified mail, first-class mail, or electronic notice a person 
who tows or removes a vehicle from a parking lot must provide to the insurer of record. 
 
Under the bill, the proper address MVA must maintain in its database is the proper address 
for the electronic notification of an insurer only. 
 
Police Departments – Abandoned Vehicle Notices 
 
Under current law, as soon as reasonably possible – but no more than seven days after it 
takes custody of an abandoned vehicle – a police department must send a notice containing 
specified information by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, to (1) the last known 
registered owner of the vehicle and (2) each secured party, as shown on the records of 
MVA. A police department may send notice to any secured party electronically, if that 
form of notice is agreed to by the police department, the tower, and the secured party in 
writing or by electronic communication. 
 
The bill authorizes a police department to notify the last known registered owner of the 
vehicle electronically through MVA if (1) MVA sends the notice to the owner using the 
email address the owner provided to MVA, as shown in MVA’s records and (2) the police 
department sends the owner a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and  
first class mail, if the owner does not respond within seven days after the electronic notice 
was sent by MVA. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 191/ Page 3 
Police Departments – Abandoned Vehicles – Notice by Publication 
 
Under current law, a police department that takes an abandoned vehicle into custody must 
post a notice meeting specified requirements in the circuit court of the county where the 
vehicle was found if any of a list of specified conditions are met, including if the electronic 
notice the police department sent to a secured party is not acknowledged or is returned as 
undeliverable. 
 
The bill also requires a police department to post a notice in the appropriate circuit court if 
the police department’s electronic notice to the last known registered owner of an 
abandoned vehicle is not acknowledged or is returned as undeliverable. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MVA advises that implementation of the bill requires the 
administration to develop a web portal, similar to existing business portals, where a tower 
enters vehicle tag numbers and towing company information in order for MVA to send 
electronic notices to the vehicle’s owner. MVA advises that it will charge a nominal fee to 
towers to completely offset costs of development and ongoing maintenance of the 
web portal/electronic notification service. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 40 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3