START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 185 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 185 
(Delegate Mireku-North, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Therapeutic Child Care Grant Program - Funding - Alterations 
 
 
This bill reestablishes a mandated appropriation for the Therapeutic Child Care Grant 
Program, administered by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). As a 
result, the Governor must include a $3.7 million appropriation for the program in the annual 
budget bill from fiscal 2027 through 2029. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $2.2 million 
from FY 2027 through 2029, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2027 through 2029. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
2.2 
2.2 
2.2 
0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($2.2) 
($2.2) 
($2.2) 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 498 and 499 of 2022 established the Therapeutic Child Care 
Grant Program, administered by MSDE. The purpose of the program is to provide grants 
to providers that specialize in providing child care and early childhood education to 
children younger than age six who have developmental delays; physical disabilities; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 185/ Page 2 
delays in social, emotional, or behavioral functioning. Chapters 498 and 499 required the 
Governor to include a $3.7 million appropriation in the annual budget bill for the program 
in fiscal 2023 through 2025. 
 
In awarding grants under the program, MSDE must distribute $1,283,000 to existing 
providers in the same amount as was provided in fiscal 2022 and $1,917,000 to existing 
providers in the same proportion as was provided in fiscal 2022 to provide additional 
services. MSDE must also distribute $500,000 to new or existing providers to enroll 
additional children; however, if funds are remaining after this distribution, the remainder 
must be distributed to existing providers to provide additional services, in proportion to 
fiscal 2022 funding. MSDE must award grants by August 15 each year and may adopt 
necessary regulations. 
 
Therapeutic child care programs were originally called therapeutic nursery programs. 
Therapeutic child care is the more modern term. According to regulations, a child is eligible 
for therapeutic nursery services if the child: 
 
 
has or is at risk for a mild to severe mental disorder, as defined in the current 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or mild to severe behavioral 
problems, or both; 
 
is at risk for emotional or behavioral problems because the child (1) is experiencing 
substantial developmental delay or atypical development, as specified; (2) has 
experienced psychological trauma, as identified by an evaluation by a mental health 
professional; (3) has a diagnosed physical or mental condition, which has a high 
probability of resulting in developmental delay; or (4) has been excluded, for 
developmental or behavioral problems, from more than one preschool or day care 
program; 
 
is at risk for emotional or behavioral problems and is a child who is being assessed 
or has been assessed in a suspected child abuse or neglect investigation; or 
 
is at risk for emotional or behavioral problems because of significant family history, 
as identified by an evaluation by a mental health professional. 
 
Therapeutic nursery services must meet specified standards for staffing, treatment, 
evaluative services, support services, discharge, physical setting, and equipment. There are 
separate requirements for programs that serve children younger than age three and for those 
that serve children ages three to five. Programs must provide specified types of therapy, 
including individual therapy if required by the child’s individual treatment plan. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, the $3.7 million mandated funding requirement 
terminated after fiscal 2025; the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $1.5 million in funding for the Therapeutic Child Care Grant Program. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 185/ Page 3 
Department of Budget and Management advises that its outyear forecast assumes that 
program funding, while discretionary, is maintained at $1.5 million annually. General fund 
expenditures therefore increase by $2.2 million annually from fiscal 2027 through 2029 to 
fund the program at the higher amount required by the bill’s mandated appropriation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 377 and SB 419 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 359 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 28, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3