START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 127 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Housing and Community 
Development) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development - Maryland Housing 
Rehabilitation Program - Local Rehabilitation Program Administration 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the entities eligible to administer local rehabilitation 
programs under the Maryland Housing Rehabilitation Program (MHRP) in the Department 
of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to include nonprofit sponsors. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. Some local jurisdictions may receive less MHRP funding to the extent that 
more funding is provided to nonprofit sponsors to administer local programs, but the effect 
on any individual local jurisdiction is expected to be minimal due to the program’s funding 
guidelines. 
  
Small Business Effect:  DHCD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 127/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Housing Rehabilitation Program 
 
MHRP provides funds for political subdivisions that meet DHCD standards to administer 
loans for the purposes of rehabilitating buildings that, after rehabilitation, provide 
(1) traditional dwellings; (2) single room occupancy; (3) shared living dwellings meeting 
specified requirements; and (4) congregate or group housing and related services or 
temporary shelters and related services. Barring certain exceptions, buildings that provide 
group housing are not eligible for program funding. 
 
The program consists of the Regular Rehabilitation Program, which provides funding for 
single family projects, and the Special Loan Program, which provides funding for various 
types of shared housing and other specified purposes (such as lead abatement). 
 
To ensure that all areas of the State are served, DHCD must allocate MHRP funding among 
the counties, taking into account (1) the number of families of limited income within each 
county; (2) the need for rehabilitation of buildings in each county; (3) the capability of the 
county to administer a local rehabilitation program; and (4) any other criteria DHCD deems 
relevant to make a fair and equitable distribution of funds among the counties. 
 
DHCD may allocate funding on a countywide basis first and then make suballocations 
among participating municipalities within counties. 
 
Definitions 
 
A “local rehabilitation program” is defined as a rehabilitation program that uses loans under 
MHRP and is administered by a political subdivision. 
 
A “nonprofit sponsor” is defined as (1) a nonprofit organization; (2) a political subdivision; 
or (3) a limited partnership formed to undertake a rehabilitation project that is eligible 
wholly or partly for federal programs or incentives, as specified. 
 
Administration of Local Rehabilitation Programs 
 
Only political subdivisions that meet certain standards set by DHCD are authorized to 
administer local rehabilitation programs. 
 
DHCD is authorized to help train employees of political subdivisions to administer local 
rehabilitation programs under the standards the department sets. DHCD is also authorized 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 127/ Page 3 
to provide advice and technical assistance to political subdivisions on the administration of 
their local rehabilitation programs, including loan packaging, contractor and bid selection, 
zoning, marketing, engineering, and related services. 
 
If DHCD determines that a political subdivision cannot or does not want to administer a 
local rehabilitation program, DHCD may originate and administer program loans from the 
allocation or suballocation to that political subdivision. 
 
Background:  DHCD advises that it is currently absorbing the work of some local 
governments who previously administered local rehabilitation programs but have since cut 
their housing staff and programs. DHCD advises that there are nonprofit organizations 
willing to administer local programs and expanding the statutory authority to include them 
as eligible administrators lessens the administrative burden on both DHCD and local 
governments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 238 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Housing and Community Development) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):   Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, and Howard counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; cities of Hagerstown and Laurel; Maryland Municipal 
League; Town of La Plata; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 127/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Department of Housing and Community Development - Maryland 
Housing Rehabilitation Program - Local Rehabilitation Program Administration 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 127 
 
PREPARED BY:  Chuck Cook 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This is only expected to impact contractors to work directly with DHCD, and is not 
expected to have an impact to the small business community, as a whole. 
 

END OF PAGE 4