START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 439

Chapter 439

(House Bill 121)

AN ACT concerning

Electric Companies – Regional Transmission Organizations – Report
(Utility Transparency and Accountability Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain electric company to submit an annual report to the
Public Service Commission regarding each recorded vote cast by the electric company
and any State affiliate of the electric company at a meeting of a regional transmission
organization; and generally relating to electric companies and regional transmission
organizations.

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

7–108.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “AFFILIATE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–501 OF THIS
TITLE.

(3) “MEETING” MEANS ANY COMMITTEE, USER GROUP, TASK FORCE,
OR OTHER PART OF THE REGIONAL TRANSMISSION ORGANIZATION IN WHICH VOTES
ARE TAKEN.

(4) “RECORDED VOTE” MEANS A VOTE THAT IS TABULATED, EITHER
INDIVIDUALLY OR AS PART OF A SECTOR, FOR ANY PURPOSE AT A MEETING,
REGARDLESS OF:

(I) WHETHER THE VOTE REPRESENTS A FINAL POSITION OF
ANY PERSON CASTING THE VOTE; OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 439 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE DECISION–MAKING AUTHORITY OF THOSE VOTING.

(5) “REGIONAL TRANSMISSION ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ENTITY
THAT QUALIFIES AS A REGIONAL TRANSMISSION ORGANIZATION UNDER 18 C.F.R. §
35.34.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY 1 EACH YEAR, EACH ELECTRIC
COMPANY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION A REPORT ON EACH RECORDED VOTE
CAST BY THE ELECTRIC COMPANY OR, SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN A STATE AFFILIATE OF THE ELECTRIC COMPANY AT A MEETING OF
A REGIONAL TRANSMISSION ORGANIZATION DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
CALENDAR YEAR.

(2) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) ALL RECORDED VOTES CAST BY THE ELECTRIC COMPANY,
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE VOTE IS OTHERWISE DISCLOSED; AND

(II) ALL VOTES CAST BY AN A STATE AFFILIATE OF THE
ELECTRIC COMPANY IF THE ELECTRIC COMPANY ITSELF DOES NOT VOTE ON THE
MATTER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2