START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 189 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 189 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Transportation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Drunk Driving - Commercial Driver's Licenses - Disqualification From Driving 
 
This departmental bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to disqualify any 
individual from driving a commercial motor vehicle for a period of one year if the 
individual, while holding a commercial instructional permit or commercial driver’s license 
(CDL), drives (or attempts to drive) any motor vehicle while the alcohol concentration of 
the person’s blood or breath is 0.08 or greater.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund revenues and expenditures are not materially 
affected. Reprogramming and other procedural changes can be handled with existing 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “commercial motor vehicle” is defined as a motor vehicle or 
combination of motor vehicles used to transport passengers or property, if the motor 
vehicle:  
 
 
has a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds (inclusive of a 
towed unit with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating of more than 10,000 pounds); 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 189/ Page 2 
 
has a GVW rating of 26,0001 or more pounds; 
 
is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or 
 
is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials found to be hazardous 
for the purposes of the federal Hazardous Materials Transportation Act and which 
requires the motor vehicle to be placarded under specified federal hazardous 
material regulations. 
 
Driving under the Influence of Alcohol or under the Influence of Alcohol Per Se 
 
A person may not drive or attempt to drive any vehicle while under the influence of alcohol 
or under the influence of alcohol per se or while impaired by alcohol. Driving under the 
influence of alcohol per se means driving with a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.08 
or higher. BAC is measured, at the time of testing, as grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters 
of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath. 
 
Disqualification of Commercial Driver’s License Holders for Drunk Driving 
 
Section 16-812 of the Transportation Article requires MVA to disqualify an individual 
from driving a commercial motor vehicle when that individual is convicted of specified 
offenses or commits specified acts. MVA must disqualify any individual from driving a 
commercial motor vehicle for a period of one year if (1) the individual is convicted of 
committing certain offenses (e.g., drunk or drugged driving offenses) while driving a 
commercial vehicle; (2) the individual holds a commercial instructional permit or CDL and 
is convicted of committing specified offenses (such as driving under the influence of 
alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se or driving while impaired by drugs or drugs 
and alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance) while driving a noncommercial motor 
vehicle; (3) the individual, while driving a commercial motor vehicle or while holding a 
commercial instructional permit or CDL, refuses to undergo required testing for 
intoxication; (4) the individual drives (or attempts to drive) a commercial motor vehicle 
while the alcohol concentration of the person’s blood or breath is 0.04 or greater; or (5) the 
individual drives a commercial motor vehicle when (as a result of prior violations 
committed while driving a commercial vehicle) the driver’s commercial instructional 
permit or CDL is revoked, suspended, or canceled or the driver is disqualified from driving 
a commercial motor vehicle. 
 
If any of the offenses described above occurred while transporting a hazardous material 
required to be placarded, MVA must disqualify the individual for a three-year period. 
 
MVA must disqualify any person from driving a commercial motor vehicle for life for 
two or more violations of any of the offenses noted above (or any combination of those 
offenses) arising from two or more separate incidents. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 189/ Page 3 
Background:  The adjudication of an administrative per se offense occurs through a 
hearing before an administrative law judge and is independent of the criminal prosecution 
of an alleged drunk or drugged driver through the courts. MVA advises that, under current 
law, it is unable to impose a disqualification (via administrative per se) for individuals who 
register a BAC of 0.08 or greater in a personal vehicle. However, MVA may do so if an 
individual drives (or attempts to drive) a commercial motor vehicle while the alcohol 
concentration of the person’ blood or breath is 0.04 or greater. MVA further notes that 
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) regulations require that 
disqualification actions be taken upon a “conviction.” FMSCA regulations consider an 
administrative per se violation to be a conviction. 
 
MVA advises that, in 2023, 174 CDL holders had an offense that would potentially be 
subject to disqualification actions at the administrative per se level under the bill. In 2022, 
that figure was 168 CDL holders. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 187 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 189/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
  
TITLE OF BILL: 
Drunk Driving – Commercial Driver’s Licenses – Disqualification 
From Driving 
  
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 189 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Phillip Dacey 
  
  
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
  
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
  
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
  
OR 
  
  
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
  
  
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
  
 

END OF PAGE 4