START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 182 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 182 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Speed Monitoring Systems - 
 
 
This bill repeals a statutory provision that sets a maximum amount of $40 for the civil 
penalty that is imposed on the owner or driver of a motor vehicle that exceeds a posted 
speed limit and is recorded by a speed monitoring system. Instead, the bill establishes an 
escalating penalty structure, with a maximum penalty that ranges from $40 to $425 for the 
offense, depending on the excessiveness of the speed violation. The bill also requires the 
State Highway Administration (SHA) to convene a workgroup to study best practices 
regarding speed monitoring systems in school zones. By December 1, 2025, SHA must 
submit its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues increase, 
potentially significantly, due to the increased civil penalties authorized by the bill and 
additional contested cases in District Court beginning in FY 2026; TTF expenditures 
increase correspondingly as the additional revenues are used for authorized purposes. The 
effects on TTF terminate in FY 2029. TTF expenditures also increase by $75,000 in 
FY 2026 for consultant costs, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for the 
Judiciary increase by $33,600 in FY 2026 for one-time programming costs. 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2026 
due to the increased civil penalties authorized by the bill; expenditures increase 
correspondingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 182/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Speed Monitoring System Penalties  
 
The bill establishes an escalating penalty structure for the maximum penalty for speeding 
violations, which increases based on the speed recorded by a speed monitoring system in 
excess of the posted speed limit, as shown in Exhibit 1.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Speed Monitoring System Workgroup 
 
SHA must convene a workgroup to study best practices regarding speed monitoring 
systems in school zones. The study of the workgroup must assess:   
 
 
the existing policies regarding speed monitoring systems in school zones;  
 
whether the current radius in which speed monitoring systems are allowed in school 
zones is consistent with best practices;  
 
the annual number of serious traffic incidents that occur within the current radius in 
which speed monitoring systems are allowed in school zones, by jurisdiction;  
 
the average distance that each speed monitoring system within a school zone is 
located from the property line of the school with which it is associated, by county; 
and  
 
any other best practices regarding the use of speed monitoring systems in school 
zones.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 182/ Page 3 
The study of the workgroup must include relevant local education stakeholders, including 
local governments, local law enforcement, and any other participants necessary to fully 
represent the interests of student pedestrians in school zones.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by SHA. Similar requirements apply to speed cameras established on Maryland 
Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of institutions of higher education in 
Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, Maryland Route 175 in 
Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the Maryland Route 175/295 interchange 
and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, and at the intersection of Maryland 
Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in Talbot County. 
 
An authorizing ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body of a local 
jurisdiction must establish certain procedures related to the movement or placement of 
speed monitoring systems. Specifically, if a jurisdiction moves (or places) a mobile (or 
stationary) speed monitoring system to (or at) a new location, the jurisdiction may not issue 
a citation for a violation recorded by that speed monitoring system (1) until signage is 
installed, as specified, and (2) for at least the first 15 calendar days after the signage is 
installed. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner that includes specified information, including a copy of the recorded 
image, the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 182/ Page 4 
imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a 
citation may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation, directly to 
the political subdivision; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
The civil penalty may not exceed $40, and the District Court must prescribe:   
 
 
a uniform citation form that includes specified information and allows the person 
receiving the citation to pay the citation or contest the citation by standing trial, as 
specified; and 
 
a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons who 
choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
Generally, from the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction 
may recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
Speed Cameras on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County 
 
Chapter 806 of 2018 authorized Prince George’s County, for five years, to place one speed 
camera at the intersection of Old Fort Road and Maryland Route 210, subject to specified 
requirements. Chapter 586 of 2019 repealed the limitation on the specific location of that 
speed camera and increased, to three, the number of speed cameras that could be placed on 
Maryland Route 210 in the county until the initial authorization terminated (originally 
September 30, 2023). Chapter 606 of 2023 again increased the number of speed cameras 
that may be placed on Maryland Route 210 (from three to six) and extended the termination 
date of the original authorization by five years (through September 30, 2028). 
 
Also, pursuant to Chapter 147 of 2020, fines collected by Prince George’s County as a 
result of violations enforced by speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 must be remitted to 
SHA for specified activities after cost recovery. (This requirement replaced a provision of 
Chapter 806 that required the fine revenues to be deposited into the Criminal Injuries 
Compensation Fund.) SHA must solely use the fine revenues to assist in covering the costs 
of (1) examining the engineering, infrastructure, and other relevant factors that may 
contribute to safety issues on Maryland Route 210; (2) reporting its findings and 
recommendations on any solutions to these safety issues; and (3) implementing any 
solutions to these safety issues. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 182/ Page 5 
Work Zone Speed Control Systems 
 
Chapter 17 of 2024 made various changes to the State’s work zone speed control systems 
program by, among other things, increasing civil penalties for violations captured by work 
zone speed cameras and establishing an escalating penalty structure for violations captured 
by work zone speed cameras (effective January 1, 2025). Exhibit 2 shows the escalating 
penalty structure established by Chapter 17. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Work Zone Speed Control Systems 
Effective January 1, 2025 
 
 
Penalty 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Base Amount 
With Workers Present 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$60 
$120 
16 - 19 MPH, inclusive 
80 
160 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
140 
280 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
270 
540 
40 or more MPH 
500 
1,000 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Note:  Penalties are doubled for a violation recorded when workers are present in a work zone. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Revenues:  Total revenues from violations recorded by a speed monitoring system 
are anticipated to increase due to the escalating penalties authorized by the bill. With higher 
fines, a greater percentage of individuals is expected to contest citations and, as a result, 
the number of trials in the District Court likely increases. Although most individuals issued 
citations are expected to fall into the lower categories under the tiered penalty system (and 
be issued citations for, at most, $40 or $70 fines), individuals who receive citations for the 
highest categories of speeding may pay considerably higher penalties than the $40 fine 
generally imposed under current law. Those individuals are assumed to be much more 
likely to contest a citation and, as a result, pay those much higher fines into the general fund 
(assuming they are found guilty after a trial).  
 
Additionally, because the bill affects fines paid from violations recorded by speed cameras 
on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County (and revenues from those cameras must 
accrue to TTF), TTF revenues increase as well. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 182/ Page 6 
While there is insufficient data on speed camera violations and the associated revenues for 
a reliable estimate (and the ultimate increase in revenues depends on the fines established 
by the District Court under the bill), given the substantial potential increase in the penalty 
for some violations, the impact on the general fund and TTF may be significant. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Speed Monitoring System Workgroup  
 
In the execution of its duties, SHA often engages expert consultants to handle research, 
evaluation, studies, and staffing duties. To meet the bill’s requirements within the 
timeframe allotted by the bill, SHA anticipates engaging a consultant to staff the 
workgroup and complete the study required by the bill. Therefore, TTF expenditures 
increase by $75,000 in fiscal 2026 only for consultant services. 
 
Speed Camera Penalties 
 
General fund expenditures for the District Court increase for programming changes 
necessary to modify its penalty schedule to meet the bill’s requirements. 
Programming-related costs total an estimated $33,596 in fiscal 2026. As noted above, the 
increased penalties authorized by the bill likely result in additional cases before the 
District Court as individuals receiving citations contest the case to avoid paying the higher 
penalties. It is anticipated, however, that the Judiciary can handle any increased case 
volume using existing budgeted resources. 
 
TTF expenditures increase correspondingly to the increase in TTF revenues from speed 
cameras on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County as these additional revenues 
are used in the manner authorized under current law.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to the extent that the higher penalties (for certain violations) authorized by the 
bill are imposed and begin to be paid. While there is insufficient data on speed camera 
violations and the associated revenues for a reliable estimate of the impact on local 
governments (and the ultimate impact depends on the prepayment penalties established by 
the District Court and the deterrent effect of higher penalties), the increase may be 
significant for some local jurisdictions that operate multiple speed monitoring systems. 
 
Nevertheless, data from Baltimore City on its school zone and Interstate 83 speed camera 
programs is instructive as to the potential impact on local governments. Baltimore City 
advises that most violations recorded by its speed cameras are for exceeding the speed limit 
by between 12 and 15 miles per hour (MPH) (77.1% of violations in school zones and 
70.3% of violations on Interstate 83), for which the maximum penalty is unchanged by the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 182/ Page 7 
bill. The next largest share of violations is for exceeding the speed limit by between 
16 and 19 MPH (17.3% and 20.5% of violations in school zones and on Interstate 83, 
respectively). Thus, for illustrative purposes only, assuming a similar rate and volume of 
such violations and continued prepayment but at the maximum fine of $70, Baltimore City 
could realize about $3.5 million in additional fine revenue annually – from that set of 
violations alone. However, to the extent that other violations – those recorded at even 
higher speeds for which the fines may be significantly greater – are contested in 
District Court rather than prepaid (as they might have been under the much lower current 
law penalty), as much as $1.8 million in fine revenue currently realized by the city might 
not be. Instead, the total increase in fine revenue for Baltimore City might be only 
$1.7 million annually – the difference between the additional revenue realized for the lower 
tier speeding violations and the foregone revenue from higher tier speeding violations due 
to the likelihood of those citations being contested. The actual impact also depends on the 
deterrent effect of the higher penalties, which could result in significantly fewer violations. 
 
Local expenditures increase correspondingly as the speed monitoring system revenues 
become available for local public safety programs (the only authorized use of these 
revenues for local governments). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 118 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Calvert, Cecil, Frederick, Howard, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties; Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 182/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 21, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8