START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 181 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Military Department – Chief of Staff and Aides – Appointment Authority 
 
 
This departmental bill replaces the Governor with the Adjutant General as the individual 
responsible for specified functions within the Military Department. Specifically, the bill 
authorizes the Adjutant General of the Military Department (instead of the Governor) to 
appoint a chief of staff and aides. The bill further establishes that these individuals serve at 
the pleasure of the Adjutant General (rather than the Governor). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
The Military Department advises that the bill conforms statute to current practice, as 
discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Military Department has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
The Military Department, Adjutant General, and Assistant Adjutants General 
 
The Military Department provides overall direction and maintenance of the Maryland 
National Guard (MDNG), which is comprised of the Maryland Army National Guard and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 181/ Page 2 
the Maryland Air National Guard. MDNG may be called up by the Governor during State 
emergencies or may be activated by the U.S. Department of Defense. 
 
The Adjutant General is the head of the Military Department. Among other things, the 
Adjutant General must be appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate and is subordinate only to the Governor in matters relating to the  
Military Department. The Adjutant General must have a commissioned grade not above 
that of Lieutenant General and must be a full-time employee of the Military Department in 
State active-duty status. 
 
The Adjutant General may appoint (1) a chief of State operations; (2) an executive officer; 
(3) an administrative officer; (4) the directors of military installations, procurement, 
military support to civil authorities, State personnel, finance, and veterans affairs; (5) the 
site managers for military reservations; and (6) a grants administrator. The executive 
officer and directors serve at the pleasure of the Adjutant General. 
 
The Governor must appoint two Assistant Adjutants General for the Maryland Army 
National Guard and two Assistant Adjutants General for the Maryland Air National Guard. 
An assistant Adjutant General serves at the pleasure of the Governor. Unless selected for a 
military position requiring federal recognition as a Major General, an Assistant Adjutant 
General must have a commissioned grade not above that of Brigadier General. 
 
Other Personnel (Statute Altered by the Bill) 
 
Officers, warrant officers, and enlisted individuals who are full-time employees of the 
Military Department are in State active-duty status. The Governor may appoint a chief of 
staff and aides. In addition, the chief of staff and aides serve at the pleasure of the Governor. 
 
The Military Department advises that while the Governor has the statutory authority to 
appoint the chief of staff, this power is rarely exercised, and by practice the  
Adjutant General chooses the chief of staff. In addition, because the chief of staff is a direct 
report to the Governor under current law, this creates the appearance that the chief of staff 
is of equal rank as the Adjutant General and may cause confusion. The Military Department 
also advises that the Adjutant General already has appointing authority for several other 
positions within the department. The Military Department further advises that clarifying 
that the Adjutant General appoints the chief of staff and aides ultimately conforms statute 
to current practice. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 181/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 255 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Military Department; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 7, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 181/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Military Department – Chief of Staff and Aides – Appointment Authority 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 181 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Dr. Tony Campbell 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The proposed bill will have NO economic impact on Maryland Small Businesses 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4