START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 123 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Correctional Training Commission – Membership 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the membership of the Correctional Training Commission 
(CTC) to include the Director of the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) within the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and one employee of DPP 
recommended by the exclusive representative for the employees of DPP and appointed by 
the Governor. The bill excludes the DPP employee member from being able to designate 
another representative from DPP to act at any meeting to the same effect as if the member 
were personally present. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for the additional commission members can 
be handled with existing resources. Otherwise, State finances are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DPSCS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  CTC within DPSCS consists of the following 16 members: 
 
 
the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 123/ Page 2 
 
the Secretary of Juvenile Services; 
 
a representative of DPSCS, designated by the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; 
 
a representative of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS), designated by the 
Secretary of Juvenile Services; 
 
a Deputy Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
 
the president of the Maryland Correctional Administrators Association; 
 
the president of the Maryland Sheriffs’ Association; 
 
the president of the Maryland Criminal Justice Association; 
 
the Maryland Attorney General; 
 
the president of a university or college in the State with a correctional education 
curriculum, appointed by the Maryland Higher Education Commission;  
 
one correctional officer of the State recommended by the exclusive representative 
for the officers, as specified and appointed by the Governor; and 
 
five correctional officers or officials appointed by the Governor. 
 
The Governor must appoint, with the advice and consent of the Senate, five correctional 
officers or officials from local correctional facilities to be members of the commission. The 
five members appointed by the Governor must be from local correctional facilities and 
represent each geographic area of the State (“the Capital region,” “the Central region,” the 
Eastern Shore region,” “the Southern region,” and “the Western region,” as defined). The 
term of each of these appointed members is three years and staggered. At the end of a term, 
such an appointed member continues to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the remainder of the 
term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
 
Except for the five members appointed by the Governor, a member of the commission may 
serve personally at a commission meeting or designate a representative from the member’s 
unit or association who may act at any meeting to the same effect as if the member were 
personally present. 
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the State budget. 
 
CTC has several enumerated powers and duties, including: 
 
 
to prescribe standards for the approval and continuation of approval of schools that 
conduct correctional, parole, or probation entrance level and in-service training 
courses; 
 
to approve and issue certificates of approval to correctional training schools; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 123/ Page 3 
 
to inspect correctional training schools; 
 
to revoke, for cause, any approval or certificate of approval issued to a correctional 
training school; 
 
to prescribe the curriculum, courses of study, attendance and eligibility 
requirements, equipment and facilities, standards of operation, and minimum 
qualifications for instructors; 
 
to certify and issue appropriate certificates to qualified instructors for approved 
correctional training schools; 
 
to certify and issue appropriate certificates to correctional officers who satisfactorily 
complete training programs; 
 
to conduct and operate approved correctional training schools; 
 
to adopt regulations necessary to carry CTC duties, as specified; 
 
to make a continuous study of correctional training methods and procedures for all 
correctional training schools; 
 
to consult with and accept the cooperation of any recognized federal, State, or 
municipal correctional agency or educational institution; 
 
to consult and cooperate with universities, colleges, and institutions to develop all 
general and specialized courses of study for correctional officers; 
 
to consult and cooperate with other units of the State concerned with correctional 
training; 
 
to develop and implement specific program design and appropriate course 
curriculum and training for DJS employees, subject to certain conditions; and 
 
to perform any other act that is necessary or appropriate to carry out CTC 
requirements. 
 
“Capital region” means Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties. 
“Central region” means Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, 
and Howard counties. “Eastern Shore region” means Caroline, Cecil, Dorchester, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester counties. “Southern region” 
means Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s counties. “Western region” means Allegany, 
Garrett, and Washington counties. 
 
Background:  Since the establishment of CTC, the duties and powers of the commission 
have grown to encompass positions beyond the traditional correctional officer and now 
also include parole and probation agents. DPP supervises more than 42,000 individuals on 
mandatory release, parole, and/or probation. As part of its duties, DPP is required to use 
practicable and suitable methods that are consistent with evidence-based programs and 
practices and innovative programs and practices to aid and encourage a probationer or 
parolee to improve conduct, to reduce the risk of recidivism, and to pay restitution. 
According to DPSCS, the bill seeks to include representation for DPP on CTC to be able 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 123/ Page 4 
to use the resources of CTC to ensure that DPP is able to adhere to its statutory 
requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 197 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 123/ Page 5 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Correctional Training Commission - Alterations - Director of the 
Division of Parole and Probation 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 123 
 
PREPARED BY:        Catherine Kahl 
, Deputy Director, Government and Legislative 
Affairs 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5