START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 146 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Estates and Trusts - Resignation of Trustee - Notice 
 
 
This bill authorizes a trustee of a trust, under the Maryland Trust Act, to resign, without 
having to seek court approval, provided that at least 30 days’ notice is given to (1) the 
qualified beneficiaries of the trust; (2) the settlor of (creator of or contributor to) the trust, 
if living; (3) all co-trustees; and (4) any person that has a right to replace or appoint a 
successor to the resigning trustee. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
Current Law:   
 
Resignation of a Trustee 
 
Under the Maryland Trust Act, a trustee may resign with approval of the court. In 
approving a resignation of a trustee, the court is authorized to issue orders and impose 
conditions reasonably necessary for the protection of the trust property. Liability of a 
resigning trustee or of a surety on the bond of the trustee for acts or omissions of the trustee 
is not discharged or affected by the resignation of the trustee. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 146/ Page 2 
Terms of a Trust Prevail 
 
Under the Maryland Trust Act, the terms of a trust prevail over many provisions of the Act, 
including the provision requiring court approval for a trustee resignation. 
 
Duties of a Resigned Trustee 
 
Unless a co-trustee remains, or the court otherwise orders, and until the trust property is 
delivered to a successor trustee or other person entitled to the trust property, a trustee that 
has resigned has the duties of a trustee and the powers necessary to protect the trust 
property. A trustee that has resigned must proceed expeditiously to deliver the trust 
property within the possession of the trustee to the co-trustee, successor trustee, or other 
person entitled to the trust property. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 126 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2