START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 124 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 124 
(Delegates Rosenberg and Boyce) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Residential Property - Assignment of Contracts of Sale - Disclosure 
Requirements and Rescission 
 
 
This bill (1) requires a “wholesale buyer” or “wholesale seller” to provide specified 
disclosures in a contract of sale for “residential property” and (2) authorizes the rescission 
of a contract (and requires the refund of any deposit) under specified circumstances related 
to the required disclosures. The bill’s provisions are not applicable to sales under 
Maryland Rule 14-215 (foreclosures). The bill applies prospectively only and may not be 
applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to any contracts of sale for 
residential property executed before the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “wholesale buyer” means a person that enters into a contract of sale 
with an owner of owner-occupied residential property in order to assign the contract to 
another person for a monetary assignment fee. A “wholesale seller” means a person that, 
without holding legal title to owner-occupied residential property (1) enters into a contract 
of sale for the property and (2) assigns the person’s beneficial interest in the property to 
another. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 124/ Page 2 
“Residential property” means property improved by four or fewer single-family dwelling 
units that are designed principally and are intended for human habitation. 
 
Prior to entering into a contract of sale for residential property, a wholesale buyer must 
provide written disclosure to the owner of the property that the wholesale buyer may assign 
the contract of sale to another person. An owner of residential property may rescind a 
contract of sale to a wholesale buyer (or the assignee or successor) without penalty at any 
time prior to closing if the wholesale buyer (1) fails to provide proper notice and (2) assigns 
the contact of sale. This right applies regardless of any provision of a contract or any other 
agreement. 
 
Prior to assigning a contract of sale for residential property, a wholesale seller must provide 
written disclosure to the prospective assignee that the wholesale seller holds an equitable 
interest in the property and may not be able to convey title to the property. If such notice 
is not provided, the assignee has the right to rescind the agreement to purchase under the 
assigned contract without penalty at any time prior to closing, regardless of any provision 
of a contract or any other agreement. An assignee rescinding a contract because of the lack 
of notice is also entitled to a refund of any deposit paid in connection with the assignment 
of a contract of sale of the residential property. 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth numerous requirements regarding statements, 
disclosures, and notices in contracts for the sale of property, including provisions relating 
to:   
 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges; 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays; 
 
notice of specified development impact fees; 
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund; 
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence. 
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located. Generally, 
unless otherwise specifically provided, a contract of sale is not rendered invalid by the 
omission of any statement, disclosure, or notice. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 124/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1408 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 160 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3