START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 150 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 150 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Education) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Child Care Centers - Certificated Staff Ratio Requirement - Alteration 
 
 
This departmental bill alters a requirement that child care centers serving more than 
20 children must have at least one staff member (per every 20 children) who is certified in 
basic first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training. Under the bill, the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) is authorized to set the ratio through 
regulation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can implement the bill’s changes with existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MSDE has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  MSDE advises that, due to a child care workforce shortage 
across the State, school age programs are experiencing challenges with staff recruitment 
and retention. Under current regulations, child care centers are required to have a certain 
number of certified first aid/CPR staff (depending on the number of children), which may 
be a barrier to hiring new staff. MSDE notes that, once the current statutory requirement is 
modified, it intends to adopt regulations lowering the ratio to one first aid/CPR certified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 150/ Page 2 
staff per every 30 school age children (i.e., a child younger than age 16 who attends a 
public or nonpublic school in grades kindergarten or above).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 252 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Education) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 150/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Child Care Centers – Certificated Staff Ratio Requirement – Repeal 
 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB 150 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Shayna Cook  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING  
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
___   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  BUSINESS  
 
OR  
 
 X   WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  BUSINESSES  
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS  
 
This amendment to statute would allow child care centers and letter of compliance facilities that 
are small businesses, based on their size or capacity, the opportunity to have fewer staff that need 
the FA/CPR certification, which will ultimately reduce the cost of staff training. This may 
encourage additional applications for child care facilities due to lower operating costs. In addition, 
the change may assist with staff recruitment and retention, which will in turn have a positive impact 
on the continuity of care for children and families. 
 

END OF PAGE 3