START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 170 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 170 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health - Maternal and Child Health Population Health Improvement Fund - Use 
 
 
This departmental bill extends, from December 31, 2025, to December 31, 2027, the date 
through which the Maternal and Child Health Population Health Improvement Fund may 
be used for maternal and child health population health improvements. The bill allows the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to spend – through calendar 2027 – any monies 
remaining in the fund on December 31, 2025. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Residual monies available in the special fund continue to be expended by 
MDH through the first half of FY 2028 and continue to be used in lieu of general funds, 
including to match federal fund revenues and expenditures (to the extent funds are used for 
Medicaid). No new special fund revenues are collected, and special fund expenditures have 
already been accounted for, but over a shorter period. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 150 of 2021 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 
2021) established a Maternal and Child Health Population Health Improvement Fund to 
invest in maternal and child population health improvements in Medicaid and MDH’s 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 170/ Page 2 
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration through calendar 2025. The fund is 
administered by MDH and the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC). 
Funding is derived from a uniform, broad-based assessment built into hospital rates, which 
must be approved by a majority of HSCRC members. Expenditures from the fund may 
only be made in accordance with the State budget and after the approval of a majority of 
HSCRC members. Money expended from the fund is supplemental to funding that would 
otherwise be appropriated for Medicaid. The fund is subject to audit by the Office of 
Legislative Audits. 
 
Background:  The hospital assessment for maternal and child health was approved by 
HSCRC in May 2021 and terminates at the end of calendar 2025. HSCRC approved 
$40 million in cumulative funding; specifically, for fiscal 2022 through 2025, $8 million 
annually to Medicaid to address severe maternal morbidity (funding that is eligible for 
federal matching funds) and $2 million annually to the Prevention and Health Promotion 
Administration (PHPA) to support childhood asthma initiatives and additional maternal 
morbidity interventions. The following programs are currently or have been funded from 
the fund:  for Medicaid, the Home Visiting Services Pilot, reimbursement for doula 
services; Centering Pregnancy (which provides group-based prenatal care in a comfortable, 
community setting); HealthySteps (resources, screenings, support, and services for the  
first three years of a child’s life); expansion of the Maternal Opioid Misuse model; and for 
PHPA, the Asthma Home Visiting Program and the Eliminating Disparities in Maternal 
Health Initiative. 
 
MDH and HSCRC advise that unspent funds will likely remain in the fund at the end of 
calendar 2025. The bill allows any such funds to be expended to continue to scale and 
mature maternal and child health programs for two additional years. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  HSCRC advises that, by the end of fiscal 2025, the fund will have a 
balance of $24.1 million. A portion of that estimated balance may be spent between 
June 30, 2025, and December 31, 2025, thus reducing that balance. Therefore, under the 
bill, up to $24.1 million may remain in the fund at the end of calendar 2025. 
 
The fiscal and policy note for Chapter 150 assumed a total of $40 million in special fund 
revenues to the fund from the assessment ($5 million in fiscal 2022, $10 million annually 
in fiscal 2023 through 2025, and $5 million in fiscal 2026), with corresponding special 
fund expenditures and additional federal fund revenues and expenditures ($4 million in 
fiscal 2022, $8 million annually in fiscal 2023 through 2025, and $4 million in fiscal 2026) 
from Medicaid federal matching funds. Under the bill, up to $24.1 million of these funds 
(should they remain unspent at the end of calendar 2025) may be available to be expended 
for maternal and child health programs and services in fiscal 2026 through 2028. In the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 170/ Page 3 
absence of the bill, any unspent funds would remain in the fund, and MDH would require 
general funds to continue such expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 213 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - January 31, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 170/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Health - Maternal and Child Health Population Health Improvement 
Fund - Use 
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 170 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Health Services Cost Review Commission  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.   
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4