START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 179 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 179 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Organized Retail Theft Act of 2025 
 
 
This bill establishes the offense of “organized retail theft” of property with an aggregate 
“value” exceeding $1,500. A violation of this prohibition is a felony punishable by 
specified graduated penalties based on the value of the property involved. A person who 
violates this prohibition must restore the property to the owner or pay to the owner the full 
value of the property. A conviction for organized retail theft merges into a conviction under 
the general theft statute (§7-104 of the Criminal Law Article) for the purposes of sentencing 
where the two convictions arise from the same acts or transactions. The bill also (1) clarifies 
the venue for prosecution of a case involving multiple thefts in multiple counties committed 
by the same person under one scheme or continuing course of conduct and (2) requires the 
court (on the State’s Attorney’s request) to make a finding of fact (after specified 
dispositions for certain offenses) as to whether a crime constitutes organized retail theft.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in general fund revenues from cases that shift to 
circuit courts under the bill, as discussed below. Potential minimal increase in general fund 
incarceration expenditures, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues from fines imposed in circuit 
court cases. The bill is not expected to materially affect local expenditures.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 179/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
General Theft Statute 
 
Under the general theft statute, a person may not, under specified circumstances, 
(1) willfully or knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over property; (2) obtain 
control over property by willfully or knowingly using deception; (3) possess stolen 
property knowing that it has been stolen or believing that it probably has been stolen; 
(4) obtain control over property knowing that the property was lost, mislaid, or delivered 
under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or nature or amount of the property; or 
(5) obtain the services of another that are available only by compensation by deception or 
with knowledge that the services are provided without the provider’s consent. A violator 
is required to restore the owner’s property or pay the owner the value of the property or 
services and is subject to the penalties in Exhibit 1.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Theft 
 
Value of Property and/or Services 
Maximum Penalty 
 
 
Less than $100* 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine 
At least $100 but less than $1,500* 
Misdemeanor – 6 months imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine (first conviction) or 
1 year imprisonment 
and/or 
$500 
fine 
(second or subsequent conviction) 
Less than $1,500 (four or more prior theft 
convictions)** 
Misdemeanor – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$5,000 fine 
At least $1,500 but less than $25,000 
Felony – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$10,000 fine 
At least $25,000 but less than $100,000 
Felony – 10 years imprisonment and/or 
$15,000 fine 
$100,000 or more 
Felony – 20 years imprisonment and/or 
$25,000 fine 
 
* Subject to two-year statute of limitations.  
** Subject to specified notice requirements.  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 179/ Page 3 
Section 7-110 of the Criminal Law Article specifies presumptions and permitted and 
prohibited defenses to the crime of theft. The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction 
with the circuit courts over felony theft violations.  
 
Scheme/Continuing Course of Conduct and Venue 
 
Under current law, when a person commits a theft under one scheme or continuing course 
of conduct, whether from the same or several sources, the conduct may be considered as 
one crime, and the value of the property or services may be aggregated in determining 
whether the theft is a felony or misdemeanor.  
 
The bill specifies that multiple thefts committed by the same person in multiple counties 
under one scheme or continuing course of conduct may be joined and prosecuted in any 
county in which any one of the thefts occurred.  
 
Organized Retail Theft 
 
Under the bill, “organized retail theft” means the commission, either alone or in concert 
with one or more other persons, of a series of thefts of retail merchandise from one or more 
retail merchants over a 90-day period with the intent to (1) permanently deprive the 
merchant of the merchandise; (2) return the merchandise to the merchant for monetary or 
other gain; or (3) resell, trade, or barter the merchandise for monetary or other gain.  
 
Under the general theft statute, “value” means the market value of the property or service 
at the time and place of the crime or if the market value cannot satisfactorily be ascertained, 
the cost of the replacement of the property or service within a reasonable time after the 
crime. 
 
The bill incorporates this definition for organized retail theft. However, under the bill, for 
the purpose of calculating the aggregate value of property for the offense of organized retail 
theft, “value” also includes the market value of any property damaged in furtherance of the 
crime and any costs to repair, replace, or restock any damaged or stolen property.  
 
The bill prohibits a person from committing organized retail theft of property with an 
aggregate value exceeding $1,500. A violation of this prohibition is a felony punishable by 
the following maximum penalties, which vary based on the value of the property involved:   
 
 
at least $1,500 but less than $25,000:  5 years and/or $10,000;  
 
at least $25,000 but less than $100,000:  10 years and/or $15,000; and 
 
$100,000 or more:  20 years and/or $25,000.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 179/ Page 4 
A person who violates this prohibition must restore the property to the owner or pay to the 
owner the full value of the property.  
 
If a defendant is convicted of or receives a probation before judgement for specified 
offenses under the Criminal Law Article (e.g., general theft, robbery, and burglary), the 
court, at the request of the State’s Attorney, must make a finding of fact based on evidence 
produced at trial as to whether the crime constitutes organized retail theft. The State has 
the burden of proving that the crime is organized retail theft by a preponderance of the 
evidence. If the court does find that the crime is organized retail theft, the finding is part of 
the court record for purposes of reporting to the Criminal Justice Information System 
Central Repository.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  While the bill subjects organized retail theft to the same graduated 
penalties with the same property value brackets as the general theft statute, the bill’s 
organized retail theft provisions may capture behavior that is not addressed under the 
general theft statute and uses a more generous definition of “value,” which affects potential 
penalties. Furthermore, the bill’s provisions regarding joining cases from multiple counties 
may result in smaller theft cases becoming larger and being subjected to stronger penalties. 
This estimate assumes that cases involving thefts in multiple counties will not be joined 
unless they involve stolen property that has a high combined value.  
 
General fund revenues may decrease minimally from fines imposed in District Court cases 
that shift to the circuit courts under the bill. General fund expenditures may increase 
minimally due to more people being committed to State correctional facilities and people 
being committed to State correctional facilities for longer periods of time. The number of 
people convicted of this proposed crime is expected to be minimal. Any operational impact 
on the District Court to make specified findings of organized retail theft is not anticipated 
to materially affect State finances.  
 
The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts over felony theft 
offenses under the general theft statute. However, the creation of the new organized retail 
theft crime as an independent felony (including in cases that also involve a felony general 
theft charge) and the ability to join multiple cases across jurisdictions that could aggregate 
to a felony theft means that (1) more cases are likely to be filed in the circuit courts rather 
than the District Court and (2) some persons may eventually serve longer incarcerations 
due to more stringent penalty provisions, applicable to some offenses for prior felony 
convictions. Accordingly, it is assumed that this bill shifts an unknown number of cases 
from the District Court to the circuit courts. It is not known whether such a prospective 
shift may spur more plea bargains and affect actual sentencing practices for this offense.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 179/ Page 5 
is estimated at $5,339 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility.  
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions.  
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that while there may be some efficiencies 
to joining charges together for prosecution in a single jurisdiction, the ability to consolidate 
misdemeanor charges for felony liability will result in significantly more effort and involve 
more experienced circuit court attorneys, rather than District Court attorneys. OPD further 
advises that its anticipated impact is the equivalent of one circuit court attorney. The 
Department of Legislative Services agrees that there may be an increased level of effort for 
a single circuit court attorney to handle cases that are joined across jurisdictions but advises 
that the time and effort of multiple District Court attorneys is redirected. Moreover, the bill 
is not anticipated to result in additional cases or clients for OPD. Thus, the effect on OPD 
caseloads is expected to be absorbable within existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 948 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 11 (Senator Watson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 179/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6