START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 288 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 288 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority – Tolls, Fees, and Other Charges – 
Temporary Adjustments 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the maximum duration – from 180 days to 300 days – of 
a Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) emergency status determination (which 
allows MDTA to adopt temporary adjustments to tolls, fees, mileage rate ranges, pricing 
periods, toll zones, or other charges without meeting specified public notice and comment 
requirements).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues for MDTA may increase, potentially significantly, 
as early as FY 2026 due to the potential increase in the duration of an emergency status 
period, as discussed below. State expenditures (all funds) may likewise increase as early 
as FY 2026 to pay higher tolls, fees, or other charges set under an emergency status 
determination for a longer period of time, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase as early as FY 2026 to pay 
higher tolls, fees, or other charges due to the potential increase in the duration of an 
emergency status period, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) generally concurs with this assessment, as discussed below.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 288/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Since 1971, MDTA has been responsible for constructing, managing, 
operating, and improving the State’s toll facilities (for example, the Chesapeake Bay 
Bridge and the Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial/Senator Thomas “Mac” Middleton 
(Nice/Middleton) Bridge) and for financing new revenue-producing transportation 
projects. MDTA is a nonbudgeted State agency, meaning that its budget is not subject to 
the General Assembly’s appropriation process.  
 
MDTA has the authority to set tolls on transportation facilities projects under its 
supervision. Tolls must provide funds that, when combined with bond proceeds and other 
available revenues, are sufficient to pay maintenance, repair, and operating costs for 
transportation facilities projects that are not otherwise paid for; pay the interest and 
principal of any outstanding bond issues; create reasonable reserves for these purposes; 
and provide funds for the cost of replacements, renewals, and improvements.  
 
Before MDTA adopts an increase to, or votes on a proposal to increase, its tolls, fees, 
mileage rate ranges, pricing periods, toll zones, fees, or other charges for its transportation 
facilities projects, it must comply with various public notice, review, and comment 
requirements, providing for a specified time period (generally, at least 10 working days) 
between each step of the process.  
 
If MDTA determines that it must increase tolls, fees, mileage rate ranges, pricing periods, 
toll zones, or other charges within a time period or in a manner that will not permit 
compliance with those requirements to remain in compliance with the provisions of any 
trust agreement, escrow deposit agreement, or resolution that provides for the payment of 
bonds it has issued, or to ensure that unforeseen circumstances do not adversely affect the 
continuity of operations at one or more transportation facilities projects, MDTA must 
determine that an emergency status exists. If MDTA determines that an emergency status 
exists, MDTA must adopt temporary adjustments to tolls, fees, mileage rate ranges, pricing 
periods, toll zones, or other charges that take effect immediately on adoption by MDTA or 
on the effective date established by MDTA. If MDTA adopts any temporary adjustments 
pursuant to the above provisions, it must (1) provide notice to the public on its website and 
(2) immediately commence the public notice and comment procedures described above.  
 
An emergency status determination may not exceed 180 days and may be subject to one or 
more additional conditions imposed by MDTA. When the emergency status expires, the 
temporary adjustments must end.  
 
Background:  On March 26, 2024, the Francis Scott Key Bridge collapsed after being 
struck by a container vessel, and MDTA advises that this incident brought to light the 
limitations of the existing 180-day limit on its authority to adjust its tolls, fees, and other 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 288/ Page 3 
charges under an emergency status determination. MDTA advises that the existing 180-day 
time limit does not provide sufficient time for it to complete a full toll-setting process 
before the expiration of the emergency status determination. MDTA further advises that 
the bill ensures that the authority has sufficient time to follow the statutory process required 
to make any increase in tolls, fees, or other charges permanent before the emergency status 
determination expires.  
 
State Revenues:  Nonbudgeted revenues for MDTA may increase during an emergency 
status determination to the extent the higher tolls, fees, or other charges established under 
such a determination continue beyond the 180-day time limit under current law. Under 
current law, when the emergency status expires, the tolls, fees, and other charges must 
revert to the previous (lower) levels; under the bill, the increased rates can be in effect for 
up to 300 days instead (an increase of up to 120 days). Depending on the severity of any 
future emergency and the increase in tolls, fees, or other charges set by MDTA in response, 
the increase in nonbudgeted revenues could be significant. Because the extent to which any 
future emergency status determinations – and their duration – cannot be predicted, an 
estimate of the timing and amount of any increase in nonbudgeted revenues cannot be 
estimated.  
 
State/Local Expenditures:  As noted above, the bill may result in the higher tolls, fees, or 
other charges established during an emergency status determination to be in effect for up 
to 120 days longer than what is allowed under current law. Depending on the emergency 
status determination, expenditures for State and local agencies that regularly use, or 
reimburse their employees for using, MDTA’s transportation facilities projects may 
increase as higher tolls, fees, or other charges are paid for a longer period of time.  
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS generally concurs that the bill is anticipated to have minimal 
or no impact on small businesses in the State; however, if an emergency status 
determination requires MDTA to significantly increase its tolls, fees, or other charges, 
small businesses that frequently use MDTA’s transportation facilities projects may incur 
an increase in costs to pay the higher tolls, fees, or other charges for a longer period of 
time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 210 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Transportation) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 288/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 288/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Transportation Authority - Tolls, Fees, and Other 
Charges - Temporary Adjustments 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 288 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
__X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill is anticipated to have no direct economic impact as proposed.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5