START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 417

Chapter 417

(House Bill 251)

AN ACT concerning

Human Services – Local Departments of Social Services – Audits

FOR the purpose of altering the frequency with which the Office of the Inspector General
in the Department of Human Services conducts or contracts for financial and
compliance audits of local departments of social services; and generally relating to
audits of local departments of social services.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 3–602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

3–602.

(a) [At least once every 3 years, the] THE Office of the Inspector General in the
Department shall[:

(1) conduct or contract for a financial and compliance audit of each local
department; and

(2) prepare a written report of the audit findings] CONDUCT OR
CONTRACT FOR A FINANCIAL AND COMPLIANCE AUDIT OF EACH LOCAL
DEPARTMENT AT AN INTERVAL RANGING FROM 3 TO OF 4 YEARS UNLESS THE
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL DETERMINES, ON A CASE–BY–CASE BASIS,
THAT ~~MORE~~ ~~FREQUENT~~ ~~AUDITS~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ AN AUDIT OCCUR AT AN INTERVAL
OF 3 YEARS.

(B) IN DETERMINING THE AUDIT INTERVAL FOR A LOCAL DEPARTMENT,
THE OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL SHALL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION:

(1) THE MATERIALITY AND RISK PROFILE OF THE LOCAL
DEPARTMENT’S PROGRAMS AND FISCAL ACTIVITIES;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 417 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF PRIOR AUDIT FINDINGS OF THE
LOCAL DEPARTMENT; AND

(3) ANY OTHER FACTOR RELATED TO RISK.

[(b)] (C) The audit shall comply with the auditing standards issued by the
Institute of Internal Auditors.

[(c)] (D) [The] A written report of the audit findings shall be PREPARED AND
distributed to:

(1) the local board; and

(2) the local governing authority.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2