START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 239 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 239 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Secretary of State) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Charitable Organizations - Late Fees and Registration - Suspension and 
Cancellation Requirements 
 
 
The departmental bill authorizes the Secretary of State (SOS) to suspend or waive late 
filing fees for charitable organizations and establish related regulations, as specified. The 
bill establishes that a late fee may not be considered a delinquent account or debt requiring 
referral to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) for collection purposes. The bill also 
establishes how SOS may cancel the registration of a charitable organization that fails to 
file specified reports, and how a charitable organization may request that SOS reinstate a 
canceled registration. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances; provisions 
related to suspension or waiving of late filing fees conforms statute to current practice.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Secretary of State has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.)  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 239/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  SOS may cancel the registration of a charitable organization if the 
organization failed to submit (1) a specified statement of intent and final annual report 
within three years after the date that the statement of intent and final annual report were 
due or (2) any annual report or updates as required under current law for a three-year 
period. Prior to canceling a registration, SOS must send a notice of cancellation to the last 
known address and email address of the organization.  
 
A charitable organization may request that SOS reinstate a registration canceled under the 
bill’s provisions if the organization (1) submits to SOS any outstanding or missing annual 
reports, supporting materials, and annual fees; (2) remits all unpaid late fees, or had late 
fees suspended as waived; (3) is in good standing with the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation, if applicable; (4) has a current tax-exempt status, if applicable, 
and (5) provides any other information that SOS requires.  
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Charitable Organizations – Fees, Annual Report, and Late Fees 
 
Generally, a charitable organization that collects less than $25,000 in charitable 
contributions from the public in the year does not need to pay an annual fee. Each charitable 
organization that submits a separate registration statement and collects at least $25,000 in 
charitable contributions in a year must pay a specified annual fee based on the charitable 
contributions collected. A charitable organization must file an annual report with SOS 
within six months of the end of the organization’s fiscal year. Failure to do so results in a 
fine of $25 for each month or part thereof after the report was due. Charitable organizations 
intending to end soliciting must submit to SOS a statement of their intent and a final annual 
report within six months after the end of its fiscal year.  
 
Revenue from late fees accrues to the Charitable Enforcement Fund, a special, nonlapsing 
fund that supports SOS and the Attorney General in carrying out their duties, as specified. 
At the close of fiscal 2024, the fund had a balance of approximately $3.0 million.  
 
Audit Findings 
 
The Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) conducted a fiscal compliance audit of SOS 
between December 2017 and November 2021. OLA found, among other things, that SOS 
did not investigate charitable organizations that failed to comply with the annual 
registration requirements under State law and did not monitor related fees incurred by 
delinquent organizations and refer those accounts to CCU for collection. SOS did not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 239/ Page 3 
concur with OLA’s findings and stated that it had authority to not submit those delinquent 
fees to CCU. That audit, which includes SOS’s objections, can be read here.  
 
Waiving Late Fees for Charitable Organizations 
 
SOS advises that it does not currently forward delinquent charitable organizations to CCU 
because doing so eliminates any possibility of negotiating with those organizations to bring 
them back into compliance with reporting requirements and annual fee payments. SOS 
further advises that the bill is intended to clarify authority it believes it already possesses 
to waive or delay late fees, in addition to making it easier for SOS to assist charitable 
organizations in coming back into compliance with State law.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 262 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 184 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Secretary of State) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 239/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Charitable Organizations - Late Fees and Registration - Suspension and 
Cancellation Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 239 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Lore 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4