START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 297 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 297 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange - State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance 
Subsidies Pilot Program - Sunset Repeal 
 
 
This bill renames the State-Based Young Adult Subsidies Pilot Program to be the 
State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Program and makes the program 
permanent by repealing the June 30, 2026 termination date. The Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) is authorized rather than required to establish and implement the 
program. MHBE may not implement the program for calendar years in which funds from 
the distribution of a specified assessment are not available. For calendar 2026 and 
thereafter, MHBE, in consultation with the Insurance Commissioner, may designate funds 
from the MHBE Fund to provide annual subsidies to young adults who meet the program’s 
subsidy eligibility and payment parameters. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent MHBE continues the program as authorized, special fund 
expenditures for young adult subsidies continue, likely by $26.0 million per calendar year 
through calendar 2028; specifically, $13.0 million in FY 2026, $26.0 million in FY 2027 
and 2028, and $13.0 million in FY 2029, as discussed below. The FY 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly includes $13.0 million in contingent funding for the program, as 
discussed below. Special fund revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
13.0 
26.0 
26.0 
13.0 
0 
Net Effect 
($13.0) 
($26.0) 
($26.0) 
($13.0) 
$0.0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 297/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program 
 
Chapters 777 and 778 of 2021 required MHBE to establish and implement the State-Based 
Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program for calendar 2022 and 2023 to help 
make health insurance more affordable for uninsured young adults. Subject to available 
funds, in fiscal 2022 through 2024, MHBE was authorized to designate monies from the 
MHBE Fund to be used for the pilot program so that no more than $20.0 million in annual 
subsidies could be provided in calendar 2022 and 2023. 
 
Chapters 256 and 257 of 2023 extended the termination date of the pilot program to 
June 30, 2026, and authorized MHBE, in fiscal 2024 through 2026, to designate funds from 
the MHBE Fund to provide up to $20.0 million in annual subsidies under the pilot program. 
Chapters 256 and 257 also required MHBE, in consultation with the Maryland Insurance 
Administration, to conduct a specified study. MHBE submitted a Report on the Young 
Adult Subsidy Program in December 2024. The report found that the pilot program 
increased young adult enrollment, reduced the uninsured rate among young adults, and 
improved the morbidity of the individual market risk pool. The report estimated that 
roughly half of the total young adult subsidy pilot program cost in 2022 was offset by a net 
increase in federal pass-through funding generated by the additional young adult enrollees 
brought into the market through the program. The report recommended that the pilot 
program be continued as a permanent program beyond calendar 2025, contingent on 
sufficient funding from the 1% State provider fee assessment. 
 
Under the program, young adults ages 18 to 37 with incomes between 138% and 400% of 
the federal poverty level are eligible for State premium assistance subsidies. Subsidies are 
allocated to reduce the maximum expected premium contribution of individuals ages 18 
to 33 by 2.5%. For individuals ages 34 to 37, the subsidy is progressively lower for each 
age, reducing the maximum expected contribution by 0.5% each year. 
 
State Health Insurance Provider Fee Assessment 
 
Under § 6-102.1 of the Insurance Article, a 1% State health insurance provider fee 
assessment provides funding for the State Reinsurance Program (SRP) through 
calendar 2028 to help stabilize the individual health insurance market. Funding for SRP is 
generated through a combination of federal pass-through dollars through the State’s 
federal § 1332 waiver and from the 1% assessment. MHBE has drawn from these funds for 
purposes of the young adult subsidy pilot program. The provider fee assessment terminates 
at the end of calendar 2028. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 297/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  MHBE advises that SRP is stable with sufficient fund balance from 
prior years to support the withdrawal of funding necessary to maintain a permanent young 
adult subsidy program through calendar 2028 while maintaining the fund’s solvency. 
Furthermore, $9.0 million in carry over funds from the pilot program are estimated to be 
available. MHBE does not anticipate any additional operational costs or staffing needs to 
continue the program beyond calendar 2025. 
 
MHBE reports that young adult subsidy expenditures are estimated at $23.9 million for 
calendar 2024, with future year expenditures estimated at $24.0 million to $28.0 million 
per year. Thus, under the bill, MHBE special fund expenditures continue through at least 
calendar 2028 at an estimated $26.0 million annually (the midpoint of estimated average 
annual expenditures). Specifically, special fund expenditures increase by $13.0 million in 
fiscal 2026 (for subsidies for the first half of calendar 2026), $26.0 million in fiscal 2027 
(for subsidies for the second half of calendar 2026 and the first half of calendar 2027), 
$26.0 million in fiscal 2028 (for subsidies for the second half of calendar 2027 and the 
first half of calendar 2028), and $13.0 million in fiscal 2029 (for subsidies for the 
second half of calendar 2028). 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $13.0 million in special 
funds from SRP to be used for the young adult subsidy program, contingent on legislation 
that extends the availability of subsidies in the program into calendar 2026. As the bill 
effectuates that appropriation, special fund expenditures increase by $13.0 million in 
fiscal 2026 (as estimated above to cover subsidies for the first half of calendar 2026). 
 
As the provider fee assessment ends after calendar 2028, this analysis does not assume that 
sufficient special funds from the assessment will continue to be available beyond that year. 
Even so, to the extent additional funding is available, special fund expenditures may 
continue for young adult subsidies beyond calendar 2028. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 5 (Senator Lam, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 297/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4