START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 225 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 225 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Exceptional Hauling Permits for Farm Products 
 
   
This departmental bill simplifies and modifies the requirements for, and permissions 
associated with, exceptional hauling permits issued by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA) to haul farm products.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SHA can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. While 
highway system preservation and maintenance costs may be affected, as discussed below, 
any such impact is likely minimal. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues increase 
beginning in FY 2026 to the extent the bill results in additional applications for exceptional 
hauling permits, as discussed below; any such impact is not anticipated to be significant. 
  
Local Effect:  Highway preservation and maintenance costs may be affected, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Regarding the requirements for and permissions associated with 
exceptional hauling permits, the bill:   
 
 
authorizes vehicles using a permit and carrying fluid milk products to travel on the 
interstate highway system;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 225/ Page 2 
 
simplifies and modifies permit eligibility to allow SHA to issue a permit for a 
combination of vehicles that (1) carry farm products that are loaded in fields, from 
bulk liquid milk storage tanks at one or more farm locations, or in other off-highway 
locations; (2) only carry farm products ; and (3) have an axle configuration of 
five or six axles with specified spacing requirements between axles, including 
tandem axles;  
 
simplifies and modifies the weight restrictions for permit holders using vehicles 
with multiple axles to a maximum gross weight of (1) 20,000 pounds on a 
single axle; (2) 40,000 pounds for any tandem axle; (3) 88,000 pounds for a 
combination of vehicles with five axles; or (4) 95,000 pounds for a combination of 
vehicles with at least six axles;  
 
eliminates load limit tolerances for weight;  
 
modifies what each person must have in their possession while operating a 
combination of vehicles under the authority of an exceptional hauling permit to 
allow an electronic copy of the exceptional hauling permit for a vehicle, requires 
specified proof of inspection documents in addition to what is required by current 
law, and applies the current inspection documentation requirement (which is slightly 
altered under the bill) to permitted vehicles exempt from specified inspections;  
 
authorizes, instead of requires, SHA to revoke a permit for a violation of the permit 
weight restrictions;  
 
makes a series of changes to specify that certain record keeping requirements apply 
to both a permit holder and a motor carrier that may be hired by the permit holder, 
instead of facilities that receive farm products; and  
 
specifies that, if a permit holder or motor carrier fails to comply with the record 
keeping requirements, SHA may suspend the eligibility of the permit holder or 
motor carrier to obtain additional permits.  
 
Current Law:   
 
State Highway Administration and Exceptional Hauling  
 
SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately 16,800 lane miles of road, 
2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and 80 miles of sound/noise barriers 
in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining 
these roads and bridges to safety and performance standards while considering 
sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. SHA must construct, reconstruct, and 
repair State highways as necessary and maintain them in good condition.  
 
SHA is authorized to issue an exceptional hauling permit for a combination of vehicles that 
carries farm products, other than milk, that meet specified loading process and axle 
configuration requirements. “Farm product” means any agricultural, horticultural, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 225/ Page 3 
vegetable, or fruit product of the soil, including livestock, meats, marine food products, 
poultry, eggs, dairy products, wool, hides, feathers, nuts, honey, and every product of farm, 
forest, orchard, garden or water, but does not include canned, frozen, dried, or pickled 
products. There are additional requirements for carrying raw liquid milk, including 
additional specifications for the axle configuration on the vehicles used to transport the 
product and the time of year during which the permit may be utilized.  
 
An applicant for a permit must pay, to SHA, a nonrefundable fee of (1) $250 for the 
issuance of a new annual permit or annual renewal; (2) $30 for the issuance of a 30-day 
permit; (3) $1,000 for the reinstatement of a permit that was revoked as a result of failure 
to comply with permit weight restrictions for a first violation; or (4) $5,000 for the 
reinstatement of a permit that was revoked as a result of failure to comply with permit 
weight restrictions for a second or subsequent violation within the prior 24 months. Permit 
fees accrue to TTF.  
 
Exceptional Hauling Permit Restrictions and Requirements 
 
Unless allowed by federal law, an exceptional hauling permit issued by SHA is not valid 
on the interstate highway system. A combination of vehicles under the authority of a permit 
must comply with the following weight limits:   
 
 
a maximum of 20,000 pounds gross weight on a single axle;  
 
for any consecutive axle configuration of two or more axles on individual vehicles 
in the combination, specified maximum weight limits ranging from 34,000 pounds 
to 80,000 pounds based on the axle configuration; and  
 
a true maximum of 87,000 pounds, 88,000 pounds, or 95,000 pounds gross weight 
for specified vehicles based on the number of axles and whether the vehicle is 
carrying milk or other farm products.  
 
Additionally, vehicles covered by a permit must (1) twice each year, submit to and pass a 
specified driver/vehicle inspection and (2) be allowed a specified load limit tolerance.  
 
While operating a combination of vehicles under the authority of a permit, a person may 
not violate a highway restriction issued by a competent authority, operate the combination 
of vehicles on the interstate highway system, operate the combination of vehicles if 
specified tire weight rating or tire speed restrictions are exceeded, or fail to comply with 
the terms and conditions of the exceptional hauling permit.  
 
Required Documents and Record Keeping 
 
While operating a combination of vehicles under the authority of an exceptional hauling 
permit, a person must possess the original exceptional hauling permit issued for the vehicle 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 225/ Page 4 
and, for each vehicle in the combination of vehicles, a copy of the required inspection 
report issued within the preceding 180 days that shows no out-of-service violations.  
 
On request by SHA or the State Highway Administrator’s designee, weight and delivery 
records of the permit holder that are kept in the normal course of business must be provided 
by either the permit holder or a facility that receives farm products delivered by a vehicle 
operating under the authority of a permit. If the permit holder or facility does not comply, 
SHA may suspend the permit and prohibit a vehicle from delivering farm products under 
the authority of a permit to the noncompliant facility.  
 
Violations 
 
A violation of the statutory or regulatory requirements governing exceptional hauling 
permits (1) voids the authority granted by the permit; (2) subjects the vehicle to all standard 
weight requirements and tolerances specified by State law; and (3) subjects the permit to 
immediate confiscation under specified circumstances.  
 
A person who confiscates a permit must immediately notify SHA. SHA must then review 
the confiscation, verify the violation of the weight restriction, and, if SHA determines a 
violation did occur, revoke the permit. The revocation may be appealed, as specified.  
 
Background:  MDOT advises that the current administrative requirements for the 
exceptional hauling permit for farm products are excessively burdensome and, in some 
cases, difficult to enforce. By simplifying the requirements, MDOT anticipates increased 
voluntary use of and compliance with the permits within the agricultural industry, allowing 
better documentation of routes and regional usage for SHA as well as ease of enforcement.  
 
State Revenues:  MDOT advises that the simplified and streamlined permitting processes 
established by the bill may result in an increase in permit applications as some individuals 
and businesses that avoid the current, more burdensome permitting process begin to 
voluntarily comply with the law.  
 
Thus, TTF revenues increase to the extent the bill results in additional permit applications 
as the permit fees are collected. While the magnitude of the impact depends on the increase 
in applications, which cannot be reliably estimated at this time, the total increase in 
revenues is not anticipated to be significant. Revenues may also be affected due to the bill’s 
elimination of load limit tolerances for weight and the authorization, rather than 
requirement, for revocation of a permit.  
 
State/Local Expenditures:  According to the Federal Highway Administration, the 
amount of infrastructure damage to a highway or bridge caused by an overweight vehicle 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 225/ Page 5 
is geometrically larger than the weight increase; for example, an increase of 2,000 pounds 
from 18,000 pounds to 20,000 pounds causes 50% more damage to the pavement.  
 
By simplifying and modifying the weight limits and eliminating load tolerances, the bill 
could either increase or decrease the average weight of vehicles using exceptional hauling 
permits. Heavier vehicles cause additional wear and tear damage to State and local 
highways and roadways over time, which could result in additional maintenance and repair 
required, while lower weight vehicles cause less of that type of damage. Thus, although 
the bill may affect maintenance costs for highways and roadways, particularly in the 
long term, the direction and magnitude of the impact, if realized, cannot be reliably 
estimated and the overall impact is likely minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 203 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee, et al.) (By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Department of State Police; Federal Highway Administration; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 225/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Vehicle Laws - Exceptional Hauling Permits for Farm Products 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 225 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Duane Pearce, SHA OOTS, Motor Carrier Division 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
__   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL  
       BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
       BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
A simplified approach to the administrative requirements will benefit in at least two ways: 
 
1) Industry will increase voluntary compliance and apply for more permits instead of 
avoiding the burdensome mandates and the permit process altogether; and  
 
2) Enforcement will find it less challenging to evaluate and determine violations of the 
statue, encouraging more compliance screening of permittees.  
 
Limited increase of gross weights per commodity loaded will serve to reduce highway trips 
(fuel consumption, emissions) and heavy truck traffic, especially in the agrarian areas of 
Maryland. The agricultural industry could experience a beneficial economic impact. SHA 
would realize an increase of permit applications with a streamlined eligibility process that 
would result in increased infrastructure and highway forecast data obtained, permit fees 
collected, and voluntary compliance.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6