START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 284 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 284 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Procurement – Electronic Transactions – Clarification of Fees Due 
 
 
This departmental bill clarifies that only fees collected for the use of electronic 
procurement systems that are due to the State must be deposited in the Operations Revenue 
Fund. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Primary procurement units in the State may conduct procurement activities 
electronically. Agencies using electronic means to conduct a procurement, or private 
contractors providing electronic means to the State to conduct a procurement, may charge 
a reasonable fee for these services to any bidder, proposer, or contract awardee, provided 
the fees receive approval from the Chief Procurement Officer and Board of Public Works 
(BPW). 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 284/ Page 2 
Any fees that are collected for the use of electronic procurement systems must be deposited 
in the Operations Revenue Fund, a special fund used by the Department of 
General Services to cover direct and indirect operating expenses of the Office of State 
Procurement. 
 
Background:  For several years, MDOT has used BidX, a third-party electronic 
procurement system, to conduct its procurement operations. While the State has its own 
electronic procurement platform, eMaryland Marketplace (eMM), MDOT maintains that 
BidX provides many benefits for transportation-related procurements that eMM does not 
offer, including expanded file size limits, bond verification mechanisms, and integration 
with MDOT’s other internal systems. While MDOT has discussed using eMM, the 
department concluded that doing so would require substantial software development at a 
significant expense of time and money. BidX is free to MDOT, but it charges potential 
bidders and offerors a monthly subscription fee for access to bidding opportunities in 
39 states, including opportunities through MDOT. 
 
MDOT advises that current law could be interpreted to require revenue for the monthly 
subscription fee paid by vendors for access to BidX to be deposited into the Operations 
Revenue Fund. While BPW has authorized the use of BidX up to this point, it informed 
MDOT that continued usage of the system may be prohibited if current law is not revised. 
Without access to BidX, MDOT advises that it would need to revert to processes that are 
not as advanced as the current electronic bidding process through BidX. 
 
By specifying that only fees owed to the State must be deposited into the Operations 
Revenue Fund, rather than all fees collected for the use of electronic procurement services, 
the bill resolves any ambiguity regarding the collection of fees collected by and due to 
private businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 196 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 284/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 284/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES  
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Procurement - Electronic Transactions - Clarification of Fees Due 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 284 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jada Wright 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4