START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 256 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 256 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations Boards - Membership Alteration and Sunset Extensions 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination dates for the State Board of Examiners for 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music 
Therapists and the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners by five years to 
July 1, 2031, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland 
Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The termination date for the State Board of Pharmacy 
is extended by five years to July 1, 2030, and the termination date for the State Board of 
Professional Counselors and Therapists (including the Behavior Analyst Advisory 
Committee) is extended by two years to July 1, 2028, both subject to MPEA. The bill also 
increases the membership of the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners from seven 
to nine members, adding one additional licensed massage therapist and one additional 
consumer. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures are 
maintained through FY 2028 for the State Board of Professional Counselors and 
Therapists; through FY 2030 for the State Board of Pharmacy; and through FY 2031 for 
the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language 
Pathologists, and Music Therapists and the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners. 
Beginning in FY 2026, special fund expenditures for the State Board of Massage Therapy 
Examiners increase by $3,500 annually for additional board member per diems. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 256/ Page 2 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners 
 
The State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners is responsible for maintaining a roster of 
licensed massage therapists and assisting in prosecutions and investigations related to 
massage therapy, among other duties. The board currently consists of seven members – 
five licensed massage therapists and two consumer members. 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists 
 
The State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists licenses and certifies 
professional counselors, alcohol and drug counselors, marriage and family therapists, 
professional art therapists, and behavior analysts; receives and resolves complaints; and 
sets standards for the practice of counseling and therapy. 
 
The Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee is charged with developing and recommending 
to the board regulations, a code of ethics, requirements for licensure as a behavior analyst, 
and continuing education requirements for license renewal, as well as providing the board 
with recommendations concerning the practice of behavior analysis. 
 
State Board of Pharmacy  
 
The State Board of Pharmacy regulates the practice of pharmacy by licensing pharmacists, 
registering pharmacy technicians, issuing permits to individuals to establish or operate 
pharmacies in the State, setting pharmacy practice standards, and developing and enforcing 
laws and regulations to protect the public.  
 
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language 
Pathologists, and Music Therapists 
 
The State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, 
Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists is responsible for licensing 
individuals who provide hearing aid services, practice audiology, practice speech-language 
pathology, or practice music therapy in Maryland.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 256/ Page 3 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, 
Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists; the State Board of Professional 
Counselors and Therapists (and the Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee); the State 
Board of Massage Therapy Examiners; and the State Board of Pharmacy are 5 of 
approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination unless 
reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be subject 
to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability 
(OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an 
evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation.  
 
The State Board of Pharmacy is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025, while the other 
three boards and the advisory committee are scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026. OPEGA 
was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior to their termination. Accordingly, MDH has 
requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 217 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 256/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Health Occupations Boards - Membership Alterations and Sunset 
Extensions 
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 256 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Office of Governmental Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.   
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4