START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 251 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 251 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Human Services) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Human Services – Local Departments of Social Services – Audits 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the standard frequency of financial and compliance audits of 
local departments of social services, from at least once every three years to an interval of 
four years. However, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in the Department of 
Human Services (DHS) may determine, on a case-by-case basis, that an audit occur at an 
interval of three years. In determining the audit interval for a local department, the office 
must take into consideration (1) the materiality and risk profile of the local department’s 
programs and fiscal activities; (2) the nature and extent of prior audit findings of the local 
department; and (3) any other factor related to risk. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any operational efficiencies are not anticipated to materially impact State 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  At least once every three years, OIG in DHS must conduct or contract for 
a financial and compliance audit of each local department and prepare a written report of 
the audit findings. The audit must comply with the auditing standards issued by the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 251/ Page 2 
Institute of Internal Auditors. The written report of the audit findings must be distributed 
to the local board and the local governing body. 
 
Background:  DHS advises that it is difficult to maintain the current three-year audit cycle 
of the local departments due to staff shortages. According to DHS, extending the audit 
cycle of the local departments allows OIG to prioritize audit resources for local 
departments classified as higher‐risk and ensure that these local departments receive 
necessary attention from OIG in a more frequent and timely manner. The bill also allows 
adequate time for the local departments to implement corrective actions to address audit 
findings prior the next audit. Further, the proposed change is generally consistent with the 
three- to four-year audit cycle utilized by the Office of Legislative Audits. 
 
According to DHS, it is current standard industry practice to allow OIG the ability to 
develop risk-based audit plans, rather than adhere to a prescribed timeframe. DHS advises 
that the larger local departments and local departments with a significant increase in 
higher-risk audit findings will likely remain on a three-year audit cycle, while the mid-size 
to smaller local departments and local departments with lower risk audit findings will be 
audited on a three- or four-year cycle. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 230 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Human Services) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 251/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Human Services - Local Departments of Social Services - Audits 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 251 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Marva Sutherland, Inspector General 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 3