START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 208 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 208 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection – False Advertising – Digital Goods 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person that is a seller from advertising or offering for sale a “digital 
good” using certain terminology unless (1) a specified affirmative acknowledgement is 
received from the purchaser or (2) the seller provides the purchaser with a required 
disclosure. The bill does not (1) require a person to download a digital good or (2) prohibit 
a person from storing a digital good on a server that can be accessed through the Internet. 
Additionally, the bill’s requirements do not apply to a person who advertises or offers for 
sale (1) a subscription-based service that provides access to a digital good only for the 
duration of the subscription; (2) access to a digital good without the requirement for 
monetary consideration; or (3) a digital good for which the seller is unable to revoke access 
after completion of the sale, including a digital good that is, at the time of purchase, 
available for permanent offline download to an external source to be used without a 
connection to the Internet. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade 
practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil 
penalty provisions. However, a violation is not subject to an action for damages under 
MCPA. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 208/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Digital good” means a digital application or game, digital audio work, 
digital audiovisual work, digital book, or digital code, whether electronically or digitally 
delivered or accessed. “Digital good” does not include a cable television service, satellite 
relay television service, or any other distribution of television, video, or radio service. 
 
The affirmative acknowledgement and disclosure statement must be distinct and separate, 
as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
False and Fraudulent Advertising 
 
 “Advertise” means (1) to publish, circulate, disseminate, or place before the public in any 
way or through any medium for the purpose of selling merchandise and (2) advertising by 
specified means (e.g., signs, radio, television, etc.). 
 
State law prohibits false and fraudulent advertising. For example, for the purpose of 
purchasing, selling, or disposing of property or a service, a person may not advertise a 
statement containing a representation of fact that the person knows, or by the exercise of 
reasonable care should know, to be untrue, deceptive, or misleading. Violators are guilty 
of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $1,000 and/or imprisonment of up to 
one year. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 208/ Page 3 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3