START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 262 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 262 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Agriculture) and Delegate 
Holmes 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Agriculture - Maryland Agricultural Commission and Young 
Farmers 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) alters the membership and appointment process of the Maryland 
Agricultural Commission (MAC) within the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA); 
(2) establishes the Committee on Young Farmers, staffed by MDA; and (3) repeals the 
Young Farmers Advisory Board within MDA. The bill also makes a conforming change to 
the statute establishing the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation board of 
trustees.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. Any changes 
in expense reimbursements and staffing costs for MDA are assumed to be minimal.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  MDA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Agricultural Commission 
 
The bill makes the following changes to MAC:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 262/ Page 2 
 
updates the names of specific members of the commission;  
 
alters language relating to the appointment of commission members;  
 
removes from the commission membership one representative from each of the 
following industries:  (1) nursery; (2) dairy; (3) poultry; (4) services related to 
agriculture; and (5) tobacco; and 
 
adds to the commission membership one representative from each of the following 
groups:  (1) the controlled environmental agriculture industry; (2) socially 
disadvantaged farmers; (3) veteran farmers; (4) the newly established Committee 
on Young Farmers (discussed below); (5) urban and small farmers; and (6) new and 
beginning farmers.  
 
Young Famers Advisory Board and Committee on Young Farmers 
 
The bill repeals the existing Young Farmers Advisory Board and instead establishes the 
Committee on Young Farmers with similar duties. MDA must provide staff for the 
committee. The committee must (1) communicate to the general public, State government, 
and MAC the importance of young and beginning farmers to agriculture in the State; 
(2) identify and address issues relating to young and beginning farmers in the State and 
make recommendations to MAC; and (3) hold meetings at least quarterly.  
 
The bill establishes provisions governing the membership of the committee. Committee 
members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Agricultural Commission 
 
MAC, within MDA, consists of 31 members appointed by the Governor that represent 
various agriculture and agriculture-related industries. The mission of the commission is to 
formulate and make proposals for the advancement of Maryland agriculture by serving as 
an advisory body to the Secretary of Agriculture on matters pertaining to agriculture. The 
commission’s current priorities include (1) encouraging the agricultural community to be 
more proactive on issues affecting agriculture and rural life; (2) evaluating farm/agriculture 
industry labor and regulations; (3) increasing public awareness of food safety; and 
(4) supporting MDA’s efforts to promote agriculture.  
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 262/ Page 3 
Young Farmers Advisory Board 
 
The Young Farmers Advisory Board within MDA consists of 20 members appointed by 
the Governor. Among other duties, the advisory board must (1) communicate to the general 
public, the federal government, the State government, and MAC the importance of young 
and beginning farmers to agriculture in the State and (2) identify and address issues relating 
to young and beginning farmers in the State and make recommendations to MAC.  
 
MDA must provide staff for the advisory board. Advisory board members may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses.  
 
Background:  MDA advises that the bill is intended to streamline the efficiency of its 
advisory boards and commissions while ensuring that the agricultural industry is 
represented and reflective of modern agriculture. Specifically, the bill aims to modernize 
the appointed representation on MAC, remove duplicative representation, and create new 
members to represent agriculture in the 21st century. MDA further advises that the 
Committee on Young Farmers is dedicated to fulfilling the mission of the Young Farmers 
Advisory Board and that repealing the advisory board and establishing the committee (with 
representation on MAC) optimizes its efficiency.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 240 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Agriculture) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 262/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of Agriculture – Maryland Agricultural Commission and 
Young Farmers 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 262 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Harrison Palmer, Executive Secretary, Maryland Agricultural 
Commission 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4