START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 166

Chapter 166

(House Bill 209)

AN ACT concerning

State Finance and Procurement – Local Cybersecurity Preparedness and
Response Plan and Assessment – Repeal

FOR the purpose of repealing a duplicative provision of law requiring certain local
government entities to create or update a cybersecurity preparedness and response
plan and complete a cybersecurity preparedness assessment; and generally relating
to local cybersecurity preparedness and response.

BY repealing
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 3.5–405
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 3.5–406 and 3.5–407
to be Section 3.5–405 and 3.5–406, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

[3.5–405.

(a) This section does not apply to municipal governments.

(b) In a manner and frequency established in regulations adopted by the
Department, each county government, local school system, and local health department
shall in consultation with the local emergency manager, create or update a cybersecurity
preparedness and response plan and complete a cybersecurity preparedness assessment.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 3.5–406 and
3.5–407 of Article – State Finance and Procurement of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
renumbered to be Section(s) 3.5–405 and 3.5–406, respectively.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 166 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2