START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 246 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 246 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Human Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Human Services - Adult Protective Services 
 
 
This departmental bill specifies an exception to the general prohibition against the 
disclosure of any information concerning an applicant or recipient of specified services. In 
relation to adult protective services (APS), disclosure of information is not prohibited to 
an officer or employee of any state or local government or the United States if the officer 
or employee is responsible for conducting an investigation in an official capacity and the 
disclosure is relevant to the investigation. The identity of a person who makes a mandatory 
report of the potential abuse, neglect, self‐neglect, or exploitation of an alleged vulnerable 
adult may be disclosed if in accordance with the aforementioned provisions. The bill also 
authorizes mandatory reporters of alleged vulnerable adult maltreatment to make the report 
using the statewide reporting hotline. Finally, the bill expands the definition of “health 
practitioner” that is applicable to statutory provisions regarding mandatory reporting. The 
bill’s provisions related to health practitioners take effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State entities involved in investigations regarding vulnerable adults may 
experience operational efficiencies; however, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local entities involved in investigations regarding vulnerable adults may 
experience operational efficiencies; however, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
local finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 246/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Health practitioner” includes any person who is authorized to practice 
healing under the Health Occupations Article or §13-516 of the Education Article. 
However, “health practitioner” does not include an emergency medical dispatcher (EMD), 
as defined in §13-516 of the Education Article. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a person may not disclose any information concerning an 
applicant for or recipient of social services, child welfare services, cash assistance, food 
stamps, or medical assistance that is directly or indirectly derived from the records, 
investigations, or communications of the State, a county, or a municipal corporation or a 
unit of the State, a county, or a municipal corporation or that is acquired in the course of 
the performance of official duties. Exempt from this prohibition is the disclosure of 
information:   
 
 
in accordance with a court order; 
 
to an officer or employee of any state or local government, the United States, or a 
fiduciary institution, if the officer or employee is entitled to the information in an 
official capacity and the disclosure is necessary to administer (1) public assistance, 
medical assistance, social services, or child welfare services programs or (2) voter 
registration (the bill removes this reference to a fiduciary institution); and 
 
to a fiduciary institution that reported suspected financial abuse or financial 
exploitation, if the fiduciary institution is authorized to request the information, as 
specified. 
 
A person who violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a 
maximum penalty of 90 days’ imprisonment and/or a $500 fine. 
 
A fiduciary institution is required to disclose certain financial records to an APS program 
that is investigating suspected financial abuse or financial exploitation. In addition, an APS 
agency or a law enforcement agency may share specified information with a fiduciary 
institution that made a report of suspected financial abuse or financial exploitation. 
 
Reporting and Investigating Abuse of Alleged Vulnerable Adults 
 
In general, each health practitioner, police officer, or human service worker who contacts, 
examines, attends, or treats an alleged vulnerable adult, and who has reason to believe that 
the alleged vulnerable adult has been subjected to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or 
exploitation must (1) notify the local department of social services and (2) if acting as a 
staff member of a hospital or public health agency, immediately notify and give required 
information to the head of the institution (or a designee). An individual who is required to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 246/ Page 3 
make a report of the suspected abuse, neglect, self‐neglect, or exploitation of an alleged 
vulnerable adult must make the report by telephone, direct communication, or in writing to 
the local department as soon as possible.  
 
Additionally, any individual other than a health practitioner, human service worker, or 
police officer who has reason to believe that an alleged vulnerable adult has been subjected 
to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation may file an oral or written report of the 
suspected abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation with the local department. 
 
The local department must begin a thorough investigation within 5 working days after the 
receipt of the report of suspected abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation or within 
24 hours after the receipt of the report of suspected abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or 
exploitation if the report indicates that an emergency exists. 
 
Based on the investigation, the local department must (1) render or assist a vulnerable adult 
to receive the appropriate services in the best interests of the vulnerable adult under the 
APS program; (2) as appropriate, involve the local office on aging; (3) report to the 
appropriate local law enforcement agency any incident of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of 
an alleged vulnerable adult where the possibility of a crime being committed against the 
alleged vulnerable adult is indicated by information provided in the initial report or by 
information obtained in the course of investigation; and (4) send to the local 
State’s Attorney and the appropriate local law enforcement agency a report of the 
investigation of any incident of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of an alleged vulnerable 
adult, which was or should have been reported to the appropriate local law enforcement 
agency. 
 
The identity of any person who makes a report must be confidential. However, the identity 
of a person who makes a report may be disclosed if the person consents or the court orders 
the disclosure. 
 
Health Practitioners 
 
In general, the Health Occupations Article authorizes individuals to practice healing 
through the licensure, certification, or registration under several health professional 
licensing boards. Section 13-516 of the Education Article governs licenses issued by the 
Emergency Medical Services Board (cardiac rescue technicians, EMDs, emergency 
medical responders, emergency medical technicians, and paramedics). 
 
Background:  According to DHS, the existing prohibition against the release of records 
(absent a court order) creates delays and barriers for relevant agencies in accessing critical 
information necessary to protect vulnerable adults. Although statutory provisions allow the 
release of records to law enforcement during ongoing investigations, collaboration among 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 246/ Page 4 
governmental investigative entities is hindered since the provision does not cover closed 
cases or reports that did not prompt investigatory responses. 
 
The statewide reporting hotline (1-800-91-PREVENT) encourages confidential reporting 
of physical, behavioral, social, and financial abuse of alleged vulnerable adults. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 205 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Human Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Cecil, Frederick, and 
Montgomery counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 246/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Human Services – Adult Protective Services  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 246 
  
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Kelly Charles/ Shalini Arora 
  
 
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
2025 SSA/OAS Legislative Proposal: Adult Protective Services (APS) proposed legislation alters 
the confidentiality statute (Hum. Servs. § 1-201) regarding APS records. All workers potentially 
tasked with additional responsibilities because of this legislative change are governmental 
employees.  Therefore, any additional duties imposed by this proposed legislative change will have 
no economic impact on Maryland small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5