START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 279 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 279 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Planning) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Municipalities - Annexation Resolutions - Submission to Department of Planning 
 
 
This departmental bill adds the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) to a list of 
entities to which a municipality that has annexed property must send a copy of the 
annexation resolution with the new boundaries. The annexation resolution must be sent to 
MDP within 10 days after the resolution takes effect. MDP must keep on record the 
resolution with the new boundaries and make the resolution available for public inspection 
during regular business hours. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Municipal Annexation 
 
A municipality may enlarge its boundaries by annexation of land, subject to various criteria 
and procedures established in Title 4, Subtitle 4 of the Local Government Article, including 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 279/ Page 2 
adoption of an annexation plan (a plan for providing municipal services to the annexed 
area) and enactment of an annexation resolution. 
 
Annexation Plan Provided to Specified Entities 
 
At least 30 days before a public hearing is held on an annexation resolution, a copy of the 
annexation plan must be provided to (1) the governing body of any county in which the 
municipality is located; (2) MDP; and (3) any regional or State planning agency with 
jurisdiction in the county. 
 
Annexation Resolution Provided to Specified Entities 
 
The chief executive and administrative officer of a municipality that has annexed property 
must send a copy of the annexation resolution with the new boundaries to (1) the clerk or 
similar official of the municipality; (2) the clerk of the court in any county in which the 
municipality is located; (3) DLS; and (4) for any municipality located in the  
Maryland-Washington Regional District, the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission. The annexation resolution must be sent to DLS within 10 days after 
the resolution takes effect. Each official or agency that receives an annexation resolution 
must keep on record the resolution with the new boundaries and make the resolution 
available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
 
Background:  MDP indicates that the bill’s requirements will allow it to update its 
municipal and Priority Funding Area map layers – which other agencies use for spatial 
designation and funding decisions – in a timelier manner. Currently, the department must 
seek out annexation resolutions and new boundaries in order to make those updates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 245 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Planning) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  City of Annapolis; City of Bowie; City of Takoma Park; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 279/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 279/ Page 4 
  
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Municipalities - Annexation Resolutions - Submission to Department of 
Planning 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 279 
  
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Andrew Wilson, Department of Planning Government Affairs Specialist 
  
 
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
 X  
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal adds the Department of Planning to a list of entities that the chief executive and 
administrative officer of a municipality that has annexed property must send annexation 
resolutions with new boundaries to. This added correspondence will have minimal impact on 
small businesses, although it will have the positive benefit of ensuring that small businesses 
located within recently annexed areas, and which are seeking growth-related funding (eg. certain 
Commerce or DHCD grants/loans), will not have to wait for updated municipal boundary maps 
and PFA designations, which often serve as prerequisites for funding eligibility. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4