START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 275 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 275 
(Delegate Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Child Support - Multifamily Adjustment 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “adjusted actual income” under the child support guidelines 
by providing for the deduction, from actual income, of an allowance for support for each 
child living in the parent’s home to whom the parent owes a legal duty of support if the 
child is considered to be spending more than 92 overnights in the parent’s home in a year 
but who is not subject to the support order. The bill also alters the factors that the court 
may consider in determining whether the application of the child support guidelines would 
be unjust or inappropriate when applied in a particular case. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/federal fund expenditures for the Department of Human Services 
(DHS) increase by as much as $297,600 in FY 2026 only for initial programming costs 
($101,200 general funds/$196,400 federal funds); federal fund revenues correspond to 
federal fund expenditures. Future year expenditures and corresponding federal fund 
revenues reflect ongoing maintenance costs. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to 
materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FF Revenue 
$196,400 
$37,300 
$37,300 
$37,300 
$37,300 
GF/FF Exp. 
$297,600 
$56,500 
$56,500 
$56,500 
$56,500 
Net Effect 
($101,200) 
($19,200) 
($19,200) 
($19,200) 
($19,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 275/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes the following formula for calculating the deduction: 
 
 
the basic support obligation for each additional child in the parent’s home must be 
determined according to the guidelines, using only the actual income of the parent 
entitled to the deduction; and 
 
this amount is to be multiplied by 75%. 
 
This amount is to be subtracted from the parent’s actual income before the child support 
obligation is computed. The court must decline awarding an allowance under these 
provisions if the court finds, after considering the evidence and the best interest of the child 
for whom support is being determined, that the application of an allowance would be unjust 
or inappropriate. 
 
The bill makes additional changes by repealing provisions that (1) allow the court to 
consider the presence of other children in the household of either parent and the expenses 
for those children, as specified and (2) prohibit the rebutting of the presumption of the 
propriety of the guidelines solely because of the presence of other children in the household 
of either parent. The bill also specifies that the court may consider any financial 
considerations, as specified, that the court deems relevant to the best interests of the child 
who is the subject of the child support order. 
 
Current Law:  In a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite 
or permanent, the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child 
support obligation is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The 
current schedule uses the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and 
the number of children for whom support is required to determine the basic child support 
obligation. Adjusted actual income, which is the basis for determining the basic 
child support obligation, is calculated from actual income minus preexisting reasonable 
child support obligations actually paid and, except as specified, alimony or maintenance 
obligations actually paid. 
 
The child support statute establishes a rebuttable presumption that the amount of 
child support that would result from the application of the child support guidelines is the 
correct amount of child support that the court is to award. The presumption may be 
rebutted, however, by evidence that the application of the guidelines would be unjust or 
inappropriate in a particular case. In determining whether the application of the guidelines 
is unjust or inappropriate, the court may consider, among other factors, the presence in the 
household of either parent of other children to whom that parent owes a duty of support 
and the expenses for whom that parent is directly contributing. The presence of other 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 275/ Page 3 
children in the household of either parent may not be the sole basis, however, for rebutting 
the presumption that the child support guidelines establish the correct amount of support. 
 
If the court determines that application of the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate 
in a particular case, the court must make a written finding or specific finding on the record 
that states the reasons for departure from the guidelines, as required by statute. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DHS estimates expenditures of up to $297,600 in fiscal 2026 for 
initial programming costs to implement the bill with annual maintenance costs of 
approximately $56,544 annually thereafter. According to DHS, these expenditures are 
supported by 34% general funds and 66% federal funds; therefore, federal fund revenues 
correspondingly increase with federal fund expenditures, reflecting the receipt and 
spending of matching federal funding. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1045 and SB 1011 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3