START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 277 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 277 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Water Bottle Filling Stations - Requirement 
 
 
This bill requires, beginning October 1, 2025, with specified exceptions, that at least one 
“water bottle filling station” or a combined water bottle filling station and drinking fountain 
must (1) be installed in all new construction at each location where a drinking fountain is 
required under the current version of the International Plumbing Code (IPC) adopted by 
the State or State or local law or regulation; (2) be installed in any building undergoing a 
renovation if the installation of a drinking fountain is required under the current version of 
IPC adopted by the State or State or local law or regulation; and (3) replace a drinking 
fountain in an area of a building undergoing a renovation if the renovation includes 
replacing the drinking fountain. The bill’s requirements apply only prospectively and do 
not apply to any new construction under contract before the bill’s effective date. The 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) must adopt implementing regulations. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to significantly affect State expenditures.  
MD Labor can adopt regulations with existing resources. State revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to significantly affect local expenditures. Local 
revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s requirement to install at least one water bottle filling station or 
a combined water bottle filling station and drinking fountain under specified circumstances 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 277/ Page 2 
does not apply if (1) a drinking fountain in a building located in a commercial or industrial 
area is replaced and no other renovations are made or (2) a building located in a commercial 
or industrial area has potable water available through a source other than a drinking 
fountain, including a kitchen.  
 
“Water bottle filling station” means a plumbing fixture connected to the potable water 
distribution system and sanitary drainage system that is designed and intended for filling 
personal use water bottles or containers at least 10 inches in height. It includes (1) a station 
that is separate from or integral to a drinking fountain and (2) for an interior location of a 
building, a station that incorporates a water filter and cooling system for chilling the water.  
 
Current Law:  A county must enforce the State Plumbing Code or adopt and enforce a 
local plumbing code that meets or exceeds the minimum standards of the State Plumbing 
Code for the proper design, acceptable installation, and adequate maintenance of plumbing 
system. The State Plumbing Code, adopted by the State Board of Plumbing, is the 
2018 IPC, although updated code versions are typically incorporated by reference in 
regulation every few years.  
 
The 2024 IPC specifies the minimum number of drinking fountains required based on 
building classification and occupancy level. For example, educational facilities and general 
business facilities require one drinking fountain per 100 occupants. There is also a general 
minimum requirement of two drinking fountains per facility. Facilities with occupant loads 
less than 15 are not required to install drinking fountains.  
 
Additional Comments:  MD Labor advises that it is unclear if the bill allows the 
installation of a water dispenser that is not connected to a potable distribution system or 
sanitary drainage system as a reasonable substitute for “water bottle filling stations” as 
defined in the bill. According to MD Labor, IPC deems water bottle filling systems that 
are not connected to a potable water distribution system or a sanitary drainage system as 
acceptable substitutes when a building occupancy load requires three or more drinking 
fountains to be installed. They are permitted to be substituted for up to 50% of the required 
number of drinking fountains.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 841 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 96 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 277/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; 
Baltimore City; cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; 
University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3