START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 276 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 276 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - General 
Services) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - Forms - Reporting Requirement - Repeal 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that, by July 31 of each year, each 
department or independent unit of State government must submit to the Records 
Management Division (RMD) of the Department of General Services (DGS) an annual 
report on its management of its forms during the previous fiscal year. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  DGS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
Records Management Division – Generally 
 
RMD is responsible for (1) inspecting the records of the units of State government; 
(2) studying the records management practices of units of State government; (3) reviewing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 276/ Page 2 
a proposal to buy or rent equipment, storage space, or services for records, and making 
recommendations about the proposal to the Department of Budget and Management or the 
Board of Public Works; (4) reporting, for each specified five-year period, a series analysis 
of the character and quantity of records that a unit of State government holds and that an 
official of the State government or the head of a unit is required or permitted to offer to 
Maryland State Archives; and (5) otherwise furthering the records management programs 
of each unit of State government. 
 
Forms Management 
 
Title 10, Subtitle 6, Part I of the State Government Article (“Forms Management”), defines 
a “form” as a document that has a standard format for the systematic and repetitive 
collection, maintenance, or transmission of information. It establishes the information that 
must be included on forms utilized by each department and each independent unit of State 
government. Generally, the head of each department and independent unit must designate 
a forms management officer for that unit, and the officer must keep a current plan for the 
management of the forms that the unit uses, administer the plan, and submit the plan 
(including each revision) to RMD. Statute specifies what must be included in the plan, 
including a register of the forms that the forms management officer approves. 
 
Annual Report on Forms Management 
 
A department or independent unit of State government may use only the forms that are 
listed on its register of approved forms. By July 31 of each year, each department or 
independent unit must submit to RMD an annual report on its activities as to the 
management of its forms during the previous fiscal year. 
 
DGS advises that Chapters 47 and 48 of 2023 repealed the requirement that RMD submit 
an annual report to the General Assembly that consolidates the submitted forms 
management reports by each department and independent unit that DGS receives. 
However, the Acts did not repeal the requirement that each department or independent unit 
submit an annual report on its form management to RMD. DGS advises that the bill will 
bring conformity with the removal of the remaining reporting requirement, reduce 
unnecessary labor at State agencies, and reduce the production and storage of unnecessary 
government records. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 276/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 260 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - General Services) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Accountability and Implementation Board; Department of 
Commerce; Department of General Services; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Human Services; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Cannabis 
Administration; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland State Archives; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Public Service Commission; State Ethics Commission; State 
Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 276/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Government - Forms - Reporting Requirement - Repeal 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 276 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Christian Skipper 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill is anticipated to have minimal or no economic impact on Maryland small 
business, because it only removes a reporting requirement from Maryland State agencies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4