START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 292 
(Delegate Holmes, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Cooperative Housing Corporations, Condominiums, and Homeowners 
Associations - Funding of Reserve Accounts and Preparation of Funding Plans 
 
 
This bill makes various changes related to the requirements for cooperative housing 
corporations, condominiums, and homeowners associations (HOAs), collectively known 
as common ownership communities (COCs), to fund reserve accounts. Among other 
provisions, the bill (1) requires the governing body to prepare a specified funding plan; 
(2) extends, from three years to five years, the amount of time after an initial reserve study 
that such entities have to attain the recommended annual reserve funding level; and 
(3) authorizes COCs to declare financial hardship and deviate from existing funding 
requirements under certain conditions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Pursuant to legislation enacted over the last several years, 
subject to limited exception, COCs in the State are required to conduct reserve studies; 
statutory provisions specify the time by which initial and updated reserve studies must be 
completed. The bill makes numerous changes to these requirements, some of which are 
described in additional detail below.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 292/ Page 2 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, a “reserve study” means a study of the reserves required for future major 
repairs and replacement of the common elements of a cooperative or condominium, or the 
common areas of an HOA, that:   
 
 
identifies each structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing component of the 
common elements or common areas and any other components that are the 
responsibility of the COC to repair and replace; 
 
states the normal useful life (for cooperatives and condominiums) and the estimated 
remaining useful life of each identified component; 
 
states the estimated cost of repair or replacement of each identified component; and 
 
states the estimated annual reserve amount necessary to accomplish any identified 
future repair or replacement. 
 
The bill further specifies that a reserve study, using an itemized list, must identify each 
structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing component of the common elements/areas 
and any other components that (1) are the responsibility of the COC to repair and replace; 
and (2) if applicable, meet a minimum cost of repair or replacement, as determined by the 
governing body, that is reasonably based on the expenses of the COC and is not a minor 
expense otherwise addressed by the budget. The bill also adds that the reserve study must 
state the quantity or size of each identified component, utilizing the appropriate unit of 
measurement. 
 
The bill establishes that an “updated reserve study” means, for the common elements/areas 
since the prior reserve study was completed within the previous five years, a study that:   
 
 
revises replacement cost, remaining life, and useful life estimates;  
 
analyzes work performed and amounts spent; and 
 
identifies whether any maintenance contracts are in place. 
 
Reserve Study and Funding Requirements 
 
Under current law, in addition to being prepared by an individual who meets specified 
experience and licensure requirements, a reserve study must:   
 
 
be available for inspection and copying by any unit owner or lot owner; 
 
be reviewed by the governing body of the COC in connection with preparing the 
annual budget; and 
 
be summarized for submission with the annual proposed budget to the unit owners 
or lot owners. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 292/ Page 3 
The bill applies these requirements to updated reserve studies. 
 
Under current law, the governing body of a COC must generally provide funds to the 
reserve in accordance with the most recent reserve study and has the authority to increase 
an assessment levied to cover the reserve funding amount required – despite any provision 
of the articles of incorporation, declaration, bylaws, or proprietary lease, as applicable, 
restricting assessment increases or capping the assessment that may be levied in a 
fiscal year. If the most recent reserve study was an initial reserve study, the governing body 
must attain the annual reserve funding level recommended by the reserve study within 
three fiscal years following the fiscal year in which the initial reserve study was completed; 
under the bill, the recommended funding level must be attained within five years, in 
accordance with the funding plan, as further specified. 
 
Among other alterations, the bill generally specifies that the governing body must deposit 
funds to the reserve account, as specified, on or before the last day of each fiscal year.  
 
The bill explicitly requires COCs to review the reserves and the most recent reserve study 
or updated reserve study annually to determine whether there is adequate funding in 
accordance with the funding plan. The bill also specifies that the annual review does not 
require an additional reserve study or updated reserve study. 
 
Financial Hardship Exemption 
 
The bill authorizes the governing body of a COC to determine by a two-thirds majority 
vote that the COC and the owners/members are experiencing a financial hardship that limits 
the ability to fund the required reserves. If a governing body makes a financial hardship 
determination, a COC may reasonably deviate from the reserve funding requirement but 
must meet the funding amount necessary for the considerations listed below when drafting 
the funding plan. 
 
A COC may not deviate from the reserve funding requirement for more than one fiscal year 
following the financial hardship determination. However, a COC may renew this 
determination for one fiscal year by a two-thirds majority vote. During this period of 
hardship the governing body must (1) make good faith efforts to resolve the financial 
hardship and resume funding reserves; (2) maintain detailed documents of the efforts made; 
and (3) allow documents and records to be examined and copied as required under existing 
State statute.  
 
Members/owners must be given reasonable advance notice of any vote to make or renew 
the financial hardship determination and any voting must be held during a regular or special 
meeting of the COC.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 292/ Page 4 
Funding Plans 
 
Under the bill, the governing body of a COC must develop a funding plan to fund the 
necessary reserves, in consultation with a person that satisfies the requirements to conduct 
a reserve study. In developing the funding plan, the governing body must select one of the 
following methods to achieve the reserve funding:   
 
 
component method; 
 
cash flow method; 
 
baseline funding method; 
 
threshold cash flow method; or 
 
any other funding method consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
A funding plan developed under the bill must prioritize adequate amounts for the repair 
and replacement of common elements/areas necessary for (1) the health, safety, and 
well-being of the occupants; (2) ensuring structural integrity, such as roofing replacements 
and maintaining structural systems;  (3) essential functioning, such as plumbing, sewer, 
heating, cooling, and electrical infrastructure; and (4) any other essential or critical 
purpose, as determined by the governing body. Reserves may be used for purposes other 
than those specified in the funding plan if the funds are repaid to the reserve fund within 
five years after their use. 
 
Progress toward compliance with the funding plan must be reviewed at each annual 
meeting. 
 
For more information on COCs, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1157 and HB 281 of 2024 and HB 534 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 63 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 292/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 292/ Page 6 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COC). In Maryland, 
a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are located in some 
form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the 
exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation for Community 
Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community associations with an 
estimated 1.0 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 292/ Page 7 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. While a small number of local governments 
(Charles and Montgomery counties) created such offices before the report’s publication, 
some local jurisdictions have since created programs to regulate or provide oversight of 
COCs. For example, Prince George’s County created its Common Ownership 
Communities Program in 2007 to assist governing bodies, as well as owners and residents 
of HOAs, residential condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with 
education, training, and alternative dispute resolution.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 7