START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 293 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 293 
(Delegate Pippy, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Child Victims - Testimony in Child Abuse Cases 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that authorize, in certain cases, a court to order the 
testimony of a child abuse victim to be taken outside the courtroom and shown in the 
courtroom by closed circuit television. Specifically, the bill repeals a requirement for the 
court, in regard to a determination that testifying in the presence of a defendant or child 
respondent will result in the child victim suffering serious emotional distress, to find that 
the child will be unable to reasonably communicate. The bill also requires (1) if the child 
victim testifies by closed circuit television, for the testimony to be given within the 
courthouse in a setting that the court finds will reasonably mitigate the likelihood that the 
child victim will suffer emotional distress and (2) the defendant or child respondent to have 
a means of privately communicating orally and in real-time with the attorney for the 
defendant or child respondent who is in the room where the child victim is testifying. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, 
under the assumptions discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A court may order that the testimony of a child victim be taken outside the 
courtroom and shown in the courtroom by closed circuit television under specified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 293/ Page 2 
circumstances. The provisions are applicable in cases of child abuse under Title 5,  
Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article (generally, the physical or mental injury of a child 
under specified circumstances or sexual abuse) or §§ 3‐601 or 3‐602 of the Criminal Law 
Article (Child Abuse and Sexual Abuse of a Minor). 
 
Specifically, a court may order that the testimony of a child be taken outside the courtroom 
and shown in the courtroom by closed circuit television if (1) the court determines that the 
testimony by the child victim in the presence of a defendant or child respondent will result 
in the child victim suffering serious emotional distress such that the child victim cannot 
reasonably communicate and (2) the testimony is taken during the proceeding. 
 
In making the aforementioned determination, the court may observe and question the child 
victim inside and outside the courtroom and hear testimony of a parent or custodian of the 
child victim or other person, as specified. Each defendant/child respondent, one attorney 
for a defendant/child respondent, one prosecuting attorney, and one attorney for the child 
victim may be present when the court hears testimony on whether to allow a child victim 
to testify by closed circuit television. However, if the court observes or questions the child 
victim in connection with the determination, it must do so without the defendant or child 
respondent present. Attorneys (for the defendant/child respondent, prosecution, and child 
victim) may be present for the observation or questioning, as specified. 
 
When the child victim testifies by closed circuit television, the only persons who may be 
in the room with the child are (1) one prosecuting attorney; (2) one attorney for each 
defendant or child respondent; (3) one attorney for the child victim; (4) the operators of the 
closed circuit television equipment; and (5) subject to the Maryland Rules, any person 
whose presence, in the opinion of the court, contributes to the well‐being of the child 
victim, including a person who has dealt with the child victim in a therapeutic setting 
concerning the abuse. The court (judge) and the defendant/child respondent must stay in 
the courtroom, communicating with the child victim by any appropriate electronic method. 
Statute further restricts who may question the child victim, as specified. 
 
These provisions (1) do not apply if a defendant or child respondent is without counsel; 
(2) may not be interpreted to prevent a child victim and a defendant/child respondent from 
being in the courtroom at the same time a child victim is asked to identify the defendant or 
child respondent; and (3) do not allow the use of two‐way closed circuit television or other 
procedure that would let a child victim see or hear a defendant or child respondent. (The 
bill specifies that the court may not order the use of two-way closed-circuit television or 
other procedure that would let child victim see or hear a defendant/child respondent.) 
 
State Expenditures:  This analysis assumes that the Judiciary’s current practices of 
providing private means for communication and child victims’ out-of-court testimony 
within the courts can effectuate implementation of the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 293/ Page 3 
According to the Judiciary, technical closed circuit television (CCTV) requires television 
displays on the same “circuit” that communicate exclusively with each other via a closed 
loop, such that no other device has any connection path to access the video feed. However, 
the Judiciary does not currently utilize technical CCTV; instead, courts utilize other 
technological resources to accomplish a similar private means of communication 
(i.e., laptops, Zoom, and Polycom). Access is therefore limited by meeting codes and 
passwords, rather than an actual “closed circuit.” 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 141 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 274 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3