START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 214 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 214 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Disabilities) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Human Services - Maryland Assistive Technology Program - Establishment 
 
 
This departmental bill codifies the federally funded Maryland Technology Assistance 
Program (MDTAP) into statute as the Maryland Assistive Technology Program in the 
Department of Disabilities (MDOD). The program must provide access to or conduct 
assistive technology services that include any activity described in the federal 21st Century 
Assistive Technology Act. The bill also establishes the Assistive Technology Services 
Fund. The Secretary of Disabilities may adopt regulations to implement the bill. The bill 
may not be construed to establish an entitlement program.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOD special fund revenues increase by an estimated $25,000 in FY 2026 
from revenues received from assistive technology services provided by the program. 
Special fund expenditures likely increase accordingly. Future years reflect revenue growth. 
Federal fund revenues and expenditures continue (not shown below). General fund 
revenues increase minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through 
FY 2028 (not shown below). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$25,000 
$28,800 
$31,600 
$34,800 
$38,300 
SF Expenditure 
$25,000 
$28,800 
$31,600 
$34,800 
$38,300 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent local governments utilize assistive technology services from 
the program, local government expenditures may increase by a minimal amount. Local 
revenues are not affected.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 214/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDOD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Assistive technology device” means any item, piece of equipment, or 
product system, whether acquired commercially, modified, or customized, that is used to 
increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities.  
 
“Assistive technology service” means any service that assists an individual with a disability 
in the selection, acquisition, or use of an assistive technology device.  
 
Maryland Assistive Technology Program 
 
The purpose of the program is to (1) increase access to assistive technology devices and 
assistive technology services for individuals with disabilities; (2) support the State’s efforts 
to improve the provision of assistive technology to individuals with disabilities of all ages, 
including underrepresented populations, through comprehensive statewide programs of 
technology-related assistance; (3) ensure statewide access to assistive technology lending 
libraries that allow individuals with disabilities and those supporting individuals with 
disabilities to learn about, try, and borrow assistive technology devices through short-term 
loans; and (4) implement activities required by federal grants, including funding authorized 
under the federal 21st Century Assistive Technology Act.  
 
Assistive Technology Services Fund 
 
The purpose of the fund is to receive revenue from assistive technology services provided 
by the program, including assistive technology assessments and training, and digital 
accessibility training, website evaluations, and remediation services.  
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the Secretary of Disabilities that 
consists of (1) revenue distributed to the fund from assistive technology services; 
(2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any 
other money accepted for the benefit of the fund. Interest accrues to the fund beginning in 
fiscal 2029, as for most special funds; however, from fiscal 2026 through 2028, interest is 
instead credited to the general fund.  
 
The fund may only be used to support the operations of the program, including the purchase 
of assistive technology devices. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in 
accordance with the State budget.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 214/ Page 3 
Current Law:  MDOD must oversee and administer constituent services and ombudsmen 
programs, the Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program, the Office of Personal 
Assistance Services (including the Attendant Care Program), Telecommunications Access 
of Maryland, and Telecommunications Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information 
for Disabled Individuals.  
 
Federal Assistive Technology Legislation 
 
The Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act (Tech Act) of 
1988 authorized grants to states to fund and establish a national network of state programs 
for assistive technology. The Assistive Technology Act of 1998 (AT Act) further expanded 
access to assistive technology and increased the availability of technology that enabled 
individuals with disabilities to live, work, and more independently participate in their 
communities. The AT Act provided grants to state programs that helped individuals with 
disabilities access assistive technology. The AT Act has not been reauthorized since 2004.  
 
Enacted in December 2022, the 21st Century Assistive Technology Act is a modernization 
of the AT Act and aims to increase the quality of life and expand work opportunities for 
individuals with disabilities through increased access to technology, equipment, and 
services. Each state is granted flexibility to determine how federal funds are allocated 
among four key pillars:  device demonstration; device loans; device reutilization; and state 
financing.  
 
Background:  MDOD advises that MDTAP was established in 1989 to implement federal 
grant funds authorized under the Tech Act. Grant funds were most recently reauthorized in 
2022 under the 21st Century Assistive Technology Act. Since its inception, MDTAP has 
been fully funded through federal grants.  
 
MDOD further advises that establishing the Maryland Assistive Technology Program 
under the bill codifies MDTAP and offers the opportunity to expand the scope of program 
activities beyond current federal grant activities. The bill also creates a special fund to 
collect reasonable fees for assistive technology services to allow MDOD to supplement 
federal funding. According to MDOD, federal fund revenues to MDTAP have increased 
by approximately $15,000 each fiscal year; however, federal funding has not kept pace 
with program costs, including personnel.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
approximately $1.3 million in federal fund revenues and expenditures for MDTAP, which 
includes personnel and program expenses. MDOD does not anticipate any federal fund 
revenue reduction as a result of the bill. Therefore, this analysis assumes that federal fund 
revenues and expenditures under MDTAP continue in fiscal 2026 (and subsequent fiscal 
years) under the Maryland Assistive Technology Program.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 214/ Page 4 
The bill establishes the Assistive Technology Services Fund to receive revenue from 
assistive technology services provided by the program. MDOD estimates special fund 
revenues of approximately $25,000 in fiscal 2026, accounting for the bill’s October 1, 2025 
effective date. MDOD anticipates that special fund revenues increase by 10% to 15% each 
fiscal year, increasing to approximately $38,000 by fiscal 2030. MDOD special fund 
expenditures likely increase accordingly.  
 
Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund remain in the fund, 
the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, that 
interest earnings from special funds (with certain exceptions) accrue to the general fund 
from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues increase minimally from 
interest earnings of the new special fund through fiscal 2028. The fund is exempted from 
a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and Procurement Article 
that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The program provides services such as assistive technology 
trainings to local governments on request. To the extend MDOD implements fees for 
assistive technology training, local government expenditures may increase by a minimal 
amount beginning in fiscal 2026.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 208 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Disabilities) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 214/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Human Services - Maryland Assistive Technology Program - 
Establishment 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 214 
PREPARED BY:  
Anne Blackfield 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
_x_  
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
OR 
____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
This legislation will have no impact on small businesses.  
The legislation codifies in statute an existing program, the Maryland Assistive Technology 
Program (MDTAP). MDTAP was formed in 1989 to implement federal grant funds, which were 
most recently reauthorized in 2022 under the 21st Century Assistive Technology Act (Pub. 
L.  117-263, § 5401 et. seq.). MDTAP is 100% funded by federal funds.  
MDTAP promotes assistive technology (AT) access and understanding for people with disabilities 
(as well as their families, educators, employers, support providers, etc.). MDTAP maintains an AT 
lending library, provides AT trainings and demonstrations of AT, helps people find used no- or low 
cost AT, and runs a low-interest financial loan program that lends money to people with disabilities 
who wish to purchase new AT.  
The legislation imposes no requirements on small businesses. MDTAP is a small, federally funded 
program that provides highly specialized AT services directly to people with disabilities that are 
generally not provided by (nor would be profitable to) small or private businesses. 

END OF PAGE 5