START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 236 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 236 
(Delegate Valentine, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Peace Orders and Criminal Harassment - Intentional Visual Surveillance 
 
 
This bill expands § 3-803 of the Criminal Law Article (harassment) to prohibit an 
individual from conducting visual surveillance of an area of another person’s residence 
where the other person has a reasonable expectation of privacy, as otherwise specified in 
statute. Violators are subject to the existing statutory penalty for violations of § 3-803. The 
bill also prohibits the harassment statute from being construed in a manner that infringes 
on any right guaranteed under the U.S. Constitution or the Maryland Declaration of Rights. 
Finally, the bill expands available relief under final peace orders issued based on an act of 
visual surveillance to include ordering the respondent to (1) remove or reposition a device 
being used for visual surveillance within 15 days after issuance of a final peace order and 
(2) refrain from further visual surveillance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $29,600 in FY 2026 
only for programming changes to update the relief available in interim, temporary, and 
final peace orders. Otherwise, the bill’s provisions, including expanded applicability of an 
existing penalty provision, are not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
29,600 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($29,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 236/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Harassment  
 
Section 3-803 of the Criminal Law Article (harassment) prohibits a person from following 
another in or about a public place or maliciously engaging in a course of conduct that 
alarms or seriously annoys the other (1) with the intent to harass, alarm, or annoy the other; 
(2) after receiving a reasonable warning or request to stop by or on behalf of the other; and 
(3) without a legal purpose. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the following penalties:  (1) for a 
first offense, up to 90 days imprisonment and/or a maximum $500 fine and (2) for a 
second or subsequent offense, up to 180 days imprisonment and/or a maximum 
$1,000 fine. The prohibition does not apply to a peaceable activity intended to express a 
political view or provide information to others. 
 
Visual Surveillance 
 
Generally, under § 3-901 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not conduct or procure 
another to conduct visual surveillance of an individual in a private place without the 
consent of the individual. Visual surveillance means surveillance by direct sight, the use of 
mirrors, the use of cameras, or the use of an electronic device that can be used 
surreptitiously to observe an individual. A private place is a dressing room or restroom in 
a retail store. 
 
Generally, under § 3-902 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not, with prurient 
intent, conduct or procure another to conduct visual surveillance of (1) an individual in a 
private place without the consent of that individual or (2) the private area, as specified, of 
an individual by use of a camera without the consent of the individual under circumstances 
in which a reasonable person would believe that the private area of the individual would 
not be visible to the public, regardless of whether the individual is in a public or private 
place. Visual surveillance is the deliberate, surreptitious observation of an individual by 
any means, including surveillance by direct sight, the use of mirrors, or the use of cameras. 
A private place is a room in which a person can reasonably be expected to fully or partially 
disrobe and has a reasonable expectation of privacy, as specified. 
 
Generally, under § 3-903 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not place or procure 
another to place a camera on real property where a private residence is located to conduct 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 236/ Page 3 
deliberate surreptitious observation of an individual inside the private residence, as 
specified. 
 
Peace Orders 
 
An individual who does not meet specified relationship requirements under the domestic 
violence protective order statutes may file a petition for a peace order with the 
District Court or the District Court commissioner that alleges the commission of specified 
acts against the petitioner by the respondent, if the act occurred within 30 days before the 
filing of the petition. Such acts include an act that causes serious bodily harm, an act that 
places the petitioner in fear of imminent serious bodily harm, harassment, stalking, 
trespass, malicious destruction of property, and, as defined in specified provisions of the 
Criminal Law Article, “visual surveillance.” 
 
After a final peace order hearing, if a judge finds by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the respondent has committed, and is likely to commit in the future, one of the specified 
acts against the petitioner, or if the respondent consents to the entry of a peace order, the 
court may issue a final peace order to protect the petitioner. The order must contain only 
the relief that is minimally necessary to protect the petitioner. A final peace order may 
order the respondent to (1) refrain from committing or threatening to commit specified 
acts; (2) refrain from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing the petitioner; 
(3) refrain from entering the residence of the petitioner; or (4) remain away from the place 
of employment, school, or temporary residence of the petitioner. Final peace orders may 
also direct the respondent or petitioner to participate in counseling or mediation and order 
either party to pay filing fees and costs. Relief granted in a final peace order is effective for 
the period stated in the order but may not exceed six months. Statutory provisions set forth 
circumstances under which a final peace order may be modified, rescinded, or extended. 
 
An individual who fails to comply with specified provisions of an interim, temporary, or 
final peace order is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties of a 
$1,000 fine and/or 90 days imprisonment for a first offense and a $2,500 fine and/or 
one year imprisonment for a second or subsequent offense. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 92 (Senator Corderman) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 236/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4