START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 273 
(Delegate Allen) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Residential Leases - Late Payment Penalties - Calculation 
 
 
This bill prohibits a landlord (for residential leases) from charging a penalty for the late 
payment of rent that exceeds 5% of the amount of unpaid rent due for the rental period for 
which the payment was delinquent. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Landlords are prohibited from using a lease that provides for (1) a penalty 
for the late payment of rent in excess of 5% of the amount of rent due for the rental period 
for which the payment was delinquent or (2) in the case of leases under which the rent is 
paid in weekly rental installments, a late penalty of more than $3 per week or a total of no 
more than $12 per month. (The bill specifies that the 5% maximum is based on the amount 
of unpaid rent.) 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business landlords and property management 
companies that assess late payments based on more than the unpaid portion of rent are 
prohibited from continuing that practice. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 273/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 853 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - February 18, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2