START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 260 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 260 
(Delegate Cardin, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Drug Paraphernalia - Prohibitions and Penalties 
 
 
This bill reduces penalties for offenses involving drug paraphernalia and controlled 
paraphernalia. Additionally, the bill repeals the prohibition on a person using controlled 
paraphernalia to administer a controlled dangerous substance (CDS). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State finances are not materially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  Local finances are not materially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Subsequent offender penalties for a violation of the prohibitions against 
the use or possession of drug paraphernalia and the delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia 
are reduced from imprisonment for up to two years and/or a $2,000 maximum fine to 
imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
The bill also reduces penalties related to controlled paraphernalia from imprisonment for 
up to four years and/or a $25,000 maximum fine for all violations to (1) a $500 maximum 
fine for a first violation and (2) imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum 
fine for a second or subsequent violation. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 260/ Page 2 
Current Law: 
 
Use or Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 
 
Unless authorized under law, a person may not use or possess with intent to use drug 
paraphernalia to: 
 
 
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, 
produce, process, prepare, pack, repack, store, contain, or conceal a CDS; or 
 
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a CDS into the human body. 
 
Chapter 4 of 2016 repealed the criminal prohibition on use or possession of 
marijuana-related drug paraphernalia. 
 
Delivery or Sale of Drug Paraphernalia 
 
Unless authorized under law, a person may not deliver or sell, or manufacture or possess 
with the intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where 
a person reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia will be used to: 
 
 
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, 
produce, process, prepare, pack, repack, store, contain, or conceal a CDS; or 
 
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a CDS into the human body. 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on penalties for offenses involving both the use or 
possession and the delivery or sale of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Controlled Paraphernalia 
 
“Controlled paraphernalia” means (1) a hypodermic syringe, needle, or any other object or 
combination of objects adapted to administer a CDS by hypodermic injections; (2) a gelatin 
capsule, glassine envelope, or other container suitable for packaging individual quantities 
of a CDS; or (3) lactose, quinine, mannite, mannitol, dextrose, sucrose, procaine 
hydrochloride, or any other substance suitable as a diluent or adulterant. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 260/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Use or Possession and Delivery or Sale of Drug Paraphernalia 
 
Violation 
Penalty 
First-time violation (use, possession, 
delivery, or sale) 
Misdemeanor 
$500 maximum fine 
 
Subsequent violation (use, possession, 
delivery, or sale) 
Misdemeanor 
Up to two years imprisonment and/or a 
maximum fine of $2,000 
 
First-time 
violation 
(use, 
possession, 
delivery, or sale) – violator has a prior 
conviction 
for 
delivery 
of 
drug 
paraphernalia by an adult to a minor who 
is at least three years younger 
 
Misdemeanor 
Up to two years imprisonment and/or a 
maximum fine of $2,000 
Delivery of drug paraphernalia by an adult 
to a minor who is at least three years 
younger 
Misdemeanor 
Up to eight years imprisonment and/or a 
maximum fine of $15,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
In general, a person may not possess or distribute controlled paraphernalia under 
circumstances that reasonably indicate an intention to use the controlled paraphernalia for 
purposes of illegally administering a CDS. Unless otherwise specified, a person is also 
prohibited from obtaining or attempting to obtain controlled paraphernalia by: 
 
 
fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge; 
 
counterfeiting a prescription or a written order; 
 
concealing a material fact or the use of a false name or address; 
 
falsely assuming the title of or representing to be a manufacturer, distributor, or 
authorized provider; or 
 
making or issuing a false or counterfeit prescription or written order. 
 
Evidence of circumstances that reasonably indicate an intent to use controlled 
paraphernalia to manufacture, administer, distribute, or dispense a CDS unlawfully include 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 260/ Page 4 
the close proximity of the controlled paraphernalia to an adulterant, diluent, or equipment 
commonly used to illegally manufacture, administer, distribute, or dispense a CDS, 
including a scale, a sieve, a strainer, a measuring spoon, staples, a stapler, a glassine 
envelope, a gelatin capsule, procaine hydrochloride, mannitol, lactose, quinine, and a CDS. 
 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction are subject to a maximum penalty 
of four years imprisonment and/or a $25,000 fine. 
 
Chapter 26 of 2022 repealed the penalty for controlled paraphernalia involving the use or 
possession of marijuana for which there was a maximum penalty of one year imprisonment 
and/or a $1,000 fine. 
 
State Revenues:  Exhibit 2 displays the number of violations and guilty dispositions for 
offenses altered by the bill. In fiscal 2022 and 2023 (the most recent years for which data 
is readily available), there were only two guilty dispositions in the District Court for these 
offenses. Thus, general fund revenues are not materially affected as a result of the bill’s 
reduction of specified monetary penalties from cases heard in the District Court. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions for 
Drug Paraphernalia (§ 5-619) and Controlled Paraphernalia (§ 5-620) 
 
 
Fiscal 2022 
Fiscal 2023 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
District Court Offenses 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Law, § 5-619 (c) 
43 
0 
76 
1 
Criminal Law, § 5-619 (d) 
56 
1 
35 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-620 
3 
0 
19 
0 
Circuit Court Offenses 
 
 
 
 
Criminal Law, § 5-619 (c) 
18 
1 
17 
1 
Criminal Law, § 5-619 (d) 
14 
0 
10 
0 
Criminal Law, § 5-620 
1 
0 
28 
0 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) are not materially affected. For fiscal 2023, DPSCS reports 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 260/ Page 5 
that Division of Correction received two inmates and Division of Parole and Probation 
opened cases for 91 individuals who had committed a CDS paraphernalia-related offense. 
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill results in reduced caseloads 
for the office. OPD provides legal representation in criminal cases where incarceration is 
a possibility. The bill eliminates the prohibition on using controlled paraphernalia to 
administer a CDS and establishes a fine only penalty for a first violation of § 5-620. The 
Department of Legislative Services advises that given current OPD caseloads and 
resources, it is assumed that any reduction in OPD caseloads generated by the bill is 
redirected to other cases. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues for circuit courts are not materially affected due to the low 
number of cases that are distributed across multiple jurisdictions in the State. According to 
the Maryland Sentencing Guidelines Database, the Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy received the following information for sentences in the State’s 
circuit courts during fiscal 2024: 
 
 
two individuals were sentenced for two counts of a subsequent offense of use or 
possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia under § 5-619 of the Criminal Law 
Article; 
 
zero individuals were sentenced for the subsequent offense of delivering or selling, 
or manufacturing or possessing with the intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia 
under § 5-619 of the Criminal Law Article; and 
 
seven individuals were sentenced for seven counts of possession or distribution of 
controlled paraphernalia under § 5-620 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Given the low number of overall convictions for offenses altered by 
the bill, local incarceration expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
The bill’s alteration of the penalty for § 5-620 to a fine only offense for a first violation 
may have an operational effect on local law enforcement as the offense must be charged 
by criminal citation. However, any time savings from issuing criminal citations (rather than 
making an arrest) is likely redirected to other duties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 1209 of 2024; HB 173 and SB 762 of 2023; and HB 481 and SB 509 of 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 260/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1009 (Senator Muse) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6