START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 261 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 261 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Estates and Trusts - Priority of Claims on an Estate - Unpaid Child Support 
 
 
This bill prioritizes the payment of unpaid child support over certain other claims on an 
estate of a decedent (deceased person) with insufficient assets to pay all claims in full, 
placing it after “family allowances” in the order of priority and before “taxes due by the 
decedent” (see Current Law below for the existing order of priority). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues may decrease, but any decrease is likely limited, as discussed 
below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may decrease, but any decrease is likely limited, 
as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  If the applicable assets of an estate are insufficient to pay all claims in full, 
the personal representative must make payment in the following order: 
 
(1) 
fees due to the register of wills; 
(2) 
costs and expenses of administration; 
(3) 
funeral expenses; 
(4) 
compensation of personal representatives, compensation for legal services, and 
commissions of licensed real estate brokers; 
(5) 
family allowances; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 261/ Page 2 
(6) 
taxes due by the decedent; 
(7) 
reasonable medical, hospital, and nursing expenses of the last illness of the 
decedent; 
(8) 
rent payable by the decedent for not more than three months in arrears; 
(9) 
wages, salaries, or commission for services performed for the decedent within three 
months prior to the death of the decedent; 
(10) 
assistance paid under the Public Assistance to Adults Program (PAA) administered 
by the Department of Human Services; and 
(11) 
all other claims. 
 
A preference may not be given in the payment of a claim over another claim of the same 
class, and a claim due and payable may not be preferred over claims not yet due. 
 
Currently, a claim for unpaid child support due by the decedent falls under the last category 
of “all other claims.” 
 
State and Local Revenues:  State and/or local government revenues may decrease to the 
extent the bill’s placement of a claim for unpaid child support higher in the priority of 
claims on an estate causes a State or local government claim on the estate (such as for taxes 
due, assistance paid under PAA, or other claims that in the absence of the bill would be at 
the same level of priority as unpaid child support under the “all other claims” category) to 
not be paid or to be paid to a lesser extent. The extent of any decrease in State or local 
government revenues cannot be reliably estimated but is likely limited since any impact 
would only occur in very specific circumstances in which unpaid child support being 
placed higher in the priority of claims on an estate would directly cause a State or local 
government claim lower in priority to not be paid or to be paid to a lesser extent. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are creditors of an estate and whose claims 
are in a lower priority of payment as a result of the bill may be negatively affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 110 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Register of Wills; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 261/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3