START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 272 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 272 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Planning) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Department of Planning – Modernization 
 
 
This departmental bill makes various changes to State law relating to (1) election precinct 
boundary data; (2) county water supply, sewerage, and solid waste disposal plans; 
(3) population projections; (4) real property information; (5) obsolete reporting 
requirements; (6) capital facilities planning information and access; (7) authorized funding 
for regional planning projects; and (8) geographic classification standards. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill makes the following changes to State law: 
 
(1) 
Precinct Boundary Data – The bill requires the State Administrator of Elections to 
send information on new election precincts or changes to precinct boundaries to 
MDP upon receipt of the information from local boards of elections. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 272/ Page 2 
(2) 
County Water Supply, Sewerage, and Solid Waste Disposal Plans – The bill 
modifies a requirement that the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) 
submit a county’s plan for water supply, sewerage, and solid waste disposal to MDP 
for advice, so that MDE is only required to submit the water supply and sewerage 
portion of the plan to MDP. 
 
(3) 
Population Projections – The bill modifies provisions governing MDP’s 
preparation of population projections for the State and local governments so that  
(1) MDP only must prepare projections for a municipality if the municipality 
requests it; (2) only State and county projections must include details of age, sex, 
and race; and (3) in preparing projections for the Washington metropolitan and 
Baltimore metropolitan areas, MDP may use population figures developed by the 
Baltimore Metropolitan Council, the Metropolitan Washington Council of 
Governments, and the member jurisdictions of these councils. The bill also removes 
an authorization for MDP to use population figures developed by the 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC) in 
preparing population projections for the Washington metropolitan area. 
 
(4) 
Real Property Information – The bill modifies provisions requiring MDP to be a 
repository and clearinghouse for information on real property available for 
public use, by (1) removing references to MDP being a “clearinghouse” and 
(2) establishing that MDP must only be a repository for information on 
State-owned (and not local government-owned or other public) property. 
 
(5) 
Obsolete Reporting Requirements – The bill removes a requirement that MDP’s 
annual report include a summary of the work of the State Economic Growth, 
Resource Protection, and Planning Commission (which no longer exists) and 
removes a requirement that local jurisdictions report information to the commission 
on certain local construction projects. 
 
(6) 
Capital Facilities Planning Information and Access – The bill repeals provisions 
that require MDP to have access to capital facilities planning information possessed 
by any State government unit and to have specified access to any State-owned land 
to make examinations and surveys that relate to capital facilities planning. 
 
(7) 
Authorized Funding for Regional Planning Projects – The bill repeals provisions 
that authorize MDP to include funding of up to $100,000 per year in the 
department’s budget for regional planning projects programmed by M-NCPPC for 
the following fiscal year. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 272/ Page 3 
(8) 
Geographic Classification Standards – The bill repeals a requirement that MDP 
establish statewide classification standards for geographically referencing all basic 
planning information collected by any unit of State government. 
 
Background:  The bill’s changes have the following background (corresponding with the 
numbering and headings under Bill Summary/Current Law): 
 
(1) 
Precinct Boundary Data – MDP indicates that the bill’s requirement saves staff time 
currently required to collect information on new election precincts and changed 
precinct boundaries, from local boards of elections, in order to update precinct 
population counts and maps published by the department. 
 
(2) 
County Water Supply, Sewerage, and Solid Waste Disposal Plans – MDP indicates 
that solid waste disposal planning has relatively little impact on land use planning 
and involves logistics and engineering matters in which the department does not 
have expertise. MDE indicates that it receives comments from MDP on solid waste 
disposal plans only on occasion. 
 
(3) 
Population Projections – MDP indicates that (1) it does not currently prepare 
population projections for all municipalities and does not have the resources to do 
so and (2) the bill’s changes allow for it to provide consistent and accurate 
projections for counties and, upon request, for municipalities. 
 
(4) 
Real Property Information – MDP indicates that it does not currently maintain 
information on all real property available for public use and does not have the 
resources to do so. 
 
(5) 
Obsolete Reporting Requirements – In the 2001 sunset evaluation of the 
State Economic Growth, Resource Protection, and Planning Commission, DLS 
advised that the commission lacked a defined role and focus and that there was 
considerable overlap with other State entities such as MDP. Pursuant to the 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act, the commission’s authority terminated on 
July 1, 2003. 
 
(6) 
Capital Facilities Planning Information and Access – MDP indicates that capital 
budget duties were transferred to the Department of Budget and Management in 
1989, and statute now specifies that MDP is the staff agency of the Governor for 
planning matters with the exception of capital facilities planning (§ 5-301(a) of the 
State Finance and Procurement Article). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 272/ Page 4 
(7) 
Authorized Funding for Regional Planning Projects – MDP indicates there is no 
record of this funding being provided in the past and no expectation from M-NCPPC 
for the funding. 
 
(8) 
Geographic Classification Standards – MDP indicates that this requirement 
pre-dates the establishment of modern, international geographic information 
systems (GIS) standards. The Maryland Department of Information Technology’s 
GIS Professional Services provides statewide enterprise level GIS support and 
guidance on applicable standards. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 236 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Planning) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, Talbot, and 
Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of Counties; cities of College Park and 
Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 272/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Department of Planning - Modernization 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 272 
 
PREPARED BY:  Andrew Wilson, Maryland Department of Planning Government Affairs 
Specialist 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
         WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
SB 236/HB 272 contains a series of amendments and repeals targeting antiquated 
provisions of statute assigned to the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) over the 
past 35 years which are no longer needed or applicable. These specific amendments and 
repeals are targeted to improve efficiency and clarify expectations of the work MDP 
performs. No provision within this bill will have an economic impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5