START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 258 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 258 
(Delegate Wells) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - West North Avenue Development Authority - 
Alterations 
 
This emergency bill alters the composition, powers, and duties of the West North Avenue 
Development Authority (WNADA), establishes that the authority is a body politic and 
corporate and an instrumentality of the State, and extends the authority’s authorization until 
September 30, 2029. The bill also (1) creates a special fund to carry out the purposes of 
WNADA; (2) creates a board of directors for WNADA, generally consisting of existing 
authority members; and (3) exempts WNADA from specified provisions of State law. In 
general terms, the bill modifies the statutory structure of the authority to more closely align 
with that of a State economic development authority; it also makes technical and 
conforming changes. The Governor may include each year in the State budget bill an 
appropriation to WNADA. Even so, WNADA must be self-sustaining beginning in 
fiscal 2028. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No anticipated effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures for WNADA 
increase by $82,600 in FY 2026, reflecting a contingent appropriation, and may further 
increase, particularly in FY 2027, due to an enhanced expectation for funding until 
WNADA must be self-sustaining. Based on the FY 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly, general fund expenditures increase by at least $21.2 million and special 
fund expenditures increase by at least $260,000 for FY 2027. Special fund revenues and 
expenditures for WNADA increase annually until FY 2030, as discussed below. 
State revenues are also potentially affected by the bill’s exemption of WNADA from 
taxation, although the effect cannot be reliably estimated at this time. All funding is 
discretionary. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City finances are potentially affected beginning as early as 
FY 2026, as discussed below. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 258/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
West North Avenue Development Authority 
 
WNADA is a body politic and corporate and is an instrumentality of the State. The exercise 
by WNADA of a power under its statutory provisions is the performance of an essential 
governmental function. A board of directors must manage WNADA and exercise its 
powers. Board membership is generally the current authority membership. The bill does 
not specify whether or not the legislative members of the new board are voting members; 
under current practice, the legislative members of the authority do not vote due to 
separation of powers concerns. 
 
The bill establishes several findings of the General Assembly related to the West North 
Avenue Corridor and the need for its revitalization and specifies the legislative purposes 
of the authority. The General Assembly intends that: 
 
 
WNADA operate and exercise its corporate powers along the West North Avenue 
Corridor in Baltimore City; 
 
without limiting its authority to otherwise exercise its powers, WNADA exercise its 
powers to assist private real estate entities and nonprofit community development 
corporations to develop and rehabilitate housing and commercial units in 
Baltimore City and support local economic development agencies to contribute to 
the expansion, modernization, and retention of existing enterprises in 
Baltimore City as well as the attraction of new businesses to Baltimore City; and 
 
WNADA should not own and operate a project unless (1) its board of directors 
determines by resolution that the private sector has not demonstrated serious and 
significant interest and development capacity to own and operate the project or (2) a 
representative of a governmental unit requests in writing that WNADA own and 
operate the project. 
 
The bill specifies additional administrative requirements, such as establishing a system of 
financial accounting, controls, audits, and reports. 
 
West North Avenue Development Authority Fund 
 
The WNADA Fund is established as a special, nonlapsing, fund to provide funds for the 
authority to use for consulting fees, salaries, and administrative expenses. WNADA must 
administer the fund, which consists of money appropriated in the State budget, interest, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 258/ Page 3 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund 
may be used only for administrative purposes and to carry out the functions of the authority. 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. 
 
Applicability of State Laws 
 
Generally, in exercising its powers, WNADA may carry out its purposes without the 
consent of any State unit. WNADA is also not subject to specified provisions in the 
Economic Development Article (local economic development financing methods) and the 
following provisions of the State Finance and Procurement Article: 
 
 
Title 2, Subtitles 2 (Gifts and Grants) and 5 (Facilities for the Handicapped); 
 
Title 3 (Budget and Management); 
 
Title 4 (Department of General Services); 
 
Title 5A (Division of Historical and Cultural Programs); 
 
Title 6, Subtitle 1 (Studies and Estimates); 
 
Title 7, Subtitles 1 (State Operating Budget), 2 (Disbursements and Expenditures), 
and 3 (Unspent Balances); 
 
Title 10 (Board of Public Works – Miscellaneous Provisions); or 
 
Division II (General Procurement Law, although WNADA, its officers, and 
employees are still subject to provisions for exempt units, as under current law). 
 
WNADA is subject to the Public Information Act and the Open Meetings Act. WNADA, 
its officers, and its employees are subject to the Public Ethics Law. WNADA is also subject 
to Title 14, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance and Procurement Article (Minority Business 
Participation). 
 
Express Powers 
 
The bill specifies many express powers for WNADA, including the ability to: 
 
 
make or accept and manage loans, grants, or assistance of any kind from specified 
governmental and private sources; 
 
make grants to individuals; 
 
acquire properties in Baltimore City by various specified means to improve, 
manage, market, maintain, or lease, for development or redevelopment; 
 
acquire, purchase, hold, lease as lessee and use any real, personal, mixed, tangible, 
or intangible property or an interest in the property;  
 
finance all or part of the acquisition or improvement of a project; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 258/ Page 4 
 
sell, lease as lessor, transfer, license, assign, or dispose of property or a property 
interest that it acquires; 
 
fix and collect rates, rentals, fees, royalties, and charges for services and resources 
it provides or makes available; 
 
exercise power usually possessed by a private corporation in performing similar 
functions unless to do so would conflict with State law; 
 
create a special district benefit for the commercial businesses in the target area; 
 
set salaries in accordance with the jurisdiction market rate and outside the State 
Personnel and Pension System; 
 
ensure money is being spent effectively and efficiently on development and that 
development is happening in the appropriate way for the West North Avenue 
Corridor; 
 
provide advisory services to State and city agencies on planning and development 
for the target area; 
 
initiate, fund, and monitor for efficiency and effectiveness economic, housing, 
transportation, neighborhood, and green space development within the target area; 
 
make rules and regulations for the operation and use of land, property, and 
undertakings under WNADA’s jurisdiction; and 
 
create and administer the accounts that it requires. 
 
Taxation 
 
WNADA is exempt from taxation or assessments on any part of a development or project, 
the authority’s activities in operating and maintaining a development or project, and 
revenues from a development or project. The authority is exempt from State and local 
transfer and recordation tax. 
 
Any property that is sold or leased by the authority to a private entity is subject to 
Baltimore City and local real property taxes from the time of sale or lease. 
 
Reporting 
 
By January 1, 2027, WNADA must report to the General Assembly on its progress toward 
becoming self-sustaining. 
 
Current Law: 
 
West North Avenue Development Authority 
 
Chapters 80 and 81 of 2021 established WNADA for the purpose of developing a 
comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy for the benefit of a specified 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 258/ Page 5 
“target area” and “buffer zone” in Baltimore City. The Acts establish provisions governing 
the membership, procedures, and duties of WNADA. Under Chapter 136 of 2023, the 
authority is generally exempt from State procurement law, although WNADA is still 
subject to written policy and procedure requirements for exempt units and the State’s 
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program. 
 
WNADA members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. WNADA is authorized to manage appropriated funds from Baltimore City and 
the State. WNADA may receive donated services from accountants, lawyers, or other 
consultants as necessary to carry out the authority’s duties. WNADA may also supervise, 
manage, and terminate staff and consultants as necessary. 
 
WNADA must support the development and approval of a comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization plan in the target area and the buffer zone to benefit (1) the residents; 
(2) housing; (3) neighborhoods; (4) economic development; and (5) transportation, 
including motor vehicles and pedestrians. WNADA must also work in coordination with 
the residents of the target area and the buffer zone to develop a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan. 
 
By December 15, 2023, WNADA was required to report its comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization strategy, including any procurement activities undertaken by the authority, 
to the Governor, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Health and 
Government Operations Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee. 
 
Among other things, the 2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report requested WNADA submit a grants 
manual to provide transparency to its review process for awarding grants with a requested 
submission date of December 29, 2023. As the grants manual was not submitted, the 
2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report restricted $250,000 in general funds to WNADA until 
submission of the grants manual, which was submitted to the General Assembly on 
January 20, 2025, and can be read here. 
 
All provisions related to WNADA terminate September 30, 2026. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program – Generally 
 
Established under Title 14, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, the 
State’s MBE program requires that a statewide goal for MBE contract participation be 
established biennially through the regulatory process under the Administrative Procedure 
Act. The goal has been 29% since 2014. The Maryland Department of Transportation is 
designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification agency. An MBE is a legal 
entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 258/ Page 6 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  WNADA advises that the bill codifies the intended powers and 
authorities for WNADA, as advised by the Office of the Attorney General, and that it has 
no additional fiscal, administrative, staffing, operational, or programmatic impact. The 
Department of Legislative Services advises that the effect on State finances (aside from 
effectuating the contingent appropriation in the fiscal 2026 budget) depends on whether 
the bill leads to a change in discretionary funding for WNADA in the State budget, largely 
due to the requirement that the authority be self-sustaining by fiscal 2028 and the extension 
of its September 30, 2026 termination date to September 30, 2029, as discussed below. 
 
As created by Chapters 80 and 81, WNADA is more similar to a stakeholder commission 
than an economic development authority. The fiscal and policy note for the legislation 
advised that there was no direct effect on State finances and that the authority could provide 
staff and expense reimbursements with existing resources. However, in practice, WNADA 
currently undertakes some economic development activities (it is authorized to manage 
appropriated funds from Baltimore City and the State), now has 14 State employees, and 
receives significant State funding. Indeed, WNADA is almost entirely State-supported, 
although Baltimore City has provided some funding. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes $16.8 million in general funds for WNADA and another 
$500,000 in special funds (from Baltimore City) for total funding of $17.3 million, 
including $15.4 million for grants. The fiscal 2026 budget includes $21.2 million in 
general funds and $260,000 in special funds (from Baltimore City) for WNADA, including 
$19.0 million for grants. According to WNADA, its grants are intended for projects that 
will support economic, commercial, transportation, and green space development, as well 
as increase the population density in the target area. 
 
A portion of the fiscal 2026 general fund appropriation ($82,614) is earmarked for 
personnel for WNADA (although not necessarily for an additional position) and is 
contingent on the enactment of the bill. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase 
by $82,614 in fiscal 2026 specifically due to the bill. 
 
Otherwise, in that funding and operational context, the significant changes in the bill are: 
 
 
the bill extends the termination date of WNADA from September 30, 2026, to 
September 30, 2029; 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 258/ Page 7 
 
WNADA must be self-sustaining by fiscal 2028; 
 
the Governor may include an appropriation to WNADA in the annual budget bill 
(presumably even after the requirement for it to be self-sustaining);  
 
while the bill expands the purposes and powers of WNADA to explicitly allow for 
the financing of various types of projects, which may increase the expectation for 
State funding, those same expanded powers also allow WNADA to generate 
revenue, which may eventually lead to the authority being self-supporting; and 
 
the termination provision may have a countervailing impact and suppress further 
investment.  
 
Additionally, despite the bill’s emergency status, this analysis does not reflect any changes 
to fiscal 2025 funding for WNADA.  
 
As noted earlier, general fund expenditures may increase due to an enhanced expectation 
for WNADA funding, coincident with its expanded statutory powers and duties. Based on 
the fiscal 2026 budget, general fund expenditures increase by at least $21.2 million and 
special fund expenditures increase by at least $260,000 for fiscal 2027. However, any 
funding to WNADA is discretionary so general fund expenditures may be less. 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for WNADA increase as funds are received and 
used for authorized purposes. Though the bill authorizes the Governor to include an 
appropriation to WNADA in the annual budget bill, as the bill explicitly requires WNADA 
to be self-sustaining by fiscal 2028, it is assumed that the Governor does not use this 
authority beginning with the fiscal 2028 budget. Special fund revenues and expenditures 
may further increase until fiscal 2030 to the extent that WNADA generates revenues from 
authorized financial transactions, and those funds accrue to the WNADA fund, which is 
not a requirement. 
 
However, as the bill extends the termination date of WNADA to September 30, 2029, it is 
assumed – for the purposes of this analysis – that all remaining special funds are exhausted 
in the first quarter of fiscal 2030 and awarded to eligible entities as grants, any loans issued 
by WNADA are considered forgiven, and no further repayments are made. Also, any real 
property held by WNADA is assumed to be transferred to a private entity within the target 
area or buffer zone of the authority’s jurisdiction, and all employees of WNADA are 
terminated. 
 
State revenues are also potentially affected by the bill’s exemption of WNADA from 
taxation, although the effect cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
WNADA can develop and submit the required report regarding its progress on the authority 
becoming self-sustaining with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 258/ Page 8 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The effect on Baltimore City revenues and expenditures cannot be 
determined at this time. WNADA received $500,000 for fiscal 2025 in discretionary 
funding from Baltimore City, which may increase with a change to WNADA’s current 
operations and/or the temporary extension. The fiscal 2026 budget includes $260,000 in 
special funds from Baltimore City for WNADA. To the extent Baltimore City provides 
additional funding to WNADA, Baltimore City expenditures increase in fiscal 2027. The 
bill also potentially affects local revenues, since the bill exempts WNADA from local 
transfer and recordation taxes but also expands WNADA’s ability to develop properties 
and increase property assessments. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit from enhanced and/or continued 
WNADA funding and additional authorized types of WNADA projects, particularly in the 
West North Avenue Corridor in Baltimore City. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill authorizes WNADA to set salaries in accordance with 
the jurisdiction market rate and outside the State Personnel and Pension System; however, 
WNADA currently has 14 staff that are State employees, funded through the State budget. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1005 and HB 1427 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 4 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  West North Avenue Development Authority; Department of 
Commerce; Baltimore City; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - May 7, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8