START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 209 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information 
Technology) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Finance and Procurement - Local Cybersecurity Preparedness and 
Response Plan and Assessment - Repeal 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals a duplicative requirement that each county government, local 
school system, and local health department (except for municipal governments) consult 
with the local emergency manager to create or update a cybersecurity preparedness and 
response plan and complete a cybersecurity preparedness assessment. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and repeals a duplicative requirement 
that remains in another section of State law. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and repeals a duplicative requirement 
that remains in another section of State law. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Information Technology (DoIT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022 expanded and enhanced 
the State’s regulatory framework for State and local government cybersecurity. Among 
other things, the Acts required additional funding for cybersecurity, established leadership 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 209/ Page 2 
positions in State government for cybersecurity, codified existing cybersecurity 
requirements from a previous executive order, and required State and local governments to 
perform cybersecurity preparedness assessments. 
 
More specifically, and being repealed by the bill, Chapter 241 required each county 
government, local school system, and local health department to consult with the local 
emergency manager to create or update a cybersecurity preparedness and response plan 
and complete a cybersecurity preparedness assessment. 
 
Similarly, but in a different section of State law that is unaffected by the bill (specifically 
§3.5-407 of the State Finance and Procurement Article), Chapter 242 required each county 
government, local school system, and local health department to consult with the local 
emergency manager to create or update a cybersecurity preparedness and response plan 
and complete a cybersecurity preparedness assessment, but the local entities must do so in 
a manner and frequency established in regulation by DoIT. 
 
DoIT advises, and DLS concurs, that the bill is technical in nature, repealing a duplicative 
requirement to avoid potential confusion and ambiguity. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 239 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Information Technology) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Montgomery County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 209/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Finance and Procurement-Local Cybersecurity Preparedness and    
Response Plan and Assessment-Repeal 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB 209 
PREPARED BY:  
Sara Elalamy - Legislative Director 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3