START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 265 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 265 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Finance 
 
Dental Services - Qualification for Maryland Dent-Care Program 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Dent-Care Program to include dentists and 
dental hygienists employed on a part-time basis. The bill also requires the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission’s (MHEC) Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), in 
collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), to establish prorated loan 
repayment assistance for any part-time dentists and dental hygienists participating in the 
program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Dent-Care Program does not require 
additional spending, as discussed below. MHEC OSFA expenditures increase minimally 
for system enhancements required to establish prorated award amounts. MDH’s Office of 
Oral Health (OOH) can likely manage the processing of additional applicants with existing 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Generally 
 
The Loan Assistance Repayment Programs (LARPs) operated by the State of Maryland 
provide loan repayment assistance in exchange for specific service commitments – mostly 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 265/ Page 2 
to ensure underserved areas and populations in the State have access to essential 
professionals. These programs include the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, Maryland Dent-Care 
LARP, Maryland LARP for Physicians and Physician Assistants, Maryland LARP for 
Nurses and Nursing Support Staff, and Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation 
Agents. There is also a program for farmers that has not received funding. 
 
Individuals must have received a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a 
college or university in the State or a school of law or have received a Resident Teacher 
Certificate from the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) after completing an 
approved alternative teaching preparation program. Except for the Maryland LARP for 
Police Officers and Probation Agents and the Maryland LARP for Farmers, they must also 
be employed in State or local government or in a nonprofit organization. For the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP, the Maryland Dent-Care LARP, and the Maryland LARP for 
Physicians and Physician Assistants, employment must also assist low-income, 
underserved residents or underserved areas in the State. For the Maryland LARP for 
Police Officers and Probation Agents, individuals must obtain employment as a 
police officer or probation agent in the State for at least two years. For the Maryland LARP 
for Farmers, individuals must have been a farmer for at least 5 years, but not more than 
10 years since obtaining the degree. 
 
The State’s LARP for Foster Care Recipients provides loan assistance repayment that is 
not based on any specific professional designation. Instead, the program assists in the 
repayment of higher education loans owed by foster care recipients with the goal of 
increasing higher education access. 
 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
The Janet L. Hoffman LARP is administered by OSFA to assist in the repayment of any 
higher education loan owed by an individual who: 
 
 
either (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college 
or university in the State, a law school, or, for mental health professionals only, any 
accredited college or university or (2) receives a Resident Teacher Certificate from 
MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program; 
 
obtains eligible employment; 
 
receives an income less than the maximum eligible total income levels established 
by the office, including any additional sources of income; and 
 
satisfies any other criteria established. 
 
Eligible employment fields include lawyers, degree- or diploma-holding registered nurses, 
licensed clinical therapists, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 265/ Page 3 
speech pathologists, teachers, and specified school health professionals. A licensed clinical 
alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed clinical marriage and family therapy counselor,  
or a licensed clinical professional counselor whose practice is located in a  
high-need geographic area of the State as determined by MDH may receive assistance 
under the program. 
 
For the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, awards are determined by an applicant’s overall reported 
educational debt at the time of application. Award funds are distributed annually over a 
three-year period as long as the recipient remains eligible and continues to submit the 
required annual employment, lender, and tax documentation by the deadline. 
 
Maryland Dent-Care Program 
 
The Maryland Dent-Care Program’s purpose is to increase access to oral health services 
for underserved Maryland Medicaid recipients by increasing the number of dentists and 
dental hygienists who treat that population. To be eligible for an award, an applicant must 
(1) be licensed to practice in Maryland by the State Board of Dental Examiners; 
(2) demonstrate financial need; (3) be employed full time as a dentist or dental hygienist; 
(4) agree to have at least 30% of their patient population be Maryland Medicaid recipients; 
and (5) meet any other criteria established by OSFA. Generally, a recipient may hold the 
award for up to three years if the recipient continues to be employed full time as a dentist 
or dental hygienist and continues to treat Medicaid recipients as at least 30% of all patients. 
However, beginning October 1, 2023, each award must be at least $50,000 per year for 
three years for a dentist and may not exceed $10,000 for two years for a dental hygienist. 
 
Regulations for the program define full-time practice as a minimum of 40 hours per week. 
At least 32 hours of the required 40 hours per week during normally scheduled office hours 
must be at an eligible practice site. Further, no more than 35 workdays may be spent away 
from the practice for holidays, vacation, continuing professional education, illness, or any 
other reason. Absences greater than 35 workdays in any given 52-week period must extend 
the service obligation end date. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding eligibility to include part-time dentists and dental 
hygienists does not necessarily require additional spending. MHEC advises that, in 
fiscal 2024, the Maryland Dent-Care Program awarded $356,100 to 15 dentists for an 
average award amount of $23,740. Although Chapter 377 of 2023 expanded eligibility for 
the program to include dental hygienists, MHEC advises that, because Chapter 377 also 
increased the minimum award amount for dentists without providing additional funding, 
MHEC was unable to make any initial awards to dental hygienists in fiscal 2024, though it 
anticipates adjusting funding to begin paying out new dental hygienist awards starting in 
fiscal 2026. Therefore, making part-time awards under the program in fiscal 2026, in 
addition to the existing full-time awards (or in addition to expanding the existing awards 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 265/ Page 4 
to include dental hygienists), would require additional funding, though the exact amount 
of additional funding is dependent on the prorated amounts set by OSFA in collaboration 
with MDH. 
 
As the Maryland Dent-Care Program is a subprogram of the Janet L. Hoffman LARP; the 
number and mix of award recipients in future years will depend on overall funding for the 
program and decisions by MHEC on how to allocate dollars across those programs. The 
fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes approximately $4.1 million 
in funding for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP. Originally, $7.1 million was allocated for the 
program in fiscal 2025; however, the fiscal 2026 budget includes a $3.0 million reduction 
to the fiscal 2025 appropriation. To the extent additional funding is not available, part-time 
dentists and dental hygienists can be added to the program’s waiting list with existing 
resources. Alternatively, the Department of Legislative Services advises that, with the 
flexibility to make awards to part-time dentists and dental hygienists (in addition to or 
instead of full-time dentists and dental hygienists), the program may be able to more readily 
serve such practitioners within the existing funding parameters. 
 
MDH advises that its OOH is responsible for processing applications and making award 
determinations (even though funding is managed through MHEC OSFA). Currently, OOH 
has one full-time employee dedicated to processing Maryland Dent-Care LARP 
applications. OOH conducts extensive reviews of each applicant, which includes site visits 
at applicant dental practices. OOH typically receives more than 40 applications for the 
dentist and dental hygienist awards annually. Although an estimate of the number of 
part-time dentists and dental hygienists in the State is not feasible at this time, MDH 
advises that a significant increase in applications could necessitate additional staffing in 
the form of one part-time contractual employee beginning in fiscal 2026. However, this 
analysis assumes that the number of additional applicants for part-time awards is small and, 
therefore, manageable with the existing full-time employee. 
 
MHEC advises that upgrading its Maryland College Aid Processing System to properly 
calculate prorated scholarship amounts requires a one-time expenditure of approximately 
$6,000 in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 334 and HB 393 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 456 (Senators McKay and Augustine) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment and Finance. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 265/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2025 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5