START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 222 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Safety - Fuel Gas Piping Systems and Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing - 
Prohibitions and Study 
 
 
This bill prohibits the sale, transfer, or distribution of non-arc-resistant jacketed corrugated 
stainless steel tubing (CSST). A person who violates this prohibition is subject to a civil 
penalty of up to $1,000. In addition, the bill establishes a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for 
a violation of a provision of current law that prohibits the use of non-arc-resistant jacketed 
CSST in specified construction and piping systems. The bill also requires the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MD Labor) and the Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) to 
conduct a study and make recommendations related to preventing fire hazards associated 
with commonly used fuel gas piping systems, including gas piping and CSST, in residential 
and commercial buildings. Related reporting requirements are established. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by $102,000 in 
FY 2026 and by $22,100 in FY 2027 to complete the study and prepare the required reports. 
Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues due to the bill’s penalty provisions.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
102,000 
22,100 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($102,000) 
($22,100) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  It is assumed that affected local government entities can consult with 
MD Labor and OSFM in carrying out the study using existing resources. No effect on 
revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 222/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study and making recommendations, MD Labor and 
OSFM must (1) study and compare the fire hazard risks of different types of fuel gas piping 
systems, including gas piping and CSST; (2) study the likelihood of fuel gas piping 
systems, including gas piping and CSST, causing a fire in a residential or commercial 
building following a direct or indirect lightning strike; (3) analyze the effectiveness of 
existing standards and requirements in the State related to fuel gas piping systems, 
including gas piping and CSST, and identify areas for improvement; (4) analyze and 
identify the best practices for state and local legislative, regulatory, and building code 
standards for fuel gas piping systems, including gas piping and CSST; (5) identify potential 
legislative or regulatory changes in the State to prevent or minimize the fire hazards 
associated with fuel gas piping systems, including gas piping and CSST, specified 
provisions of the Public Safety Article, and provisions in the bill; (6) determine what 
industry standards or requirements are necessary to prevent or minimize the fire hazards 
associated with fuel gas piping systems, including gas piping and CSST; (7) determine 
what standards or requirements are necessary, if any, to address aggravating factors that 
may reasonably contribute to the failure or malfunctioning of fuel gas piping systems, 
including gas piping and CSST, and create a fire hazard, such as improper installation or 
grounding; (8) assess the prevalence of non-arc-resistant jacketed CSST in residential and 
commercial buildings and the fire hazards that this presents; and (9) assess the feasibility 
of implementing the standards and requirements identified in the study.  
 
In carrying out the study, MD Labor and OSFM must consult with (1) the State Fire 
Prevention Commission (SFPC); (2) local government entities responsible for residential 
or commercial gas fitting inspections; and (3) manufacturers of fuel gas piping systems and 
CSST.  
 
By December 1, 2025, MD Labor and OSFM must submit an interim report of their 
findings and recommendations to the Governor, the Senate Committee on Education, 
Energy, and the Environment, and the House Environment and Transportation Committee. 
A final report is due by September 1, 2026.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Natural Gas and Liquefied Propane Piping Systems in Construction 
 
Chapter 140 of 2022 established that, for any building using fuel gas piping systems not 
subject to Title 49, Part 192 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), non-arc-resistant 
jacketed CSST may not be used in (1) the new construction of a customer-owned natural 
gas or liquefied propane piping system in a building; (2) a natural gas or liquefied propane 
piping system in a renovated property if the renovation affects more than 50% of the total 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 222/ Page 3 
square footage of the property; or (3) a natural gas or liquefied propane piping system that 
requires the addition of a new gas line to the gas piping system. (The bill establishes a civil 
penalty for a violation of this prohibition.) 
 
Regulation of Gas Lines – Generally 
 
The Board of Plumbers within MD Labor incorporates by reference the 2018 International 
Fuel and Gas Code (IFGC) in regulation. Title 49, Part 192 of the CFR specifies the 
minimum federal safety standards for gas pipeline facilities and the transportation of 
natural and other gas by pipeline. Both the IFGC and federal regulations include standards 
for the installation and maintenance of gas piping systems. 
 
State Fire Prevention Code 
 
The State Fire Marshal must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among other things, 
the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of all kinds of equipment 
intended to control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also enforce 
regulations adopted by SFPC. SFPC within the Department of State Police must adopt 
comprehensive regulations as a State Fire Prevention Code. The commission adopted by 
reference, subject to some exceptions noted in the regulations, the NFPA 1 Fire Code 
(2018 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2018 Edition), and some requirements of 
the International Building Code as the State Fire Prevention Code. The State Fire 
Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the political subdivisions of the State, 
and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire Marshal, a legally designated fire 
official of a county or municipality of the State, or other persons legally appointed by the 
State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public Safety Article). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MD Labor and OSFM advise that they do not possess the expertise 
necessary to evaluate the fire hazard risks of different types of fuel gas piping systems. As 
a result, general fund expenditures increase by $101,983 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for 
a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date, and by $22,124 in 
fiscal 2027. This estimate reflects the cost of MD Labor hiring one contractual engineer 
with expertise in fuel gas piping systems to consult with specified entities, study the fire 
hazards associated with fuel gas piping systems (including gas piping and CSST), identify 
potential legislative or regulatory changes to prevent fire hazards associated with fuel gas 
piping systems, and prepare the required reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 222/ Page 4 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$88,398 
$20,855 
Operating Expenses 
    13,585 
      1,269 
Total State Expenditures 
$101,983 
$22,124 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
The estimate reflects termination of the contractual position on October 1, 2026, following 
the submission of the final report.  
 
This analysis assumes that MD Labor takes the lead on the study and that OSFM provides 
assistance with existing resources. 
 
General fund revenues may increase minimally due to the bill’s penalty provisions for cases 
heard in the District Court. 
 
Small Business Effect:  As the bill prohibits the sale, transfer, or distribution of 
non-arc-resistant jacketed CSST, any small business that sells, transfers, or distributes 
non-arc-resistant jacketed CSST in violation of the bill’s prohibition could be significantly 
affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 586 and HB 503 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 175 (Senators Lewis Young and Brooks) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland 
Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Interagency Commission on School Construction; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Public Service 
Commission; Maryland Stadium Authority; International Code Council; National Fire 
Protection Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 222/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 5, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5