START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

Chapter 215

(House Bill 258)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – West North Avenue Development Authority –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the administration and membership of the West North Avenue
Development Authority; specifying the powers and duties of the Authority, subject
to certain limitations; exempting the Authority from certain provisions of law;
requiring the Authority to take certain actions regarding the finances of the
Authority; exempting the Authority from certain taxation or assessments under
certain circumstances; establishing the West North Avenue Development Authority
Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; altering the termination date of the Authority;
and generally relating to the West North Avenue Development Authority.

BY repealing
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–703.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–702, 12–703, 12–704, 12–705, and 12–706
to be Section 12–703, 12–706, 12–707, 12–708, and 12–709, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–701
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–702, 12–704, 12–705, and 12–710 through 12–714
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–703 and 12–706
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 2 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)204. and 205.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)206.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 80 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 2

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 81 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 2

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 136 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023
Section 3

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 12–703.1 of Article – Economic Development of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 12–702, 12–703,
12–704, 12–705, and 12–706 of Article – Economic Development of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 12–703, 12–706, 12–707, 12–708, and 12–709,
respectively.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Economic Development

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

12–701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(B) “AUTHORITY” MEANS THE WEST NORTH AVENUE DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY.

(C) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AUTHORITY.

[(b)] (D) “Buffer zone” means the area within 250 yards of the target area.

[(c)] (E) “Target area” means the portion of West North Avenue in Baltimore
City between the 600 block and the 3200 block, inclusive.

(F) “WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR” INCLUDES THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA
CONSISTING OF THE TARGET AREA AND THE BUFFER ZONE.

12–702.

THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED TO ACCOMPLISH ITS
PURPOSES.

12–703.

(A) There is a West North Avenue Development Authority in Baltimore City.

(B) THE AUTHORITY IS A BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE AND IS AN
INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

(C) THE EXERCISE BY THE AUTHORITY OF A POWER UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
IS THE PERFORMANCE OF AN ESSENTIAL GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.

(D) THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE EACH YEAR IN THE STATE BUDGET BILL
AN APPROPRIATION TO THE WEST NORTH AVENUE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY IN
BALTIMORE CITY.

(E) BEGINNING FISCAL YEAR 2028, THE AUTHORITY SHALL BE
SELF–SUSTAINING.

12–704.

(A) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS THAT:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THERE EXISTS WITHIN VARIOUS NEIGHBORHOODS IN BALTIMORE
CITY, PARTICULARLY THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR, A NEED FOR
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT IN
FURTHERANCE OF THE PUBLIC’S INTEREST;

(2) THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR HAS EXPERIENCED LOW
HOUSING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE COMMUNITY FOR DECADES;

(3) AREAS IN THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR INCLUDE BOTH
AREAS THAT ARE CONSIDERED SLUM OR BLIGHTED AND AREAS THAT ARE
DETERIORATED OR SUBJECT TO FURTHER DETERIORATING CONDITION, AND THOSE
AREAS ARE IN NEED OF DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT FOR THE PUBLIC
BENEFIT;

(4) THE REVITALIZATION OF AREAS WITHIN THE WEST NORTH
AVENUE CORRIDOR NEEDING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT IS
AN ESSENTIAL GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION AND IS A PUBLIC USE THAT WILL CONFER
A PUBLIC BENEFIT ON CITIZENS OF BALTIMORE CITY BY:

(I) RELIEVING CONDITIONS OF UNEMPLOYMENT;

(II) ENCOURAGING THE INCREASE OF COMMERCE AND A
BALANCED ECONOMY;

(III) ASSISTING IN THE RETENTION OF BUSINESSES AND
RESIDENTS;

(IV) ATTRACTING NEW INDUSTRIES AND COMMERCE;

(V) PROMOTING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH; AND

(VI) GENERALLY PROMOTING THE HEALTH, WELFARE, AND
PUBLIC SAFETY OF RESIDENTS IN BALTIMORE CITY AND INCREASING PROPERTY
TAX REVENUES FOR THE STATE AND THE CITY OF BALTIMORE;

(5) THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THIS PUBLIC AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE
FINANCIAL RESOURCES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND ESTABLISHMENT OF
RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES THROUGH COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS IN THE
TARGET AREA WILL SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVE BALTIMORE CITY NEIGHBORHOODS
AND INCREASE PROPERTY TAX REVENUES FOR THE STATE AND THE CITY OF
BALTIMORE; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

(6) THE AUTHORITY IS THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
FOR THE STATE TO BENEFIT THE NEIGHBORHOODS OF BALTIMORE CITY WITHIN
THE TARGET AREA.

(B) THE LEGISLATIVE PURPOSES OF THE AUTHORITY ARE TO:

(1) REVIVE THE VARIOUS COMMUNITIES ALONG THE WEST NORTH
AVENUE CORRIDOR IN BALTIMORE CITY;

(2) PROMOTE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT;

(3) ENCOURAGE THE INCREASE OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY, COMMERCE,
AND A BALANCED ECONOMY IN BALTIMORE CITY;

(4) HELP TO RETAIN AND ATTRACT BUSINESS ACTIVITY AND
COMMERCE IN BALTIMORE CITY; AND

(5) PROMOTE THE HEALTH, PUBLIC SAFETY, RIGHT OF GAINFUL
EMPLOYMENT, AND WELFARE OF RESIDENTS OF BALTIMORE CITY.

(C) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY INTENDS THAT:

(1) THE AUTHORITY OPERATE AND EXERCISE ITS CORPORATE
POWERS ALONG THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR IN BALTIMORE CITY;

(2) WITHOUT LIMITING ITS AUTHORITY TO OTHERWISE EXERCISE ITS
POWERS, THE AUTHORITY EXERCISE ITS POWERS TO ASSIST PRIVATE REAL ESTATE
ENTITIES AND NONPROFIT COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS TO
DEVELOP AND REHABILITATE HOUSING AND COMMERCIAL UNITS IN BALTIMORE
CITY AND SUPPORT LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES TO CONTRIBUTE
TO THE EXPANSION, MODERNIZATION, AND RETENTION OF EXISTING ENTERPRISES
IN BALTIMORE CITY AS WELL AS THE ATTRACTION OF NEW BUSINESSES TO
BALTIMORE CITY; AND

(3) THE AUTHORITY SHOULD NOT OWN AND OPERATE A PROJECT
UNLESS:

(I) THE BOARD DETERMINES BY RESOLUTION THAT THE
PRIVATE SECTOR HAS NOT DEMONSTRATED SERIOUS AND SIGNIFICANT INTEREST
AND DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY TO OWN AND OPERATE THE PROJECT; OR

(II) A REPRESENTATIVE OF A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT REQUESTS
IN WRITING THAT THE AUTHORITY OWN AND OPERATE THE PROJECT.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

12–705.

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, IN
EXERCISING ITS POWERS, THE AUTHORITY:

(I) MAY CARRY OUT ITS PURPOSES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF
ANY STATE UNIT; AND

(II) IS NOT SUBJECT TO:

1. SUBTITLES 1 THROUGH 3 OF THIS TITLE; OR

2. THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS OF THE STATE
FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE:

A. TITLE 2, SUBTITLES 2 (GIFTS AND GRANTS) AND 5
(FACILITIES FOR THE HANDICAPPED);

B. TITLE 3 (BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT);

C. TITLE 4 (DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES);

D. TITLE 5A (DIVISION OF HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL
PROGRAMS);

E. TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 1 (STUDIES AND ESTIMATES);

F. TITLE 7, SUBTITLES 1 (STATE OPERATING BUDGET),
2 (DISBURSEMENTS AND EXPENDITURES), AND 3 (UNSPENT BALANCES);

G. TITLE 10 (BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS –
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS); OR

H. DIVISION II (GENERAL PROCUREMENT LAW).

(2) THE AUTHORITY IS SUBJECT TO:

(I) THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT; AND

(II) THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT.

(B) THE AUTHORITY, ITS OFFICERS, AND ITS EMPLOYEES ARE SUBJECT TO
THE PUBLIC ETHICS LAW.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

(C) THE AUTHORITY, ITS OFFICERS, AND ITS EMPLOYEES ARE SUBJECT TO
TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(D) THE AUTHORITY IS SUBJECT TO TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE STATE
FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

12–706.

(a) A BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL MANAGE THE AUTHORITY AND
EXERCISE ITS POWERS.

(B) The [Authority] BOARD consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland who represents the target area,
appointed by the President of the Senate;

(2) one member of the House of Delegates who represents the target area,
appointed by the Speaker of the House;

(3) the Secretary of Housing and Community Development, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Secretary of Transportation, or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary’s designee;

(6) the Executive Director of the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation, or the Executive Director’s designee;

(7) one member of the Baltimore City Council who represents the target
area, appointed by the President of the Baltimore City Council;

(8) one member appointed by the Mayor of Baltimore City;

(9) one member appointed by the Governor;

(10) the Director of the Baltimore Development Corporation, or the
Director’s designee;

(11) the Commissioner of the Baltimore City Department of Housing and
Community Development, or the Commissioner’s designee;

(12) the Director of the Baltimore City Department of Transportation, or the
Director’s designee;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(13) the Director of the Baltimore City Department of Planning, or the
Director’s designee;

(14) the President of Coppin State University, or the President’s designee;

(15) the President of the Maryland Institute College of Art, or the
President’s designee;

(16) two members appointed by the chair of the Authority, or the chair’s
designee; and

(17) two members who are residents of communities impacted by the target
area or buffer zone, WITH ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING THE NEIGHBORHOODS EAST
OF NORTH FULTON AVENUE AND ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING THE
NEIGHBORHOODS WEST OF NORTH FULTON AVENUE, selected by the majority vote of
the leadership of the following organizations:

(i) Alliance of Rosemont Community Associations;

(ii) Bolton Hill Community Association;

(iii) Coppin Heights Community Development Corporation;

(iv) Druid Heights Community Development Corporation;

(v) Greater Mondawmin Coordinating Council;

(vi) Penn North Community Association; and

(vii) collectively, the leadership of the Reservoir Hill Improvement
Council, the Reservoir Hill Association, and the Upper Eutaw Madison Neighborhood
Association.

[(b)] (C) The President of Coppin State University, or the President’s designee,
shall serve as the chair of the [Authority] BOARD.

12–710.

THE AUTHORITY MAY:

(1) ADOPT BYLAWS FOR THE CONDUCT OF ITS BUSINESS;

(2) ADOPT A SEAL;

(3) SUE OR BE SUED;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

(4) MAINTAIN AN OFFICE AT A PLACE IT DESIGNATES IN BALTIMORE
CITY;

(5) MAKE OR ACCEPT AND MANAGE LOANS, GRANTS, OR ASSISTANCE
OF ANY KIND FROM THE FEDERAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY, A CHARITABLE INSTITUTION, A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION, A FOR–PROFIT ORGANIZATION, OR A PRIVATE SOURCE;

(6) MAKE GRANTS TO INDIVIDUALS;

(7) ACQUIRE PROPERTIES IN BALTIMORE CITY, DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY, FROM A PERSON OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, TO IMPROVE, MANAGE,
MARKET, MAINTAIN, OR LEASE, FROM A PERSON OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION FOR
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT,
INCLUDING COMPREHENSIVE RENOVATION OR REHABILITATION OF THE LAND OR
PROPERTY ON TERMS THE AUTHORITY CONSIDERS REASONABLE TO OPERATE A
PROJECT IN BALTIMORE CITY, BY:

(I) PURCHASE;

(II) GIFT;

(III) INTEREST;

(IV) CONDEMNATION;

(V) EMINENT DOMAIN, EXCEPT FOR OWNER–OCCUPIED
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES;

(VI) TAX SALE;

(VII) FORECLOSURE;

(VIII) RECEIVERSHIP;

(IX) IN REM FORECLOSURE PROCEEDINGS;

(X) EASEMENT, OR ANY OTHER INTEREST IN LAND;

(XI) LEASE; AND

(XII) RENT;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(8) ACQUIRE, PURCHASE, HOLD, LEASE AS LESSEE, AND USE:

(I) A FRANCHISE, PATENT, OR LICENSE;

(II) ANY REAL, PERSONAL, MIXED, TANGIBLE, OR INTANGIBLE
PROPERTY; OR

(III) AN INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY LISTED IN THIS ITEM;

(9) FINANCE ALL OR PART OF THE ACQUISITION OR IMPROVEMENT OF
A PROJECT;

(10) SELL, LEASE AS LESSOR, TRANSFER, LICENSE, ASSIGN, OR
DISPOSE OF PROPERTY OR A PROPERTY INTEREST THAT THE AUTHORITY
ACQUIRES;

(11) FIX AND COLLECT RATES, RENTALS, FEES, ROYALTIES, AND
CHARGES FOR SERVICES AND RESOURCES THE AUTHORITY PROVIDES OR MAKES
AVAILABLE;

(12) ENTER INTO CONTRACTS WITH ANY FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AGENCY, A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT, A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY,
CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS, OR A PRIVATE ENTITY OR PARTY;

(13) EXERCISE POWER USUALLY POSSESSED BY A PRIVATE
CORPORATION IN PERFORMING SIMILAR FUNCTIONS UNLESS TO DO SO WOULD
CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW;

(14) WITH THE OWNER’S PERMISSION, ENTER LANDS OR PREMISES TO
MAKE A SURVEY, A SOUNDING, A BORING, OR AN EXAMINATION TO ACCOMPLISH THE
PURPOSE AUTHORIZED BY THIS SUBTITLE;

(15) CREATE, OWN, CONTROL, OR BE A MEMBER OF A CORPORATION,
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, PARTNERSHIP, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY;

(16) CREATE A SPECIAL DISTRICT BENEFIT FOR THE COMMERCIAL
BUSINESSES IN THE TARGET AREA;

(17) OPEN A BANK ACCOUNT WITH A NATIONAL OR LOCAL FEDERALLY
INSURED FINANCIAL INSTITUTION;

(18) SET SALARIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE JURISDICTION MARKET
RATE AND OUTSIDE THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSION SYSTEM;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

(19) CREATE A FORUM FOR STAKEHOLDERS TO COME TOGETHER ON
CREATING A 20–YEAR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AROUND ECONOMIC, HOUSING,
TRANSPORTATION, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND GREEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT WITHIN
THE TARGET ZONE;

(20) SERVE AS A CLEARINGHOUSE AND RESOURCE CENTER FOR
PROMOTING COORDINATION AND COMMUNICATION ON DEVELOPMENT
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR;

(21) ENSURE MONEY IS BEING SPENT EFFECTIVELY AND EFFICIENTLY
ON DEVELOPMENT AND THAT DEVELOPMENT IS HAPPENING IN THE APPROPRIATE
WAY FOR THE WEST NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR;

(22) PROVIDE ADVISORY SERVICES TO STATE AND BALTIMORE CITY
AGENCIES ON PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT FOR THE TARGET AREA;

(23) INITIATE, FUND, AND MONITOR FOR EFFICIENCY AND
EFFECTIVENESS ECONOMIC, HOUSING, TRANSPORTATION, NEIGHBORHOOD, AND
GREEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE TARGET AREA;

(24) MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE OPERATION AND USE
OF LAND, PROPERTY, AND UNDERTAKINGS UNDER THE AUTHORITY’S
JURISDICTION; AND

(25) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO CARRY OUT THE
POWERS EXPRESSLY GRANTED BY THIS SUBTITLE.

12–711.

(A) THE AUTHORITY SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM OF FINANCIAL
ACCOUNTING, CONTROLS, AUDITS, AND REPORTS.

(B) THE FISCAL YEAR OF THE AUTHORITY BEGINS ON JULY 1 AND ENDS ON
THE FOLLOWING JUNE 30.

12–712.

(A) THE AUTHORITY MAY CREATE AND ADMINISTER THE ACCOUNTS THAT
IT REQUIRES.

(B) THE AUTHORITY SHALL DEPOSIT ITS MONEY INTO A BALTIMORE CITY
OR NATIONAL BANK OR A FEDERALLY INSURED SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION
THAT HAS A TOTAL PAID–IN CAPITAL OF AT LEAST $1,000,000.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE AUTHORITY MAY DESIGNATE THE TRUST DEPARTMENT OF A
BALTIMORE CITY OR NATIONAL BANK OR SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION AS A
DEPOSITORY TO RECEIVE SECURITIES THAT THE AUTHORITY OWNS OR ACQUIRES.

12–713.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
AUTHORITY IS EXEMPT FROM TAXATION OR ASSESSMENTS ON ANY PART OF A
DEVELOPMENT OR PROJECT, THE AUTHORITY’S ACTIVITIES IN OPERATING AND
MAINTAINING A DEVELOPMENT OR PROJECT, AND REVENUES FROM A
DEVELOPMENT OR PROJECT.

(B) ANY PROPERTY THAT IS SOLD OR LEASED BY THE AUTHORITY TO A
PRIVATE ENTITY IS SUBJECT TO BALTIMORE CITY AND LOCAL REAL PROPERTY
TAXES FROM THE TIME OF SALE OR LEASE.

(C) THE AUTHORITY IS EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TRANSFER AND
RECORDATION TAX.

12–714.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE WEST NORTH AVENUE
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FUND.

(B) THERE IS A WEST NORTH AVENUE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDS FOR THE
AUTHORITY TO USE FOR CONSULTING FEES, SALARIES, AND ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENSES.

(D) THE AUTHORITY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 215

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR ADMINISTRATIVE PURPOSES AND TO
CARRY OUT THE FUNCTIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(H) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND IN
THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) 1. This subparagraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024
through 2028.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

204. the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund;
[and]

205. the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund; AND

206. THE WEST NORTH AVENUE DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY FUND.

Chapter 80 of the Acts of 2021

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2021. [It shall remain effective for a period of 5 8 years and, at the end of
September 30, 2026 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.]

Chapter 81 of the Acts of 2021

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 215 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2021. [It shall remain effective for a period of 5 8 years and, at the end of
September 30, 2026 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.]

Chapter 136 of the Acts of 2023

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has been
passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to each of
the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is enacted.
Section 1 of this Act shall remain effective until the taking effect of the termination provision
specified in Section 2 of Chapters 80 and 81 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021. If
that termination provision takes effect, Section 1 of this Act, with no further action required
by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect. This Act may
not be interpreted to have any effect on that termination provision. Section 2 of this Act shall
remain effective through September 30, [2026] 2029, and, at the end of September 30,
[2026] 2029, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before January 1, 2027,
the West North Avenue Development Authority shall report to the General Assembly, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the progress of the Authority
toward becoming self–sustaining in accordance with § 12–703 of the Economic
Development Article, as enacted by Section 3 of this Act.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted. This Act shall remain effective until the taking effect of the termination provision
specified in Section 2 of Chapters 80 and 81 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021. If
that termination provision takes effect, this Act, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect. This Act may not be
interpreted to have any effect on that termination provision.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14