START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 227 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 227 
(Delegates Adams and Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations and Associations - Electric Cooperatives - Nonescheat Capital 
Credits 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes that “nonescheat capital credits” held by an electric cooperative 
may not presumed to be abandoned property and (2) authorizes the use of nonescheat 
capital credits only for specified purposes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/special fund revenues may decrease to the extent that specified 
property is no longer presumed abandoned, as discussed below. Expenditures are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “nonescheat capital credits” as money (1) due to any past 
member of an electric cooperative in retirement of capital allocated on a patronage basis to 
the account of the past member for amounts received and receivable by the cooperative in 
excess of operating costs and expenses; (2) for which at least five years have passed since 
the credits were retired; and (3) that has not been claimed by the past member. 
 
An electric cooperative may use nonescheat capital credits only to (1) assist members of 
the cooperative pursuant to the powers granted to the cooperative under the applicable 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 227/ Page 2 
statute or (2) make donations to nonprofit, charitable organizations approved by the 
cooperative’s board of directors. 
 
The bill may not be construed as relieving an electric cooperative of the obligation to refund 
nonescheat capital credits on application of a past member. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Electric Cooperative – In General 
 
An electric cooperative is a cooperative, nonprofit, membership corporation organized 
under the Corporations and Associations Article for the purpose of supplying, promoting, 
and extending the use of electricity. If a person agrees to use electricity or other services 
supplied by the cooperative when the electricity or services are available through the 
cooperative’s facilities, the person may become a member of the cooperative. An electric 
cooperative has broad statutory powers to act on behalf of the corporation, including, 
among others, the power to distribute, sell, supply, and dispose of electricity to its members 
and to provide assistance to persons to whom the cooperative supplies or will supply 
electricity, as specified. 
 
Unless otherwise determined by a vote of the members of the electric cooperative, for each 
fiscal year, the revenues of a cooperative in excess of the amount necessary to provide for 
expenses, financing, working capital, and other purposes, as specified, must be allocated 
by the cooperative in the form of patronage credits to its members and other persons to 
whom the cooperative supplies electricity or provides other services. For each fiscal year, 
the patronage credits must be allocated to a member or other person in proportion to the 
patronage of the member or other person during the fiscal year. 
 
Abandoned Property 
 
Title 17 of the Commercial Law Article generally governs abandoned property in the State; 
the Comptroller is the administrator of abandoned property. Generally, property presumed 
abandoned includes (among numerous other items) any stock or other certificate of 
ownership, or any dividend, profit, distribution, interest, payment on principal, or other 
sum held by a business association for or to, among others, a shareholder or participating 
patron of a cooperative, three years after the later of the date (1) the holder is deemed to 
not have a valid address for the owner of the property or (2) the owner last communicated 
with the business association regarding the property, as statutorily specified. The running 
of the three-year period of abandonment ceases immediately upon the occurrence of 
conditions specified in statue. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 227/ Page 3 
Statute includes additional notice and procedural requirements. For example, a holder of 
presumed abandoned property valued at $100 or more is required to send written notice 
(by first-class mail) to the apparent owner of the presumed abandoned property, at the 
apparent owner’s last known address, informing the owner that the holder is in possession 
of the property and that the property will be considered abandoned unless the owner 
responds to the holder within 30 days after the notification. 
 
A person holding abandoned property must also file a report with the Comptroller including 
information on the nature of the property and the property’s presumed owner. The 
abandoned property specified in the report must be transferred to the Comptroller. The 
Comptroller is required to take specified actions, including those related to publication and 
the mailing of notice to apparent owners. 
 
In general, within one year of taking custody of abandoned personal property, the 
Comptroller must sell the property at auction (subject to limited exceptions, such as if the 
Comptroller has determined the property has no commercial value). A person who claims 
a legal interest in property delivered to the Comptroller must file a claim to the property or 
to the proceeds from its sale. For property sold at auction, if the Comptroller allows the 
claim, the Comptroller must pay the claimant an amount equal to the sales price. 
 
State Revenues:  As noted above, the Comptroller’s Office is generally required to sell 
property that has been deemed abandoned at auction after specified requirements have been 
satisfied. The bill removes nonescheat capital credits for members of an electric 
cooperative from the presumption of abandoned under current law provisions. Although 
the Department of Legislative Services is unable to quantify an exact impact on State 
finances, the bill may reduce revenues for the Unclaimed Property Fund. Because net 
proceeds from unclaimed property are distributed to the general fund (after administrative 
costs and certain required distributions are made), general fund revenues may also be 
impacted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 510 and HB 487 of 2024 and SB 956 and HB 1276 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 561 (Senators Hershey and Mautz) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 227/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4