START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 228 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Military) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Veterans Trust – Assistance to Members of the Maryland National 
Guard 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the purposes of the Maryland Veterans Trust to include 
providing monetary and other assistance to members of the Maryland National Guard 
(MDNG) and their families and authorizes the Maryland Veterans Trust to expend money 
from the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund (MVTF) to provide grants or loans to MDNG 
members and their families. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVTF nonbudgeted expenditures increase by an indeterminate but likely 
minimal amount beginning in FY 2026 to the extent that the Maryland Veterans Trust 
issues additional grants and loans. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Military Department has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 742 of 2009 established the Maryland Veterans Trust and MVTF 
to provide monetary and other assistance to veterans and their families and public and 
private programs that support veterans and their families. Generally, MVTF consists of 
(1) gifts and grants; (2) contributions from the sale of tickets from instant ticket lottery 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 228/ Page 2 
machines, donations from video lottery facility players, designated fees from specified 
special registration plates, and specified civil penalties related to persons providing 
veterans benefits and veterans benefits appeals services; and (3) the net proceeds from 
contributions under a State income tax checkoff. 
 
MVTF is maintained by the Maryland Veterans Trust, which is staffed by the Department 
of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF). Money in the fund may be used to provide 
grants and loans to veterans and their families, public and private programs that support 
veterans and their families, or any other programs that the trust considers to be within the 
purposes for which the trust is established. Money in the fund may also be invested as 
specified and used to pay the costs of administering the fund. Money expended from the 
fund is supplemental to and not intended to take the place of funding otherwise 
appropriated to DVMF. 
 
Background:  The Military Department advises that adding MDNG members and their 
families as potential recipients of assistance from the Maryland Veterans Trust is intended 
to better reflect Maryland’s military community and ensure that MDNG members serving 
the State have access to support during periods of temporary, nonemergency financial 
difficulties. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Veterans Trust is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization, 
so its funds are not reported as part of State fund balances. However, DVMF staffs the trust 
and processes grant and loan applications. Therefore, the department may experience a 
minimal operational impact to the extent that applications increase under the bill. 
 
As of January 2025, there are about 6,000 MDNG members and 321,000 veterans in 
Maryland. Accordingly, DVMF estimates that the bill may cause a 2% increase in grant 
and loan applications. Thus, nonbudgeted MVTF expenditures increase by an 
indeterminate but likely minimal amount beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent that the 
trust issues more grants and loans. 
 
As of December 31, 2024, the balance of MVTF was $621,332. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 246 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Military) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 228/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; Military 
Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 228/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Veterans Trust - Assistance to Members of the Maryland 
National Guard 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 228 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Dr. Tony Campbell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The proposed bill will have NO economic impact on Maryland Small Businesses 
 

END OF PAGE 4