START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 230 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 230 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - State Ethics Commission) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law - Training and Financial Disclosure Requirements - 
Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill clarifies that required financial disclosure statements by officials 
and candidates for office as State officials include the name and address of any source of 
compensated employment. The bill removes the requirement that ethics training courses 
for specified officials and registered lobbyists provided by the State Ethics Commission 
(SEC) be at least two hours and clarifies that training courses can be given as online training 
or in-person presentations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. SEC can implement the bill with existing budgetary resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal. The bill may require changes to the financial disclosure provisions 
of some local ethics laws. 
 
Small Business Effect:  SEC has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small businesses (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law sets out requirements, prohibitions, and procedures that 
affect officials in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of government for the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 230/ Page 2 
purpose of maintaining people’s trust in government and protecting against the improper 
influence and the appearance of improper influence of government. The Maryland Public 
Ethics Law is administered by SEC with the Joint Committee on Legislative Ethics and the 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities. 
 
Ethics Training 
 
Among other responsibilities, SEC must provide a training course of at least two hours on 
the Maryland Public Ethics Laws to an individual who fills a vacancy in or serves in a 
position that has been identified as a public official position, among other individuals. 
“Public official,” as it applies to the Ethics Law, means an individual determined to be a 
public official under § 5-103 of the General Provisions Article and includes specified 
individuals in the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches. SEC must also provide a 
training course for an individual who, on or after January 19, 2023, is a State official subject 
to the jurisdiction of SEC (“State official,” as defined under current law, includes a 
constitutional officer or officer-elect in an executive unit, among others). SEC must also 
provide ethics training to lobbyists, as specified. 
 
Financial Disclosure Statements 
 
Under current law, public officials, State officials, and candidates for office as a 
State official must file financial disclosure statements with SEC. Statements generally must 
disclose (1) interests in real property; (2) interests in corporations and partnerships; 
(3) interests in and employment by business entities doing business with the State; (4) debts 
owed to entities doing business with or regulated by an individual’s governmental unit; 
(5) family members employed by the State; (6) sources of earned income; and (7) gifts, as 
specified. A filer must disclose an interest held by (1) a spouse or child of an individual, if 
the interest was controlled, directly or indirectly, by the individual at any time during the 
applicable period; (2) a business entity in which the individual held a 10% or greater 
interest at any time during the applicable period; or (3) a trust or estate in which, at any 
time during the applicable period, the individual held a reversionary interest, was a 
beneficiary, or was a settlor, if a revocable trust. 
 
Background:  SEC advises that current law is not specific enough as it relates to 
compensated employment disclosures on the required financial disclosure statements. 
Because of this, SEC advises current disclosure statements may not account for all potential 
conflicts of interest. The new disclosure requirements under the bill would reflect current 
forms of outside employment held by State employees and officials that might not 
otherwise be included in financial disclosure statements.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 230/ Page 3 
Additionally, the bill allows SEC greater flexibility in the format and duration of ethics 
trainings while maintaining content requirements.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 251 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Ethics Commission) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 230/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Public Ethics Law - Training and Financial Disclosure 
Requirements - Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 230 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jennifer Allgair, Executive Director 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
         WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4