START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 259 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 259 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- State Police) and Delegate Conaway 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Statewide DNA Database System, DNA Collection, and Penalties - 
Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) alters the circumstances in which a DNA sample must be 
collected and stored in the statewide DNA database system within the Department of State 
Police (DSP) Crime Laboratory; (2) alters the individuals required to collect DNA samples 
and the process for collection of DNA samples from registered sex offenders; and  
(3) clarifies when a DNA sample may be tested, placed in the statewide DNA database 
system, or destroyed and expunged. The bill also requires the releasing entity, before 
releasing an individual from custody, to ensure that the individual’s required DNA sample 
has been collected in accordance with § 2-504 of the Public Safety Article, as altered by 
the bill. In addition, the bill (1) prohibits an individual from refusing to provide a DNA 
sample as required; (2) discharges an employee from the duty to collect a DNA sample 
when an individual refuses to submit a DNA sample, as specified; and (3) establishes 
penalties for violations of the prohibition against refusal. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. The bill’s changes 
are expected to be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  While most local jurisdictions can likely implement the bill with existing 
resources, at least one county reports the potential for increased expenditures, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DSP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 259/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Collection of DNA Sample 
 
For each individual convicted of a felony, fourth-degree burglary, or breaking and entering 
a vehicle and sentenced to imprisonment, each required DNA sample must be collected by 
an employee of the correctional facility at the time of intake to the correctional facility 
where the individual is confined. 
 
For an individual required to register as a sex offender under § 11-704 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article, each required DNA sample must be collected at the time of registration 
as a sex offender by the supervising authority where the individual is initially required to 
register, if applicable. 
 
Each required DNA sample must be collected (1) by an individual who is designated by 
the Director of the DSP Crime Laboratory and trained in the collection procedures that the 
Crime Laboratory uses and (2) at the time the individual is charged, by an employee of a 
booking facility or the arresting agency. Collection must also be done in accordance with 
adopted regulations. 
 
Before releasing an individual from custody, the custodial agency or correctional facility 
must ensure that the individual’s DNA sample has been collected in accordance with  
§ 2-504 of the Public Safety Article, as altered by the bill. 
 
Testing of DNA Sample 
 
A DNA sample collected from an individual charged with a “crime of violence” or burglary 
or an attempt to commit those crimes may only be tested or placed in the statewide DNA 
database system if (1) a determination is made by a judge or commissioner of the 
District Court or a judge of the circuit court, based on an application for a statement of 
charges filed by a police officer or a State’s Attorney, that probable cause exists for a 
qualifying crime in accordance with the Maryland Rules; (2) the individual has been 
arrested for a qualifying crime in accordance with an arrest warrant based on an application 
for a statement of charges filed by a police officer or a State’s Attorney; (3) an information 
is filed by a State’s Attorney for a qualifying crime, as specified; (4) an indictment is 
returned by a grand jury charging the individual with a qualifying crime; or (5) requested 
or consented to by the individual, as specified. 
 
An individual may request or consent to have the individual’s DNA sample processed prior 
to a probable cause determination for the sole purpose of having the sample checked 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 259/ Page 3 
against a sample that has been processed from the crime scene or the hospital and is related 
to the charges against the individual. 
 
Destruction or Expungement of DNA Sample 
 
With specified exceptions, an individual’s DNA samples and records collected from an 
individual charged with a “crime of violence” or burglary or an attempt to commit those 
crimes must be destroyed and expunged automatically from the statewide DNA database 
system if (1) a criminal action begun against the individual relating to the crime does not 
result in a conviction of the individual; (2) the conviction is finally reversed or vacated and 
no new trial is permitted; or (3) the individual is granted an unconditional pardon. In 
addition, with specified exceptions, a DNA sample collected, but not tested, from an 
individual charged with a “crime of violence” or burglary or an attempt to commit those 
crimes must be destroyed and expunged if at least two years have passed from the date of 
collection of the DNA sample and the DNA sample failed to meet the requirements for 
testing. 
 
A DNA sample or DNA record may not be destroyed or expunged automatically from the 
statewide database system if (1) the criminal action is put on the stet docket; (2) the 
individual receives probation before judgment; or (3) the trial for a qualifying “crime of 
violence” or burglary or an attempt to commit those crimes remains pending for any reason. 
 
Written notice documenting expungement of the DNA record and destruction of the DNA 
sample must, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Director of the DSP Crime 
Laboratory, be sent to the defendant and the defendant’s attorney, as specified. 
 
The Director must adopt regulations to comply with the above provisions. 
 
For any DNA sample collected from an individual who is charged with a “crime of 
violence” or burglary or an attempt to commit those crimes before October 1, 2025 (the 
bill’s effective date), the Forensic Sciences Division in DSP must, by October 1, 2028, 
destroy and expunge the record of any DNA sample that has not been tested or placed in 
the statewide DNA database system by November 1, 2027, because the DNA sample failed 
to meet the requirements of Title 2, Subtitle 5 of the Public Safety Article, as that subtitle 
existed before October 1, 2025. 
 
Prohibitions 
 
An individual may not refuse to provide a DNA sample in accordance with § 2-504 of the 
Public Safety Article, as altered by the bill. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, and on 
conviction is subject to a maximum fine of $1,000. A refusal to submit a required 
DNA sample must be referred to the State’s Attorney’s Office for prosecution. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 259/ Page 4 
An employee’s duty to collect a DNA sample in accordance with § 2-504 of the Public 
Safety Article, as altered by the bill, is deemed to be discharged if the employee attempts 
to collect the required DNA sample but is unable to collect the sample because the 
individual who is required to submit the sample refuses to do so. 
 
Current Law:   
 
DNA Database  
 
The statewide DNA database system consists of DNA samples collected from individuals 
convicted of a felony, fourth-degree burglary, or breaking and entering a vehicle. DNA 
samples for individuals charged with a “crime of violence” or burglary or an attempt to 
commit those crimes are also included within the statewide database. 
 
The DSP Crime Laboratory is required to store and maintain each DNA identification 
record in the statewide DNA database. 
 
Matches between evidence samples and database entries may only be used as probable 
cause and are not admissible at trial unless confirmed by additional testing. 
 
Collection of DNA Sample 
 
In accordance with adopted regulations, each DNA sample required to be collected must 
be collected: 
 
 
at the time the individual is charged, at a facility specified by the Secretary of State 
Police; 
 
at the correctional facility where the individual is confined, as specified; 
 
at a facility specified by the Director of the DSP Crime Laboratory, if the individual 
is on probation or is not sentenced to a term of imprisonment; or 
 
at a suitable location in a circuit court following the imposition of sentence. 
 
A DNA sample must be collected by an individual who is designated by the Director of the 
DSP Crime Laboratory and trained in the collection procedures that the Crime Laboratory 
uses. 
 
Testing of DNA Sample 
 
A DNA sample collected from an individual charged with a “crime of violence” or burglary 
or an attempt to commit those crimes may not be tested or placed in the statewide DNA 
database system prior to the first scheduled arraignment date unless requested or consented 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 259/ Page 5 
to by the individual, as specified. An individual may request or consent to have the 
individual’s DNA sample processed prior to arraignment for the sole purpose of having the 
sample checked against a sample that has been processed from the crime scene or the 
hospital and is related to the charges against the individual. 
 
If all qualifying criminal charges are determined to be unsupported by probable cause, the 
DNA sample must be immediately destroyed, and notice must be sent to the defendant and 
counsel of record for the defendant that the sample was destroyed. A second DNA sample 
must be taken if needed to obtain sufficient DNA for the statewide DNA database system 
or if ordered by the court for good cause shown. 
 
Violation of Probation 
 
Failure of an individual who is not sentenced to a term of imprisonment to provide a DNA 
sample within 90 days after notice by the Director of the DSP Crime Laboratory is a 
violation of probation. 
 
Prohibitions 
 
A person is prohibited from performing a search of the statewide DNA database for the 
purpose of the identification of an offender in connection with a crime for which the 
offender may be a biological relative of the individual from whom the DNA sample was 
acquired. 
 
A person may not willfully test a DNA sample for information that does not relate to the 
authorized identification of an individual, as specified. A violation is punishable by up to 
five years imprisonment and/or a $5,000 fine. In addition, a person is prohibited from 
willfully failing to destroy a DNA sample for which notification has been sent stating that 
the DNA sample has been destroyed or for which destruction has been ordered. Violators 
are subject to imprisonment for up to one year or a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
Definition 
 
“Crime of violence” has the meaning stated in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article; 
however, for purposes of provisions relating to the statewide DNA Database system, does 
not include mayhem. Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of 
violence” as (1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, 
except involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; 
(9) robbery; (10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree 
sexual offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other “crime of 
violence”, except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; 
(13) child abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 259/ Page 6 
circumstances; (15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; 
(17) an attempt to commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual 
conduct with a child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, 
rape, rob, or commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
Background:  According to the 2023 DSP Forensic Sciences Division Statewide DNA 
Database Annual Report, released in April 2024, in calendar 2023, the division collected 
7,993 samples from individuals arrested and charged with qualifying crimes. In the same 
year, a total of 3,566 DNA profiles from arrested and charged individuals were uploaded 
to the Combined DNA Index System and searched. There were 162 matches to arrested 
and charged DNA profiles reported to law enforcement in calendar 2023. 
 
DSP advises that currently, the DSP Crime Laboratory has a backlog of approximately 
16,000 arrestee DNA samples that have not been tested because it is often unclear to the 
laboratory when an individual’s arraignment date occurs. A DNA sample may not be tested 
until the defendant’s first scheduled arraignment date; however, arraignment is not defined 
in Maryland law and is not recognized by the courts. DSP advises that in many cases, the 
Office of the Attorney General must be consulted before a sample is allowed to be tested 
or expunged. 
 
Local Expenditures:  While most local jurisdictions can likely comply with the bill’s 
changes using existing resources, at least one county reports the potential for increased 
expenditures. Based on a limited survey of local governments, the following information 
was gleaned regarding the anticipated costs to implement the bill: 
 
 
Baltimore City, the City of Annapolis, and Calvert and Prince George’s counties 
report that they can each handle the altered DNA collection and testing requirements 
with existing resources; 
 
the Maryland Association of Counties advises that the bill does not have a 
significant impact on local government finances or operations; and 
 
Montgomery County advises that the three correctional facilities within the county 
require additional staff to facilitate the collection and testing of DNA samples under 
the bill, at an annual cost of approximately $200,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 249 of 2024 and SB 967 of 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 259/ Page 7 
Designated Cross File:  SB 202 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 17, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 259/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Public Safety - Statewide DNA Database System, DNA Collection and 
Penalties - Alterations 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB 259 
PREPARED BY:  
Thomas Williams  
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING  
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
XX  
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
BUSINESS  
OR  
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES  
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS  
The legislation will not have any impact on small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8