START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 243 
Department of Legislative Services 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 243 
(Delegate Boyce) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Adoption of an Adult 
 
 
This bill establishes that specified provisions of law regarding adoptions – including those 
requiring the issuance and service of a show cause order on a prospective adoptee’s parents 
and for a petitioner’s spouse to join in the petition for adoption (subject to limited 
exception) – do not apply if the prospective adoptee is an adult. The bill also (1) specifies 
that a court may order – only on a showing of good cause – specified investigations prior 
to ruling on an adoption petition if the prospective adoptee is an adult; (2) establishes that 
parental consent to an adoption is not required if the prospective adoptee is an adult; and 
(3) authorizes, but does not require, a petitioner’s spouse to join the petition for adoption 
if the adoptee is an adult. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In an independent adoption case, if a petitioner is married, the petitioner’s 
spouse must join in the petition, subject to limited exceptions (e.g., the spouse is separated 
from the petitioner under certain circumstances, etc.). A court must issue a show cause 
order that includes advice as to the parent’s rights to have independent counsel and receive 
adoption counseling and guidance. This provision does not apply to an adoption by a 
spouse of the prospective adoptee’s parent or a relative of the prospective adoptee. Service 
of the order must be in accordance with statutory guidelines. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 243/ Page 2 
Subject to limited exception, before ruling on a consensual adoption petition, a court may 
order a court investigator or child placement agency to conduct any investigation that the 
court considers necessary. For a nonconsensual adoption petition, the court must order a 
court investigator or child placement agency to investigate and submit a report that 
summarizes specified information, including the prospective adoptee’s emotional ties with 
and feelings toward the prospective adoptee’s parents. 
 
A court may enter an order for adoption only if: 
 
 
each of the prospective adoptee’s living parents consents in writing or by failure to 
timely file notice of objection after being served with a show cause order; an 
administrative, executive, or judicial body of a state or other jurisdiction has granted 
a governmental unit or person other than a parent the power to consent to adoption 
and the unit or person consents; or parental rights have been terminated in 
compliance with the laws of a state or other jurisdiction, and, if the prospective 
adoptee is at least age 10, the prospective adoptee consents; or 
 
the court orders adoption without consent as allowed by statute (circumstances when 
a parent affirmatively withholds consent by filing a notice of objection). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 214 of 2024 and HB 1117 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2