START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 241 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 241 
(Delegate Simpson) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Marriage - Confidential Communication 
 
 
This bill establishes that a spouse, who is the alleged victim, is competent to disclose a 
confidential communication between spouses occurring during their marriage in a criminal 
action in which one spouse is charged with a crime against the other spouse. However, a 
spouse may not be compelled to testify to a confidential communication under these 
circumstances. The bill specifies that under § 9-105 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article, “spouse” includes a former spouse.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is procedural and is not anticipated to materially affect State finances 
or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is procedural and is not anticipated to materially affect local 
government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the marital communications privilege (§ 9‐105 of the Courts and 
Judicial Proceedings Article), one spouse is not competent to disclose any confidential 
communication between the spouses occurring during their marriage.  
 
This privilege does not render the spouse-witness incompetent but is rather a privilege that 
the spouse who made the confidential communication can exercise or waive to preclude 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 241/ Page 2 
the person’s spouse from disclosing the communication through testimony. See 
Brown v. State, 359 Md. 180 (2000). The presumption that marital communications are 
confidential is rebuttable. Maryland courts have ruled that the presumption can be rebutted 
if it can be shown that a communication was not intended to remain confidential, was made 
to a third party, or was made in the presence of a third party. See Coleman v. State, 
281 Md. 538 (1977). The marital communications privilege applies so long as the spouses 
were in a valid marriage at the time the communication was made, even if the spouses are 
no longer married at trial. This privilege also applies if the communication was made in 
furtherance of a crime. Id. The privilege does not apply when the confidential 
communication “constitutes a threat or crime against the other spouse.” Harris v. State, 
37 Md. App. 180, 184 (1977). However, in Coleman, a case decided after the decision by 
the Court of Special Appeals (now the Appellate Court of Maryland) in Harris, the 
Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) determined that no express 
exceptions exist.  
 
State v. Enriquez, 327 Md. 365 (1992), concerned a husband who was convicted of 
committing battery and sexual offenses against his wife. Before trial and during trial, the 
husband moved to preclude the State from offering evidence of marital communications. 
The trial court allowed the wife/victim’s testimony after determining that the privilege 
under § 9-105 does not apply where one spouse is the victim of a crime allegedly 
perpetrated by the other spouse. On appeal, the State argued that there is an exception under 
§ 9-105 for prosecutions of one spouse for crimes committed against the other spouse. The 
State supported its arguments by citing the Harris decision, legal treatises, cases from other 
jurisdictions, common law principles, legislative history, and public policy. The Court of 
Appeals affirmed the intermediate court’s decision that the admission of testimony 
regarding a telephone conversation between the spouses violated the statutory marital 
communications privilege. The Court of Appeals noted that the legislature did not add any 
express exceptions to the statute since the Coleman decision and determined that because 
the legislature did not subsequently amend the statute, the court’s interpretation of § 9-105 
under Coleman should continue to apply.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 406 of 2024 and HB 1418 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 142 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 241/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3