START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 390 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 390 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Environment and 
Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Affordable Housing Payment In Lieu of Taxes Expansion Act 
 
 
This bill authorizes county governments to exempt real property used for rental housing 
from the county property tax if the property owner maintains at least 25% of the rental 
housing units as affordable dwelling units and enters into a payment in lieu of taxes 
(PILOT) agreement with the county government. The PILOT agreement must require the 
property owner to maintain at least 25% of the rental housing units as affordable dwelling 
units for a period of at least 15 years. However, a county may require the owner of 
real property to maintain a higher percentage of rental housing units as affordable housing. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent that certain rental properties are exempt from real property taxes. The amount of any 
decrease depends on the number of eligible rental housing units and the assessed value of 
each affected property. Any decrease in county property tax revenues will be mitigated by 
negotiated PILOT agreements between the county government and property owners. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A PILOT is an agreement between a jurisdiction and a developer, business, 
or landowner that substitutes a negotiated payment for annual real estate taxes that are 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 390/ Page 2 
traditionally due on a property. The Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority provides 
an overview on each county government’s statutory authority to impose local taxes and 
establish tax credits and exemptions, including PILOTs. 
 
Affordable Housing Designation 
 
An affordable dwelling unit is defined as a dwelling unit that is affordable to households 
earning 60% or less of the area median income. Area median income is defined as the 
median household income for the area adjusted for household size as published and 
annually updated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Affordable 
means that housing costs do not exceed 30% of a household’s income. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 
to the extent that certain rental housing designated as affordable dwelling units is exempt 
from real property taxes. Any decrease in county property tax revenues will be mitigated 
by negotiated PILOT agreements between the county government and property owners. 
 
The property tax is one of the leading revenue sources for county governments, accounting 
for 24.2% of total local revenues in fiscal 2023. In fiscal 2025, county governments are 
projected to collect approximately $10.8 billion in property tax revenues, which represents 
a $1.0 billion increase over a two-year period. Additional information on local property tax 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the report is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 327 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; Maryland Association 
of Counties; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 390/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3