START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 376 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations Committee) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Cybersecurity Council - Alterations 
 
 
This bill modifies the membership, organization, and duties of the Maryland Cybersecurity 
Council (MCC). The bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly that MCC review 
and adjust its subcommittee structure, if necessary, and implement appropriate bylaws of 
operation consistent with State law by December 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Reimbursements for additional MCC members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill modifies MCC’s membership and organizational structure by: 
 
 
adding numerous additional members to MCC; 
 
modifying how many representatives with specified backgrounds must be included 
as members of MCC; and 
 
requiring, beginning October 1, 2025, and every two years thereafter, the council to 
elect a chair and vice chair from among the members of the council and specifying 
that one must be a State employee, and one must be a non-State employee. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 376/ Page 2 
The bill expands MCC’s duties and responsibilities by requiring it to: 
 
 
work with nonprofits in the execution of its duties; 
 
assess and address cybersecurity threats and associated risks from artificial 
intelligence (AI) and quantum computing in the execution of its duties; 
 
consider all critical infrastructure in the execution of its duties, instead of only 
critical infrastructure that is not covered by federal law or a specified 
executive order; 
 
address sensitive privacy interests of State residents related to cybersecurity and 
associated risks; and 
 
address emerging threats posed by AI, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  MCC must work with the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), as well as other federal agencies, private-sector businesses, and private 
cybersecurity experts to address State cybersecurity issues. The council’s responsibilities 
include (1) assisting specified infrastructure entities in complying with federal 
cybersecurity guidance; (2) examining inconsistencies between State and federal 
cybersecurity laws; (3) assisting private-sector cybersecurity businesses in adopting, 
adapting, and implementing the NIST cybersecurity framework of standards and practices; 
and (4) recommending legislative changes to address cybersecurity issues. 
 
MCC is chaired by the Attorney General’s designee, is staffed by the University of 
Maryland Global Campus, and consists of various representatives from State agencies, 
members of the General Assembly, and members appointed by the Attorney General. 
Additionally, the Attorney General must invite, as appropriate, representatives from 
specified federal agencies to serve on the council. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced withing the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 294 (Senator Feldman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Governor’s Office; 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Office of the Attorney General; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 376/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 10, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3