START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 345 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 345 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Interstate Social Work Licensure Compact 
 
 
This bill enters Maryland into the Interstate Social Work Licensure Compact. The bill 
establishes (1) specified procedures and requirements for a social worker to practice under 
a “multistate license” in a member state; (2) the composition, powers, and responsibilities 
of the Social Work Licensure Compact Commission; and (3) requirements related to the 
oversight, dispute resolution, and enforcement of the compact. The bill is contingent on 
similar legislation being enacted in six other states.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the State Board of Social Work Examiners 
(BSWE) increase by $73,900 in FY 2026 to hire an administrator. Future year expenditures 
reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Any impact on BSWE special fund revenues is 
indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
SF Expenditure 
$73,900 
$86,900 
$90,800 
$94,900 
$98,900 
Net Effect 
($73,900) 
($86,900) 
($90,800) 
($94,900) 
($98,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 345/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the purpose of the compact is to facilitate interstate practice of 
regulated social workers by improving public access to competent social work services and 
to preserve the regulatory authority of states to protect public health and safety through the 
current system of state licensure.  
 
The compact is designed to (1) increase public health access to social workers; (2) reduce 
overly burdensome and duplicative requirements associated with holding multiple licenses; 
(3) enhance the member states’ ability to protect the public’s health and safety; 
(4) encourage the cooperation of member states in regulating multistate practice; 
(5) promote mobility and address workforce shortages by eliminating the necessity for 
licenses in multiple states; (6) support military families; (7) facilitate the exchange of 
licensure and disciplinary information among member states; (8) authorize all member 
states to hold a regulated social worker accountable for abiding by a member state’s laws, 
regulations, and applicable professional standards in the member state in which the client 
is located at the time care is rendered; and (9) allow the use of telehealth to facilitate 
increased access to regulated social worker services.  
 
Participation in the Compact 
 
To be eligible to participate in the compact, a potential member state must:   
 
 
license and regulate social work at either the clinical, master’s, or bachelor’s 
category; 
 
require that applicants graduate from specified programs; 
 
require that applicants for clinical licensure complete supervised practice; and 
 
have a mechanism in place for receiving, investigating, and adjudicating complaints 
about licensees.  
 
To maintain membership in the compact, a member state must:   
 
 
require that applicants for a multistate license pass a qualifying national exam and 
obtain or retain a license in their home state and meet all applicable home state laws;  
 
participate fully in the commission’s data system;  
 
notify the commission of any adverse action or the availability of current significant 
investigative information regarding a licensee;  
 
implement procedures for considering the criminal history of applicants;  
 
comply with the rules of the commission;  
 
authorize a licensee holding a multistate license in any member state to practice in 
accordance with the terms of the compact and rules of the commission; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 345/ Page 3 
 
designate a delegate to participate in commission meetings.  
 
Member states must designate the categories of social work licensure that are eligible for 
issuance of a multistate license. If any member state does not meet the requirements for 
participation in the compact in any category of social work licensure, the member state 
may choose to issue a multistate license to applicants that otherwise meet the requirements 
for the multistate license.  
 
A home state may charge a fee for granting the multistate license.  
 
Multistate License Privilege 
 
“Multistate license” means a license to practice as a regulated social worker issued by a 
home state licensing authority that authorizes the regulated social worker to practice in all 
member states under multistate authorization to practice. “Multistate authorization to 
practice” means a legally authorized privilege to practice, which is equivalent to a license, 
associated with a multistate license permitting the practice of social work in a remote state.  
 
To be eligible for a multistate license, an applicant must, among other requirements, 
(1) hold or be eligible for an active, unencumbered license in the home state; (2) pay 
applicable fees; (3) complete a specified criminal history records check; (4) notify the home 
state of any adverse action, encumbrance, or restriction on any professional license taken 
within 30 days from the date the action is taken; (5) meet any continuing competence 
requirements established by the home state; and (6) abide by the laws, regulations, and 
applicable standards in the member state where the client is located at the time care is 
rendered.  
 
To be eligible for a multistate license in a specific category of social work licensure 
(clinical, master’s, or bachelor’s), an applicant must fulfill specified competency 
requirements and attain the appropriate degree in social work. Clinical-category multistate 
license applicants must also fulfill a specified practice requirement.  
 
A regulated social worker practicing in a remote state is subject to that state’s regulatory 
authority. A remote state may, in accordance with due process and that state’s laws, remove 
a regulated social worker’s multistate authorization to practice, impose fines, or take any 
other necessary action to protect health and safety.  
 
Changing Home State License 
 
A social worker may hold a multistate license, issued by their home state, in only 
one member state at a time. The bill establishes a process by which a social worker may 
change their home state when moving between two compact states.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 345/ Page 4 
Adverse Actions 
 
The bill establishes processes for imposing adverse actions and allows remote states to 
investigate and take adverse action against a social worker’s multistate authorization to 
practice. The home state has sole power to take adverse action against a social worker’s 
multistate license. In the event of an adverse action by a social worker’s home state, that 
social worker’s multistate authorization to practice must be deactivated until all 
encumbrances have been removed from the social worker’s multistate license.  
 
Social Work Licensure Compact Commission 
 
The commission is an instrumentality of the compact states. The delegate from each 
member state must be selected by the state’s licensing authority. The commission must 
meet at least once during each calendar year and must, among other actions:   
 
 
establish and amend rules and bylaws;  
 
maintain financial records and conduct an annual financial review;  
 
assess and collect fees;  
 
take actions consistent with the provisions of the compact and the commission’s 
rules and bylaws;  
 
initiate and conclude legal proceedings or actions;  
 
appoint committees, including an executive committee;  
 
adopt and provide an annual report;  
 
establish a budget and make expenditures; and 
 
perform such other functions as may be necessary or appropriate to achieve the 
purposes of the compact.  
 
The commission may levy a fee on and collect an annual assessment from each member 
state and impose fees on multistate licensees to cover the cost of the operations and 
activities of the commission and its staff.  
 
Coordinated Data System 
 
The commission must provide for the development, maintenance, operation, and utilization 
of a coordinated data system. All member states must participate in the commission’s data 
system and submit a uniform data set on all social workers with a multistate license, 
including (1) identifying information; (2) licensure data; (3) adverse actions against a 
license and related information; (4) nonconfidential information related to alternative 
program participation; (5) any denial of application for licensure; (6) the presence of 
current significant investigative information; and (7) other information that may facilitate 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 345/ Page 5 
the administration of the compact. A member state may designate information that may not 
be shared with the public without the express permission of the contributing state.  
 
Oversight, Dispute Resolution, and Enforcement 
 
Each member state must enforce the compact and take all actions necessary and appropriate 
to implement the compact. If the commission determines that a member state has defaulted 
in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities under the compact, the commission 
must (1) provide a written notice to the defaulting state and other member states that 
describes the default, proposed means of curing the default, and any other action that the 
commission may take and (2) offer training and specific technical assistance regarding the 
default. If a member state fails to cure the default, the defaulting state may be terminated 
from the compact upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the member states.  
 
Construction and Severability 
 
The compact and the commission’s rulemaking authority must be liberally construed to 
effectuate the purposes and the implementation and administration of the compact. The 
provisions of the compact must be severable. If the compact is held to be contrary to the 
constitution of any member state, the compact must remain in full force and effect as to the 
remaining member states and in full force and effect as to the member state affect for all 
severable matters. The commission may deny a state’s participation or terminate a member 
state’s participation in the compact if the commission determines that a constitutional 
requirement of a member state is a material departure from the compact.  
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by BSWE to practice social work 
in Maryland. In general, to obtain a license, an applicant must (1) submit a written 
application on a board-prescribed form; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) be of good moral 
character; (4) successfully pass required examinations pertinent to the license sought; 
(5) pay any applicable fees; (6) complete a criminal history records check; and (7) if 
required, complete a mental or physical examination by a board-appointed health care 
practitioner. Each license expires every two years, after which the licensee must pay a 
renewal fee, submit a renewal application, submit satisfactory evidence of compliance with 
any continuing education requirements, and otherwise be entitled to be licensed.  
 
Categories of Social Work Licensure 
 
A licensed bachelor social worker (LBSW) must have a bachelor’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program. A licensed master social worker (LMSW) must 
have, or be a candidate for, a master’s degree in social work from an accredited social work 
program. Generally, an LBSW or an LMSW must practice social work under the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 345/ Page 6 
supervision of another social worker, unless given approval to engage in independent 
practice.  
 
A licensed certified social worker (LCSW) must have a master’s degree in social work 
from an accredited social work program and provide documentation of having completed 
two years of specified supervised experience. LCSW licenses are no longer issued but are 
renewed by BSWE.  
 
A licensed certified social worker-clinical (LCSW-C) must have a master’s degree in social 
work from an accredited social work program and documentation of 12 academic credits 
in clinical course work, as specified. An LCSW-C must also provide documentation of 
having completed two years as a licensee with specified supervised experience of 
face-to-face client contact, formulation of a diagnostic impression, and treatment of mental 
disorders and other conditions and the provision of psychotherapy.  
 
State Revenues:  BSWE special fund revenues may decrease as social workers who do 
not reside in the State but currently chose to be licensed by BSWE instead seek multistate 
licensure in their home state under the compact. Currently, each new applicant for a social 
worker license in Maryland must pay a $100 application processing fee and a $75 initial 
license fee. On a biannual basis, each social worker must pay a license renewal fee based 
on their license category as follows:  (1) LBSW, $100; (2) LMSW, $200; and (3) LCSW 
and LCSW-C, $275.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that any loss in revenues from license 
fees is not quantifiable at this time. One neighboring state (Virginia) has already enacted 
the compact, and Pennsylvania has introduced legislation to join the compact. It is not clear 
how many individuals from neighboring states may no longer chose to be licensed in 
Maryland. However, any such impact is likely minimal.  
 
State Expenditures:  BSWE special fund expenditures increase by $73,917 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one administer to manage additional workload associated with awarding compact 
licenses. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$66,548 
Operating Expenses 
    7,369 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$73,917 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 345/ Page 7 
Additional Comments:  DLS advises that, although the bill includes language that it is 
contingent on six other states adopting legislation to enter the compact, as of 
January 21, 2025, 22 states have enacted such legislation (including Virginia), and 11 other 
states have introduced such legislation (including Pennsylvania and New Jersey). 
According to the National Center for Interstate Compacts, the compact has reached 
activation status; however, multistate licenses are not yet being issued.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 204 and HB 34 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 174 (Senator Benson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - August 13, 2025 
 
hr/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7