START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 347 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 347 
(Delegates Holmes and Terrasa) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property – Recordation and Land Records – Requirements 
 
  
This bill generally alters various statutory provisions related to the filing, maintenance, and 
transmittal of land records. Among other provisions, the bill (1) alters certain formatting 
requirements; (2) authorizes the acceptance of documents received through an electronic 
recordation system; (3) authorizes court clerks to assess additional fees for the recordation 
of subdivision plats if required by local law; (4) repeals certain requirements and references 
related to bound books and microfilm; and (5) makes numerous stylistic and technical 
changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Recording Requirements – Generally 
 
Clerks of the circuit courts are responsible for the recording of land records. Generally, 
property may not be transferred on the assessment books or records until (1) all public 
taxes, assessments, and charges currently due and owed on the property have been paid to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 347/ Page 2 
the treasurer, tax collector, or director of finance of the county in which the property is 
assessed and (2) all taxes on personal property in the county due by the transferor have 
been paid when all land owned by the transferor in the county is being transferred. 
 
Any printed deed or other instrument submitted for recordation must satisfy specific 
formatting requirements before being recorded. 
 
Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act 
 
Generally, the Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act – Title 3, 
Subtitle 7 of the Real Property Article – establishes that requirements for documents to be 
signed as a condition for recording are met by an electronic document or electronic 
signature under specific circumstances. The Act also authorizes the clerks of the 
circuit courts and the State Department of Assessments and Taxation to coordinate with 
appropriate entities on procedures and processes to facilitate the electronic satisfaction of 
prior approvals and conditions precedent to recording documents or the electronic payment 
of fees or taxes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 163 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 150 (Senator Watson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 25, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2