START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 491

Chapter 491

(House Bill 313)

AN ACT concerning

Motor Vehicles – Specially Designed Vintage Reproduction Registration Plates

FOR the purpose of repealing the time limitation within which the Motor Vehicle
Administration is required to make available specially designed vintage
reproduction registration plates; requiring the Administration to charge certain fees
for the initial issuance and renewal of specially designed vintage reproduction
registration plates; and generally relating to specially designed vintage reproduction
registration plates.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–619.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

13–619.3.

(a) The Administration shall develop and make available for qualifying vehicles
a specially designed vintage reproduction registration plate.

(b) The owner of a vehicle, or a lessee of the vehicle under a lease not intended as
security, or a director, an officer, an employee, or a partner of a business entity that owns
the vehicle considered eligible by the Administration may apply to the Administration for
a registration plate under this section if the vehicle is included in one of the following
classes:

(1) A Class A (passenger) vehicle;

(2) A Class E (truck) vehicle with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of 1 ton
or less;

(3) A Class L (historic) vehicle;

(4) A Class M (multipurpose) vehicle; or

(5) A Class N (street rod) vehicle.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 491 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) (1) In addition to the annual registration fee otherwise required under this
title, an owner of a vehicle assigned a registration plate under this section shall pay [when
initially issued the registration plate and each time the registration plate is renewed:

(1) A fee set by the Administration to recover the Administration’s costs
under this section; and

(2) A fee set by the Administration to be credited to the Gasoline and Motor
Vehicle Revenue Account for distribution under § 8–403 or § 8–404 of this article]:

(I) $100 WHEN INITIALLY ISSUED THE REGISTRATION PLATE;
AND

(II) $25 EACH TIME THE REGISTRATION PLATE IS RENEWED.

(2) FEES COLLECTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE:

(I) USED TO RECOVER THE ADMINISTRATION’S COSTS UNDER
THIS SECTION; AND

(II) CREDITED TO THE GASOLINE AND MOTOR VEHICLE
REVENUE ACCOUNT FOR DISTRIBUTION UNDER § 8–403 OR § 8–404 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(d) The special registration plate issued under this section shall[:

(1) Be available for sale for 1 year from the date of initial issuance; and

(2) Resemble] RESEMBLE the black lettering on yellow background
registration plate issued by the State for display on a motor vehicle in 1910.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2