START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 372 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 372 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Prince George's Gateway Development Authority - Sunset Repeal  
PG 403-25 
 
 
This bill repeals the sunset provisions of Chapters 466 and 467 of 2023 that established the 
Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority, thereby making the authority 
permanent.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Prince George’s County 
operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 466 and 467 established the Prince George’s Gateway 
Development Authority for the five-year period ending September 30, 2028. The authority 
must support the development and approval of a comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization plan to benefit the residents, housing, neighborhoods, economic 
development, and transportation, including motor vehicles and pedestrians, in the  
“target area” of the county. The “target area” encompasses the cities of Mount Rainier and 
Bladensburg, and the towns of Brentwood, Cottage City, Colmar Manor, and 
North Brentwood. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 372/ Page 2 
The authority consists primarily of State and local government officials, or their designees. 
Authority members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. The authority may manage any funds appropriated from municipalities in the 
target area, Prince George’s County, and the State (but there is no requirement for such 
funding). The authority may also receive donated services from accountants, lawyers, or 
other consultants as necessary. Accordingly, the authority may supervise, manage, and 
terminate staff and consultants as necessary. 
 
By October 31, 2025, the authority must report its comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization strategy to the Governor, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and 
the House Appropriations Committee.  
 
Additional Comments:  Though the bill only repeals the termination date of  
Chapters 466 and 467, there may be an expectation of future funding. As a recent example, 
the fiscal 2026 budget as introduced includes $22.4 million in general funds for the 
West North Avenue Development Authority, which was established in 2021 for a similar 
purpose and tasked with similar responsibilities (and also without a funding mandate), 
primarily to hire staff and fund/initiate development projects along West North Avenue in 
Baltimore City.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Prince George’s County; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2