START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 388 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 388 
(Delegates Roberson and Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Drunk and Drugged Driving - Points Assessments 
 
 
This bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to assess 12 points against the 
driver’s license of a person convicted of a violation of § 21-902(h) or § 21 902(i) of the 
Transportation Article. Accordingly, the bill also requires MVA to revoke the 
driver’s license of a person convicted of either offense. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Otherwise, 
the bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 21-902(a)-(d) of the Transportation Article, a person may not drive 
or attempt to drive any vehicle while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the 
influence of alcohol per se; (2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any 
combination of drugs, or any combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a 
controlled dangerous substance (CDS). Additionally, a person may not commit any of these 
offenses while transporting a minor. 
 
A person convicted of one of the above offenses is subject to higher maximum penalties 
when that person has specified prior convictions. Exhibit 1 displays the maximum 
incarceration and monetary penalties that may be imposed for alcohol and drug-related 
driving offenses. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 388/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Current Maximum Penalties for Alcohol and/or Drug-related Driving Offenses  
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or  
While Impaired by a CDS 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,200 
Second Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,400 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Under the Influence Per Se, or  
While Impaired by a CDS While Transporting a Minor 
First Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,000 
Second Offense 
3 years imprisonment and/or fine of $3,000 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, 
a Combination of Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol 
First Offense 
2 months imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Second Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $500 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol or While Impaired by a Drug, a Combination of 
Drugs, or a Combination of One or More Drugs and Alcohol  
While Transporting a Minor 
First Offense 
1 year imprisonment and/or fine of $1,200 
Second Offense 
2 years imprisonment and/or fine of $2,400 
Third Offense 
5 years imprisonment and/or fine of $5,000 
Fourth or Subsequent Offense 
10 years imprisonment and/or fine of $10,000 
 
CDS:  controlled dangerous substance 
 
Notes:  All listed offenses are misdemeanors. Additionally, for the offense of driving under the influence 
of alcohol, under the influence per se, or while impaired by a CDS, a repeat conviction or convictions within 
five years requires a mandatory minimum penalty of imprisonment from 5 to 10 days. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 388/ Page 3 
Transportation Article § 21-902(h) 
 
A person violates § 21-902(h) of the Transportation Article if the person commits any of 
the offenses set forth in § 21-902(a)-(d) and has two or more prior convictions under those 
provisions, § 8-738 of the Natural Resources Article (drunk or drugged boating), or 
equivalent federal offenses. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000.  
 
Transportation Article § 21-902(i) 
 
A person violates § 21-902(i) of the Transportation Article if the person commits any of 
the offenses set forth in § 21-902(a)-(d) and has three or more prior convictions under those 
provisions; § 8-738 of the Natural Resources Article (drunk or drugged boating); specified 
provisions addressing homicide, manslaughter, or life-threatening injury by motor vehicle 
or vessel; or equivalent federal offenses. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on 
conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a maximum fine of $10,000. 
 
Subsequent Offenders 
 
Under Maryland Rule 4-245, when the law permits but does not mandate additional 
penalties because of a specified previous conviction, a court may not sentence a defendant 
as a subsequent offender unless the State’s Attorney serves notice of the alleged prior 
conviction on the defendant or defendant’s counsel. The notice must be served before the 
acceptance of a guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere, or at least 15 days before trial in 
circuit court or 5 days before trial in the District Court, whichever is earlier. Before 
sentencing and after giving the defendant a chance to be heard, the court must determine 
whether the defendant is a subsequent offender. 
 
Administrative Penalties 
 
A person who commits an alcohol or drug-related driving offense is also subject to a points 
assessment by MVA on the person’s driver’s license. For a conviction of driving while 
under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se or while impaired 
by a CDS, MVA must assess 12 points against the driver’s license, and the license is subject 
to revocation. For a conviction of driving while impaired by alcohol, a drug, combination 
of drugs, or combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, MVA must assess 8 points 
against the driver’s license, and the license is subject to suspension. A driver who 
accumulates 8 or 12 points against their driver’s license within a two-year period is subject 
to license suspension or revocation, respectively. 
 
Although MVA must revoke a person’s driver’s license if the person accumulates 
12 points, a limited exception to this requirement exists. When a person’s license is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 388/ Page 4 
revoked, MVA is required to provide notice of the revocation by mail and advise the person 
of their right to file, within 10 days of the notice being sent, a written request for an 
administrative hearing. With specified exceptions, at the time a hearing is held, §16-405 of 
the Transportation Article authorizes a hearing officer to decline, cancel, or modify a 
revocation if the revocation would adversely affect the person’s employment or 
opportunities for employment. 
 
Additional Comments:  As previously mentioned, a driver convicted of violating 
§ 21 902(a)-(d) is subject to a points assessment by MVA of either 8 or 12 points, 
depending on the offense committed. However, the Maryland State’s Attorneys’ 
Association advised in a July 2023 memorandum that, due to a lack of specificity in statute 
regarding points assessments (which is addressed by this bill), MVA is unable to assess 
points to the driver’s licenses of certain drivers convicted of violating § 21-902(h) or 
§ 21-902(i) of the Transportation Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1406 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4