START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 346 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 346 
(Delegates Boyce and Embry) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - 43rd Alcoholic Beverages District - Class 
B-D-7 Licenses 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue, in the 
43rd alcoholic beverages district, one Class B-D-7 license in the 2600 block of 
Huntingdon Avenue, one Class B-D-7 license in the 300 block of West 29th Street, and 
three Class B-D-7 licenses in the 2700 block of Huntingdon Avenue provided that (1) at 
least 51% of the applicant’s average daily receipts come from the sale of items other than 
package goods; (2) the applicant executes a memorandum of understanding with the 
Greater Remington Improvement Association; and (3) the applicant does not create a 
separate package goods department. The bill also specifies a Class C license issued for a 
premises in the 4500 block of North Charles Street must be considered unexpired until 
July 1, 2026, for the purpose of being renewed. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  This bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board generally may not issue a new alcoholic beverages license in 
the 40th, 41st, 43rd, 44th, or 45th alcoholic beverages districts unless the authorization to 
issue specified licenses in these districts is otherwise provided for in statute.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 346/ Page 2 
Class B-D-7 Licenses 
 
Generally, the board may issue a Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration 
of the number of beer, wine, and liquor outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of 
sale, that the license is reasonably necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license 
authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place described in the 
license, for on- and off-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $2,336.  
 
License Expiration 
 
Generally, in Baltimore City, a license expires 180 days after the license holder has closed 
the business or stopped active alcoholic beverages business operations at the premises for 
which the license is held unless (1) a transfer of the license has been approved or is pending; 
(2) a specified certificate of permission or renewal license has been approved or is pending; 
or (3) a written request for a hardship extension is filed within the 180-day period. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 788 (Senator M. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2