START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 334 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 334 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Workgroup on Newborn Nurse Home Visiting Services - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Workgroup on Newborn Nurse Home Visiting Services. The 
workgroup must (1) compile updated participant data and expenditures per participant from 
home visiting for families with newborns programs operating in the State; (2) compare that 
data to data for evidence-based models for universal nurse home visiting for families with 
newborns; (3) identify specified service gaps, opportunities to align evidence-based models 
with home visiting for families with newborns programs operating in the State, and 
potential funding sources to close identified service gaps; and (4) identify workforce needs 
for evidence-based models for universal newborn nurse home visiting for families with 
newborns and recommendations to address such needs. The Maryland Family Network, in 
collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), may provide staff for the 
workgroup. A member of the workgroup may not receive compensation but is entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. The workgroup must 
report, by December 31, 2025, its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can collaborate with the Maryland Family Network using existing 
budgeted resources. Any expense reimbursement for workgroup members is assumed to 
be minimal. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 334/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup comprises (1) one member of the Senate of Maryland; 
(2) one member of the House of Delegates; (3) the Secretary of Health (or their designee); 
and (4) the following members appointed by the Governor:  one representative of the 
Maryland Hospital Association; one representative from each certified site in the State 
implementing an evidence-based universal nurse home visiting model for families with 
newborns; one representative from an organization in the State implementing at least 
two approved Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting models; 
one representative of a private insurance carrier; one representative of the Maryland Nurses 
Association; one representative of the B’More for Healthy Babies Initiative; 
one representative from a local health department; one pediatrician licensed in the State; 
one nurse midwife licensed in the State; one obstetrician licensed in the State; and 
one representative of a federally qualified health center. 
 
Current Law:  MDH currently has a Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting 
program supported by a federal funding formula, which is allocated to 10 Maryland 
jurisdictions with communities that meet the highest need for maternal and child 
intervention:  Baltimore City and Allegany, Baltimore, Caroline, Dorchester, Harford, 
Prince George’s, Somerset, Washington, and Wicomico counties. 14 sites in these 
10 jurisdictions receive funding. The federal government has approved 19 home visiting 
models that meet federal evidence-based criteria. In Maryland, 7 of these evidence-based 
home visiting programs are in use (Nurse-Family Partnership, Healthy Families America, 
Parents as Teachers, Home Instruction for Parents of Preschool Youngsters, Early Head 
Start, Family Connects, and Attachment Biobehavioral Catch-Up). In fiscal 2024, 
337 infants received home visiting services through this program. 
 
Maryland Medicaid currently offers two evidence-based home visiting models, Healthy 
Families America and Nurse-Family 
Partnership. 
Services are available to 
Medicaid enrollees who are pregnant or have delivered a child within three months. A 
Medicaid enrollee can obtain services through a provider in their managed care 
organization network. Approximately 200 households receive home visiting services 
through Medicaid annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 156 (Senator Lewis Young) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 334/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; March of Dimes; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3