START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 596

Chapter 596

(House Bill 349)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Speed Monitoring Systems – Maryland Route 210

PG 306–25

FOR the purpose of increasing the maximum civil penalties for violations recorded by speed
monitoring systems on Maryland Route 210 (Piscataway Highway) in Prince
George’s County that involve exceeding the maximum speed limit by certain
amounts; ~~repealing~~ ~~the~~ ~~termination~~ ~~provision~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~authority~~ ~~to~~ ~~place~~ ~~speed~~
~~monitoring~~ ~~systems~~ ~~on~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Route~~ ~~210~~ ~~(Piscataway~~ ~~Highway)~~ ~~in~~ ~~Prince~~
~~George’s~~ ~~County;~~ and generally relating to speed monitoring systems on Maryland
Route 210 (Piscataway Highway) in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–809(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Chapter~~ ~~806~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~of~~ ~~2018,~~ ~~as~~ ~~amended~~ ~~by~~ ~~Chapter~~
~~606~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~of~~ ~~2023~~
~~Section~~ ~~3~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–809.

(c) (1) Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police
officer at the time of the violation, the owner or, in accordance with subsection (f)(4) of this
section, the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if the motor vehicle is
recorded by a speed monitoring system while being operated in violation of this subtitle.

(2) (I) [A] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A civil penalty under this subsection may not exceed $40.

(II) 1. THIS SUBPARAGRAPH APPLIES TO A CIVIL PENALTY
ASSESSED TO THE OWNER OR DRIVER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT IS RECORDED BY

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 596 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A SPEED MONITORING SYSTEM WHILE BEING OPERATED ON MARYLAND ROUTE 210
(PISCATAWAY HIGHWAY) IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY IN VIOLATION OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

2. SUBJECT TO SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 3 OF THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH, A THE MAXIMUM CIVIL PENALTY UNDER THIS SUBPARAGRAPH IS
AS FOLLOWS:

A. FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMIT
BY BETWEEN 12 AND 15, INCLUSIVE, MILES PER HOUR, $60 $50 $40;

B. FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMIT
BY BETWEEN 16 AND 19, INCLUSIVE, MILES PER HOUR, $80 $70;

C. FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMIT
BY BETWEEN 20 AND 29, INCLUSIVE, MILES PER HOUR, $140 $120;

D. FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMIT
BY BETWEEN 30 AND 39, INCLUSIVE, MILES PER HOUR, $270 $230; OR

E. FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM POSTED SPEED LIMIT
BY 40 MILES PER HOUR OR MORE, $500 $425.

(3) For purposes of this section, the District Court shall prescribe:

(i) A uniform citation form consistent with subsection (d)(1) of this
section and § 7–302 of the Courts Article; and

(ii) A civil penalty, which shall be indicated on the citation, to be paid
by persons who choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court.

~~Chapter~~ ~~806~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~2018,~~ ~~as~~ ~~amended~~ ~~by~~ ~~Chapter~~ ~~606~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~2023~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
October 1, 2018. [It shall remain effective for a period of 10 years and, at the end of
~~September~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2028,~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~
shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2