START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 397 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 397 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation 
- Oyster Shucking House Loan Program 
 
 
This bill increases the amount, from $10,000 to $25,000, that the Maryland Agricultural 
and Resource-Based Industry Development Corporation (MARBIDCO) may loan per 
“seasonal full-time job” projected to be created or retained under the Maryland Oyster 
Shucking House Loan Fund (MOSHLF). The bill also reduces the number of years, from 
five to three, that a person must have been a licensed seafood dealer in order to be eligible 
for loans under the program. Other program requirements remain unchanged. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for MARBIDCO increase 
beginning in FY 2026 to the extent that the bill increases overall amounts loaned under the 
program, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MARBIDCO is a quasi-public economic development organization 
chartered by the State; MARBIDCO employees are not State employees. 
 
Chapters 30 and 574 of 2022 required MARBIDCO to provide loans of up to $250,000 to 
licensed seafood dealers to finance costs of eligible seafood processing projects that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 397/ Page 2 
support the goal of increasing the amount of oyster shells retained in the State and returned 
to the Chesapeake Bay (with specified loan forgiveness available that is based on the value 
of bushels of oyster shells returned to the Department of Natural Resources at no cost or 
$25 per bushel of spat-on-shell planted on a public fishery bottom). 
 
In addition to other requirements, a person is eligible to receive a loan if the person (1) has 
been a licensed seafood dealer for at least five years or (2) has held a tidal fish license 
issued under § 4-701 of the Natural Resources Article for at least five years and agrees to 
obtain a seafood dealer license on receipt of financing. “Licensed seafood dealer” means a 
person licensed under § 4-701 of the Natural Resources Article to buy, process, pack, resell, 
market or otherwise deal in fish caught in the tidal waters of the State. 
 
Loan amounts range from $25,000 to $250,000, with up to $25,000 provided for each 
full-time job or $10,000 for each seasonal full-time job that is projected to be created or 
retained. “Seasonal full-time job” means a position for which an individual is required to 
work a minimum of 420 hours during 12 weeks of a three-month period. 
 
Loan proceeds can be used to renovate or construct a new oyster processing facility or 
expand an existing facility, as well as to purchase oyster processing equipment.  
 
The Acts also required the Governor to include an appropriation of $1.0 million in the 
annual budget bill for fiscal 2024 to MARBIDCO to provide the loans and administer and 
operate the loan program. Also, although the Acts did not establish a name for the loan 
program, it is administratively known as MOSHLF. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MARBIDCO advises that, despite receiving a $1.0 million general 
fund appropriation in fiscal 2024 as required under Chapters 30 and 574, the corporation 
has approved only one loan under MOSHLF, which still has $750,000 available to lend. 
The bill does not alter the amount of general funds that must be provided to MARBIDCO 
for MOSHLF under current law, and subsequent lending activity under the program is 
nonbudgeted. Accordingly, nonbudgeted expenditures (and subsequent revenues, as loans 
are only partially forgivable) for MARBIDCO increase beginning in fiscal 2026 to the 
extent that the bill increases overall amounts loaned under the program due to increased 
program interest, eligibility, and/or average loan amounts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Generally, small businesses benefit from increased eligibility and 
loan amounts under MOSHLF beginning in fiscal 2026, although funding may be 
reallocated between eligible businesses if program interest increases substantially. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 397/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 363 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry 
Development Corporation; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3