START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 325 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Adult Education - High School Diploma by Examination - Requirements and 
Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) to allow an individual to 
choose to take all components of the high school diploma by examination (e.g., GED) in 
either English or Spanish. MD Labor must identify other appropriate languages in which 
to offer the GED and study the feasibility and cost of offering the examination in additional 
languages. By December 1, 2026, MD Labor must submit a report on its findings and 
recommendations from the study. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MD Labor can allow qualifying adults to choose to take all components of 
the high school diploma in either English or Spanish and meet the reporting requirement 
regarding additional languages using existing resources, as explained below. Further, 
MD Labor expenditures for examination subsidies are likely not materially affected. 
Revenues are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A Maryland resident may obtain a high school diploma by examination if 
the individual is at least 18 years old and has not obtained a high school diploma. To 
qualify, the individual must have withdrawn from a regular full-time public or private 
school program. English language learners, as specified, are exempt from the requirement 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 325/ Page 2 
to withdraw from high school prior to obtaining a diploma by examination (including the 
GED). 
 
MD Labor must offer examinations to individuals who are pursuing a high school diploma 
at least twice each year at places throughout the State that are reasonably convenient for 
the applicants. The examination must be in appropriate high school subject areas and be of 
a comprehensive nature as determined by the State Board of Education. 
 
According to regulations, each module of the GED tests may be taken in foreign languages 
as available from the national testing service issuing the GED instrument, except as 
indicated. If a candidate chooses to take a module in a foreign language, the entire module 
must be taken in the same language. Separate modules may be taken in different languages 
if available from the national testing services issuing the GED instrument. A candidate who 
chooses to take one or more modules in a foreign language must take the Reasoning 
Through Language Arts (RTLA) test module in English to demonstrate English 
proficiency. A candidate who obtains passing scores on the foreign language tests and on 
the RTLA tests in English and who obtains the required overall passing score, must be 
awarded a Maryland high school diploma. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MD Labor advises that it is actively working on updates to the 
regulations governing high school diploma by examination. These changes would allow 
test takers to complete all components of the examination in Spanish, as allowed by the 
bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 451 (Senator King, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 325/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3