START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 331 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 331 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Information Act - Public Access Ombudsman - Delegation of Powers 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Public Access Ombudsman to delegate to a staff member of the 
Office of the Public Access Ombudsman any of the powers and duties granted to the 
ombudsman that are appropriate to the staff member’s training and expertise. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s Public Information Act (PIA) establishes that all persons are 
entitled to have access to information about the affairs of government and the official acts 
of public officials and employees. Each governmental unit that maintains public records 
must identify a representative whom a member of the public may contact to request a public 
record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must post all such contact information 
on its website and in any Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 331/ Page 2 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021 requires each official custodian to adopt a policy of 
proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection under PIA, as 
specified. 
 
Office of the Public Access Ombudsman – Appointment and Duties 
 
The ombudsman, who must be appointed by the Attorney General and is a full-time State 
employee, must have been admitted to practice law in the State. The term of the 
ombudsman is four years. 
 
The Office of the Public Access Ombudsman reviews and resolves disputes between 
applicants and custodians over requests for public records. Within 90 calendar days after 
receiving a request for dispute resolution, unless the parties mutually agree to extend the 
deadline, the ombudsman must issue a final determination stating either that the dispute 
has been resolved or that the dispute has not been resolved. The ombudsman may not 
compel a custodian to disclose public records or redacted information. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 296 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2