START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 343 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Speed Monitoring Systems - Statements and Certificates of 
Violations 
 
 
This bill authorizes a technician employed by or under contract with an agency (rather than 
only a duly authorized law enforcement officer) to (1) sign a statement in a citation alleging 
a speed monitoring system violation and (2) swear to or affirm (for evidentiary reasons) 
that a speed monitoring system violation occurred (after inspection of a recorded image 
and on a specified certificate). The bill also requires a duly authorized law enforcement 
officer or a technician employed by or under contract with an agency to complete 
“reasonable training” specific to the speed monitoring system before certifying any 
certificates of violation. “Reasonable training” means a level of education, instruction, and 
practical experience sufficient to ensure competency in the inspection and interpretation of 
the recorded images generated by the speed monitoring system. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may result in administrative efficiencies for local jurisdictions that 
utilize speed monitoring systems; otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
local government operations or finances as training is already provided. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, for purposes of speed monitoring 
systems implementation, an “agency” means:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 343/ Page 2 
 
a law enforcement agency of a local political subdivision that is authorized to issue 
a citation for a violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local traffic laws or 
regulations; or 
 
for a municipal corporation that does not maintain a police force, an agency 
established (or designated) by the municipal corporation to implement speed 
monitoring systems. 
 
Under current law, a citation mailed to a person whose vehicle was recorded by a speed 
monitoring system must include specified information, including a copy of the recorded 
image and a signed statement by a duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by, 
or under contract with, an agency that, based on an inspection of recorded images, the 
motor vehicle was being operated in violation of a speed restriction. The bill expands this 
provision by specifying that the statement may instead be signed by a technician employed 
by or under contract with an agency. 
 
Under current law, a certification alleging that a violation occurred, sworn to or affirmed 
by a duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by (or under contract with) an 
agency, based on the inspection of a recorded image produced by a speed monitoring 
system, is evidence of the facts contained in the certificate and is admissible in any 
proceeding concerning the alleged violation. The bill expands this provision by specifying 
that the certificate may instead be sworn to or affirmed by a technician employed by or 
under contract with an agency. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 282 of 2024 and HB 139 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 390 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Baltimore City; Baltimore, Harford, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 343/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3