START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 315 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 315 
(Delegates Cardin and Conaway) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Task Force to Study Fiduciary Adjudication in Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes a Task Force to Study Fiduciary Adjudication in Maryland. The 
Governor must designate the chair of the task force. The Department of Legislative 
Services in conjunction with the Maryland State Bar Association must provide staff for the 
task force. By January 1, 2026, the task force must report its findings and recommendations 
to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and 
terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must:   
 
 
examine the qualifications, training, and methods of selection of judges hearing 
probate and other fiduciary matters in Maryland; 
 
examine the jurisdictions of the orphans’ courts and circuit courts with respect to 
fiduciary matters; 
 
analyze the efficiency of the procedures for adjudicating contested and uncontested 
matters in the orphans’ courts and circuit courts; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 315/ Page 2 
 
analyze the effect of the different qualifications of orphans’ court judges and related 
litigation procedures on the uniform application of justice in Maryland; 
 
analyze and compare the laws and practices of other states relating to the 
adjudication of fiduciary matters, including the selection, qualification, and training 
of judges hearing those matters; 
 
seek guidance from appropriate witnesses with experience or expertise in the area 
of fiduciary adjudication; 
 
examine any other research, analysis, or guidance related to the best practices for 
adjudicating fiduciary matters; 
 
offer one or more opportunities for members of the public and other interested 
parties to give their opinions on the subjects considered by the task force; and 
 
make recommendations to improve efficiency, uniformity, and quality of fiduciary 
adjudication in Maryland. 
 
The orphans’ courts, circuit courts, registers of wills, and the Administrative Office of the 
Courts must comply with all reasonable requests by the task force for information and data 
the task force considers necessary for its work. 
 
A member of the task force may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the State budget. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Orphans’ Courts 
 
Under the Maryland Constitution, each county and Baltimore City elects, for a term of 
four years, three judges to the orphans’ court of their respective jurisdictions, with the 
exception of Harford, Howard, and Montgomery counties, where a circuit court judge sits 
as the orphans’ court. The orphans’ courts are the State’s probate courts. The courts 
supervise the handling of estates and also have certain jurisdiction over the guardianship 
of minors and their property. 
 
Circuit Courts 
 
The circuit courts are the highest common-law and equity courts of record exercising 
original jurisdiction within the State. Each has full common-law and equity powers and 
jurisdiction in all civil and criminal cases within its county, and all the additional powers 
and jurisdiction conferred by the Maryland Constitution and by law, except where, by law, 
jurisdiction has been limited or conferred exclusively on another court. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 315/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  On December 13, 2021, the Task Force to Study the 
Maryland Orphans’ Courts adopted a report making recommendations about, among other 
things, the term of office for an orphans’ court judge, setting of annual salaries and benefits, 
and a cross-jurisdictional probate court to adjudicate complex estate matters. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  SB 22 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Bar Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3