START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 309 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 309 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Law Enforcement Agencies - Peer Support Programs 
 
 
This bill prohibits, with specified exceptions, the disclosure of the contents of any written 
or oral communication regarding a peer support interaction by a “peer support specialist” 
or a peer support program participant. A peer support specialist must inform the peer 
support program participant in writing of the bill’s confidentiality provisions before the 
initial peer support interaction with a peer support program participant. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State law enforcement agencies can likely modify existing peer support 
programs to meet the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local government expenditures to the extent 
that local law enforcement agencies must modify existing peer support programs to meet 
the bill’s requirements. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Peer support program” means a program provided by a law enforcement 
agency or the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) that provides counseling services from a 
peer support specialist to a law enforcement officer. 
 
“Peer support specialist” means a law enforcement officer or a member of the FOP who  
(1) has received training in peer support, including emotional and moral support to law 
enforcement officers who have been involved in or exposed to an emotionally traumatic 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 309/ Page 2 
experience in the course of duty as a law enforcement officer and (2) is designated by the 
law enforcement agency to provide these services. 
 
The prohibition on disclosure of the contents of any written or oral communication under 
the bill does not apply if (1) the communication contains an explicit threat of suicide, as 
specified, an explicit threat of imminent and serious bodily harm or death to a clearly 
identified or identifiable individual, information relating to the abuse or neglect of a child 
or vulnerable adult or abuse or neglect that is otherwise required to be reported by law, or 
the admission of criminal conduct; (2) the disclosure is authorized by each peer support 
participant who was a party to the communication; or (3) a court of competent jurisdiction 
issues an order or subpoena requiring the disclosure of the communication. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Employee Assistance Programs 
 
Each law enforcement agency must provide access to an employee assistance program for 
all police officers whom the law enforcement agency employs. The employee assistance 
program must provide police officers access to confidential mental health services, 
including counseling services, crisis counseling, stress management counseling, resiliency 
sessions, and peer support services for police officers. 
 
In addition to a confidential and nonpunitive early intervention system to identify police 
officers who are at risk of engaging in the use of excessive force. and as part of the 
employee assistance program, before a police officer returns to full duty, a law enforcement 
agency must provide (1) a voluntary mental health consultation and voluntary counseling 
services to the police officer if the police officer is involved in an incident involving an 
accident resulting in a fatality and (2) a mandatory mental health consultation and voluntary 
counseling services to the police officer if the police officer is involved in an incident 
involving:   
 
 
a serious injury to the police officer; 
 
an officer-involved shooting; or 
 
any use of force resulting in a fatality or serious injury. 
 
A mental health consultation and counseling service provided under these provisions must 
be confidential. 
 
The employee assistance program must include a component designed to protect the mental 
health of police officers during periods of public demonstrations and unrest. Each law 
enforcement agency must develop a policy to provide access to the required services at no 
cost to a police officer. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 309/ Page 3 
“Employee assistance program” means a work-based program offered to all police officers 
that provides access to voluntary and confidential services to address the mental health 
issues of a police officer stemming from personal and work-related concerns, including 
stress, financial issues, legal issues, family problems, office conflicts, and alcohol and 
substance abuse disorders. 
 
State Critical Incident Stress Management Team 
 
The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) State Critical 
Incident Stress Management (CISM) team assists Emergency Medical System, fire, law 
enforcement, dispatch centers, and other responders in mitigating and responding to the 
normal emotional and psychological effects experienced following stressful responses and 
critical incidents. According to MIEMSS, this is accomplished through education and 
training in advance of events and in individual and group discussions following critical 
incidents. The CISM team is made up of volunteer peer support and licensed mental health 
personnel who have been trained to assist responders in dealing with normal reactions to 
abnormal events. Communications with the team are voluntary and confidential. 
 
Officer and Community Wellness Training Grant Fund 
 
Chapters 752 and 753 of 2023 established the Officer and Community Wellness Training 
Grant Fund, a special fund administered by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and 
Policy, to provide grants to local law enforcement agencies for Mental Health First Aid for 
Public Safety training and CISM peer support training. The fiscal 2026 budget as 
introduced does not include an appropriation for the fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 326 (Senator Waldstreicher, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Comptroller’s Office; 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Systems; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 309/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4