START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 349 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 349 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Maryland Route 210  
PG 306-25 
 
 
This bill establishes an escalating penalty structure for speed monitoring system (i.e., speed 
camera) violations on Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County; the maximum 
penalties range from $40 to $425, depending on the excessiveness of the speed violation.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase, 
potentially by more than $100,000 annually, from FY 2026 through 2029 due to an existing 
revenue-sharing requirement related to speed camera violations on Maryland Route 210. 
General fund revenues increase over the same period to the extent more violations are 
contested under the bill, as discussed below. General fund expenditures increase by 
$21,000 in FY 2026 only for programming costs for the Judiciary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County finances or 
operations due to an existing revenue-sharing requirement related to speed camera 
violations on Maryland Route 210. However, Prince George’s County may benefit from 
increased spending on safety improvements for Maryland Route 210. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the civil penalty for a citation issued 
through a speed monitoring system is capped at $40 and is payable to the political 
subdivision operating the speed monitoring system; otherwise, the citation may be 
contested in District Court. The District Court must prescribe a uniform citation form, as 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 349/ Page 2 
specified, and a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons 
who choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
Chapter 806 of 2018 authorized Prince George’s County, for five years, to place  
one speed camera at the intersection of Old Fort Road and Maryland Route 210, subject to 
specified requirements. Chapter 586 of 2019 repealed the limitation on the specific location 
of that speed camera and increased, to three, the number of speed cameras that could be 
placed on Maryland Route 210 in the county until the initial authorization terminated 
(originally September 30, 2023). Chapter 606 of 2023 again increased the number of 
speed cameras that may be placed on Maryland Route 210 (from three to six) and extended 
the termination date of the original authorization by five years (through 
September 30, 2028). 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the tiered, maximum civil penalty levels that may be assessed for citations 
issued through a speed monitoring system on Maryland Route 210 under the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Speed Camera Violations 
Under Current Law and the Bill 
Maryland Route 210 
 
Exceeding Posted Speed Limit by: 
Current 
Civil Penalty 
Maximum Civil 
Penalty  
Under the Bill 
12 to 15 miles per hour 
Capped at $40 
$40 
16 to 19 miles per hour 
70 
20 to 29 miles per hour 
120 
30 to 39 miles per hour 
230 
40+ miles per hour 
425 
 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Also, pursuant to Chapter 147 of 2020, fines collected by Prince George’s County as a 
result of violations enforced by speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 must be remitted to 
the State Highway Administration (SHA) for specified activities after cost recovery. (This 
requirement replaced a provision of Chapter 806 that required the fine revenues to be 
deposited into the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund.) SHA must solely use the fine 
revenues to assist in covering the costs of (1) examining the engineering, infrastructure, 
and other relevant factors that may contribute to safety issues on Maryland Route 210; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 349/ Page 3 
(2) reporting its findings and recommendations on any solutions to these safety issues; and 
(3) implementing any solutions to these safety issues. 
 
State Revenues:  As noted above, the current authorization to use speed cameras on 
Maryland Route 210 terminates September 30, 2028. Thus, although the bill significantly 
increases the maximum penalties that may be imposed for certain speed violations recorded 
by a speed camera on Maryland Route 210 beginning in fiscal 2026, the bill’s various 
impacts (discussed below) terminate in fiscal 2029. 
 
District Court and General Fund 
 
Under the bill, a person issued a citation for a violation that is captured by a speed camera 
on Maryland Route 210 is potentially subject to a significantly higher civil penalty than 
under current law, depending on the level at which the person exceeds the speed limit. 
 
Additionally, because of the increased fine levels established by the bill, more individuals 
issued speed camera citations for violations captured on Maryland Route 210 are expected 
to request a trial in District Court. If an individual is found guilty after a trial, the penalty 
is paid to the general fund, rather than the local government issuing the citation. However, 
the exact impact on general fund revenues depends on the number of guilty dispositions in 
court, which cannot be reliably determined at this time, and can only be determined with 
actual experience under the bill. 
 
Additional factors may also affect overall citation volume (such as changes in driving 
behavior as drivers become aware of the new penalties for speeding under the bill). Despite 
these factors, because certain maximum fine amounts are considerably higher than those 
under current law, general fund revenues are expected to increase – even assuming a 
relatively low conviction rate. 
 
Transportation Trust Fund  
 
As noted above, Prince George’s County is required to transfer net fine revenues  
(i.e., revenues remaining after cost recovery) from speed camera violations on 
Maryland Route 210 to the Comptroller for distribution to SHA. Thus, under the bill, 
TTF revenues increase commensurately for the required activities. 
 
Prince George’s County has previously advised that, for fiscal 2023, approximately 
13,743 citations were issued by speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 and subsequently 
satisfied with the county; after cost recovery, $334,456 was remitted to the Comptroller for 
distribution to SHA. This figure excludes any citations issued that were contested in 
District Court, voided for technical reasons, or otherwise not paid. Although  
Prince George’s County also advises that 80% of its speed camera violations are for lower 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 349/ Page 4 
threshold violations (i.e., 12 to 19 miles per hour over the speed limit), violations over 
15 miles per hour are subject under the bill to a penalty that may be at least $30 more than 
the maximum penalty under current law. 
 
Accordingly, citation revenues remitted to SHA increase under the bill, potentially by more 
than $100,000 annually; however, the higher penalty levels are also likely to have a 
deterrent effect, which may offset the higher revenues over time as driver behavior 
changes. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
District Court  
 
General fund expenditures for the District Court increase for programming changes 
necessary to modify its penalty fee schedule to meet the bill’s requirements. 
Programming-related costs total an estimated $21,048 in fiscal 2026. 
 
As noted above, the increased penalties established by the bill likely result in additional 
cases before the District Court as individuals receiving citations contest the case to avoid 
paying the higher penalties. It is anticipated that the Judiciary can handle any increased 
case volume using existing budgeted resources; however, the bill may have a more 
significant operational impact on the District Court locations in Prince George’s County, 
depending on the portion of individuals cited who choose to request a trial. 
 
State Highway Administration 
 
To the extent SHA receives more revenues than it currently does under the existing 
revenue-sharing requirement noted above, TTF expenditures increase commensurately for 
the 
required 
activities 
(e.g., 
implementing 
solutions 
to 
safety 
issues 
on  
Maryland Route 210). As noted above, in fiscal 2023, $334,456 was remitted to the 
Comptroller for distribution to SHA. Similar to the effect discussed above for TTF 
revenues, any such impact terminates September 30, 2028, when the authorization for 
speed cameras on Maryland Route 210 terminates.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 974 of 2024 and HB 431 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 485 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 349/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Comptroller’s Office; Prince George’s County; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5