START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 301 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 301 
(Delegate Moon) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Forensic Genetic Genealogical DNA Analysis and Search - 
Affidavit for Judicial Authorization 
 
 
This bill alters the information that must be asserted and is required to be included in a 
sworn affidavit submitted by a law enforcement agent for the initiation of a forensic genetic 
genealogical DNA analysis and search (FGGS). Under the bill, a sworn affidavit must be 
submitted by a law enforcement agent with approval of a prosecutor from the relevant 
jurisdiction asserting that the identity of the perpetrator is unknown instead of that 
reasonable investigative leads have been pursued and failed to identify the perpetrator. The 
sworn affidavit requirements may not be construed to require that all investigative leads 
have been exhausted. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  FGGS means the forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis of biological 
material using single-nucleotide polymorphisms or other sequencing techniques to develop 
a forensic genetic genealogical (FGG) profile; a subsequent search using the FGG profile 
in a publicly available open-data personal genomics database or a direct-to-consumer 
genetic genealogy service to find individuals related to the source of the FGG profile; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 301/ Page 2 
a genealogical search using public records and other lawful means to obtain information in 
accordance with statutory requirements. 
 
Generally, FGGS may not be initiated without judicial authorization and without certifying 
before the court that the forensic sample and the criminal case meet specified criteria. If an 
FGGS is certified in accordance with specified criteria, the court must authorize the 
initiation of the FGGS. Chapters 830 and 831 of 2024 exempt from these requirements 
FGGS conducted solely for the purpose of identifying an individual who is deceased or the 
subject of a missing person report filed with a law enforcement agency in the State and 
whose whereabouts are unknow. 
 
As part of this process, a law enforcement agent must submit a sworn affidavit, with 
prosecutorial approval, asserting specified facts regarding the crime being investigated and 
testing that has already been conducted on the forensic sample. The sworn affidavit must 
also assert that, unless the crime being investigated presents an ongoing threat to public 
safety or national security concerns, reasonable investigative leads have been pursued and 
failed to identify the perpetrator. FGGS is restricted to direct-to-consumer or publicly 
available open data personal genomics databases meeting specified notice requirements. 
There are informed consent requirements that must be met before law enforcement can 
obtain a DNA sample from a third party to assist in FGGS. Law enforcement may not 
collect a covert reference sample for an FGGS investigation from any third-party individual 
who has refused consent. However, investigators may seek authorization to obtain a covert 
sample from a third party if obtaining informed consent from the third party presents 
specified risks to the investigation and the third party has not already refused informed 
consent. The fear that a third party will refuse informed consent may not constitute the 
basis for seeking a covert sample. The person obtaining the informed consent must have 
training from a genetic counselor approved by the Office of Health Care Quality, as 
specified. 
 
Law enforcement seeking to collect a covert DNA sample from a potential putative 
perpetrator or a third party must meet specified criteria, including (1) required notification 
to the authorizing court prior to collection of the covert sample; (2) with respect to a covert 
sample from a third party, an affidavit submitted by investigative authorities to the court 
that seeking informed consent from a third party presents specified risks to the 
investigation; and (3) a proffer by investigative authorities to the court of their plan to 
collect the sample without unduly intrusive surveillance and invasions of privacy. 
Law enforcement must also follow requirements regarding testing, use, and destruction of 
the sample. The law enforcement officer conducting the covert collection must report back 
to the court every 30 days about the progress of the covert collection, as specified. Absent 
a showing of good cause, efforts to collect a covert sample must cease after six months. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 301/ Page 3 
DNA samples and genetic genealogy information must be destroyed in compliance with 
specified requirements. A genetic genealogist participating in an FGGS must turn over to 
investigators all records and materials collected in the course of the FGGS on the 
completion of an FGGS investigation and a genetic genealogist may not keep any records 
or materials. In addition, a genetic genealogist must ensure that specified records have been 
deleted or removed from any FGG website. Further, the prosecutor must retain and disclose 
any records or materials as required under the Maryland Constitution, U.S. Constitution, 
and the rules of discovery under Maryland Rules 4-262 and 4-263, but the prosecutor may 
not otherwise use or share the records or materials. 
 
A person who discloses genealogical or DNA information without authorization of a court 
order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or 
a $5,000 maximum fine. A person who willfully fails to destroy DNA and genetic 
information as required is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. A person whose genetic genealogy information, 
FGG profile, or DNA sample is wrongfully disclosed, collected, or maintained in violation 
of statutory provisions has a private right of action under relevant State law guiding tort 
claims, and is entitled to minimum liquidated damages of $5,000 for a violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Talbot counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3