START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 344 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 344 
(Delegates Stein and Lehman) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Environmental Service - Membership of Board of Directors - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the composition of the Board of Directors of the Maryland Environmental 
Service (MES) by replacing the State Treasurer with the Secretary of Planning (or the 
Secretary’s designee) and adding two nonvoting members – one member from each the 
Senate of Maryland and the House of Delegates. The bill also specifies that (1) certain 
provisions regarding the terms of board members do not apply to the Secretary of Planning, 
the Executive Director, or the legislative members and (2) the Secretary of Planning and 
the legislative members may not serve as the Secretary, Treasurer, or Chair of the Board. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances; however, the 
State Treasurer’s Office experiences administrative efficiencies, which allows staff to 
redirect their time and resources to other duties. The Maryland Department of Planning 
(MDP) can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MES is an instrumentality of the State and a self-supporting, not-for-profit 
public corporation that serves State, local, and federal agencies and the private sector 
through designing, planning, financing, constructing, operating, and monitoring projects 
for water and wastewater treatment, solid waste management, composting, recycling, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 344/ Page 2 
dredged material management, hazardous materials cleanup, stormwater services, and 
renewable energy. 
 
The MES Board of Directors is composed of the following eight members, seven of which 
are voting members, as the Executive Director does not vote:  (1) the Executive Director; 
(2) the State Treasurer (or the State Treasurer’s designee); (3) three members from the 
public sector in the State in positions responsible for environmental, water, wastewater, or 
solid waste management; (4) one member from the private sector in the State with 
technical, financial, development, or legal experience related to environmental, water, 
wastewater, or solid waste management; (5) one member from the private sector in the 
State with financial experience related to environmental, water, wastewater, or solid waste 
management; and (6) one member from the private sector in the State with experience or 
expertise in matters related to business ethics, as specified. 
 
Five members of the board constitute a quorum, and five affirmative votes are necessary 
for any action taken by the board. The term of a member other than the State Treasurer is 
four years, and the terms of members other than the State Treasurer are staggered, as 
specified. The Executive Director and the State Treasurer may not serve as the Secretary, 
Treasurer, or Chair of the Board. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to MDP, the full board meets monthly, and there are 
two subcommittees which meet twice a year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 315 (Senators Brooks and Kagan) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2