START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 323 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 323 
(Delegate Forbes) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Domestic Partnership and Marriage - Required Information 
 
 
This bill specifies, when registering a domestic partnership or obtaining a marriage license, 
that the full legal name and date of birth of each party must be provided, in addition to 
other requirements specified in statute. The bill also requires for each domestic partnership 
registration filed with the register of wills to include the Social Security number (SSN) of 
each party who has one. The SSN provided by a party may not be disclosed as part of the 
public record of the declaration of domestic partnership, except as provided in § 4‐334 of 
the General Provisions Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill may help protect federal funding by ensuring that Maryland law 
complies with federal requirements, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Registered Domestic Partnerships – Generally 
 
Chapter 647 of 2023 allows the registration of domestic partnerships to have the same 
effect as marriage under various provisions of the Estates and Trusts Article of the 
Maryland Code. Two individuals may register a domestic partnership by filing a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 323/ Page 2 
declaration of domestic partnership with the register of wills in the county in which the 
domestic partners are domiciled. A declaration filed with the register of wills must:   
 
 
include (1) the full name of each domestic partner; (2) the home address of each 
domestic partner; and (3) the age of each domestic partner; 
 
be signed directly by each party, or by another individual, at the express direction 
of the party and in the party’s presence; 
 
be signed in the physical presence of a notary public or before a notary public 
through communication technology in accordance with the State Government 
Article; and 
 
affirm under penalty of perjury that each domestic partner is (1) at least age 18; 
(2) the sole domestic partner of the other; (3) not married; and (4) in a committed 
relationship with the other individual. 
 
The register must maintain adequate records of declarations of domestic partnership, 
amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and termination statements. A 
declaration of domestic partnership filed with a register of wills is a public record. The 
register must deny inspection of the part of a declaration of a domestic partnership that 
contains the home address of either domestic partner. 
 
Obtaining a Marriage License 
 
Statute establishes certain procedures for individuals obtaining a marriage license. In order 
to apply for a marriage license, one of the parties to be married must:   
 
 
appear before a court clerk and give, under oath, specified information, which must 
be placed on an application form by the clerk, including (1) the full name of each 
party; (2) the place of residence of each party; and (3) the age of each party; 
 
sign the application form; and 
 
provide the clerk with the SSN of each party who has one and a copy of an official 
government-issued birth certificate or other official government-issued document 
or record demonstrating the age of each party. 
 
The SSN of the parties must be included in the electronic file for the marriage license 
application and, except as otherwise provided by statute (discussed below), may not be 
disclosed as part of the public record of the marriage license application. 
 
Section 4-334 of the General Provisions Article 
 
Generally, a custodian must deny inspection of the part of an application for a marriage 
license that contains an SSN. A custodian must, however, allow inspection of the part of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 323/ Page 3 
an application for a marriage license that contains an SSN by a person in interest or, on 
request, the State Child Support Administration. 
 
Requirements of Statutorily Prescribed Procedures to Improve the Effectiveness of Child 
Support Enforcement 
 
As a condition of receiving certain federal funding, states must have in effect laws requiring 
the use of specified procedures to increase the effectiveness of the child support 
enforcement program in the state. This includes procedures to require the SSN (if the 
individual has one) to be recorded for (1) any applicant for a professional, driver’s, 
occupational, recreational, or marriage license and (2) any individual who is subject to a 
divorce decree, support order, or paternity determination. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 286 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Register of 
Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3