START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 322 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 322 
(Delegate Wims) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Municipal Elections - Administration 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes the State Administrator of Elections to (1) enter into a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with a municipality to support the administration 
of the municipality’s elections and (2) lease a voting system or any other equipment used 
to administer an election to the municipality for use in the municipal election in accordance 
with the MOU. The bill repeals provisions that authorize a local (county) board of elections 
to lease a voting system to any governmental or nongovernmental entity within the county. 
The bill also alters provisions governing the inclusion of municipal offices and questions 
on a statewide ballot.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually, beginning as early as FY 2025, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Municipal expenditures may increase annually, beginning as early as 
FY 2025, as discussed below. Revenues are not expected to be affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
State Support for Municipal Elections 
 
The bill authorizes the State Administrator to enter into an MOU with a municipality that 
allows the State Administrator to work collaboratively with the municipality to support the 
administration of the municipality’s elections. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 322/ Page 2 
Leasing of Voting System and Other Election Equipment 
 
The bill authorizes the State Administrator to lease a voting system or any other equipment 
used to administer an election to a municipality for use in a municipal election in 
accordance with an MOU with a municipality entered into by the State Administrator. 
 
The State Administrator must determine the terms and conditions of the lease and distribute 
the proceeds of the lease to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund (FCFF). 
 
The bill also repeals provisions that authorize a local board of elections to lease a voting 
system to any governmental or nongovernmental entity within the county. 
 
Inclusion of Municipal Offices and Questions on a Statewide Ballot 
 
The bill modifies the date by which a municipality must file a request with the State Board 
of Elections (SBE) to include municipal offices and questions on a statewide ballot. The 
deadline is moved from 18 months before the deadline under State law for a certificate of 
candidacy to be filed for the applicable election to 9 months before the deadline under State 
law for a certificate of candidacy to be filed for the applicable election. 
 
The bill also modifies an existing provision that requires the municipality that files the 
request to certify that the charter of the municipality requires, and the municipality has 
established, specified deadlines and procedures for the administration of municipal 
elections for the municipality that are consistent with the deadlines and procedures for State 
and county elections. The bill modifies the provision by adding that deadlines and 
procedures for voter registration and voting be certified as consistent with State and county 
deadlines and procedures. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Applicability of State Election Law to Municipal Elections 
 
State election law governs the administration of federal, State, county, and Baltimore City 
elections held during statewide elections every two years, and special elections, but 
generally 
does 
not 
govern 
municipal 
elections 
other 
than 
those 
in  
Baltimore City (which is considered a “county” for purposes of State law). Municipal 
elections are primarily governed by each municipality’s law and occur at various times 
throughout the year and in odd- and even-numbered years.  
 
While State law governing elections generally does not apply to municipal elections, there 
are certain provisions of State law that address municipal elections, including those that 
(1) prohibit a municipality from requiring an individual to own or control an interest in 
property to participate in an election or hold office in the municipality; (2) allow a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 322/ Page 3 
municipality to use the information in the statewide voter registration database to 
administer voter registration for its elections; (3) allow a municipality to request that SBE 
include the offices and questions to be voted on in a municipal election on the statewide 
ballot (within the municipality) during a statewide election; (4) require municipalities to 
allow no-excuse absentee voting (mail-in voting) in municipal elections; (5) make State 
voting-related offenses (e.g., voting more than once, voter intimidation) and associated 
criminal penalties applicable to municipal elections; and (6) require municipalities to 
submit their election results to SBE to publish on the SBE website. 
 
Voting System and Election Administration Costs 
 
Each county must pay for its share of 50% of the State’s cost of acquiring and operating 
the uniform statewide voting systems for voting in polling places and for absentee voting, 
including the cost of maintenance, storage, printing of ballots, technical support and 
programming, related supplies and materials, and software licensing fees. 
 
Statute authorizes a local board of elections to lease a voting system to any governmental 
or nongovernmental entity within the county. The local board must determine the terms 
and conditions of the lease. The local board must pay the governing body of the county, 
within 30 days of receipt, the proceeds of the lease. 
 
Inclusion of Municipal Offices and Questions on a Statewide Ballot 
 
A municipality that makes a request that SBE include on a statewide ballot the offices and 
questions to be voted on in a municipal election must:   
 
 
file the request with SBE on or before the day that is 18 months before the deadline 
date applicable for individuals who are required to file a certificate of candidacy; 
and 
 
certify as part of the request that the charter of the municipality requires, and the 
municipality has established, deadlines and procedures for the administration of the 
municipality’s elections that are consistent with deadlines and procedures for State 
and county elections established by SBE with regard to (1) the filing of certificates 
of candidacy; (2) the filling of a vacancy in office; (3) the filing of a petition; and 
(4) the certification of a ballot question. 
 
If SBE previously included a municipal election on the ballot, that municipality’s elections 
may continue to appear on the ballot without the municipality filing an additional request; 
however, a municipality must file a request if, since the municipality’s election last 
appeared on the ballot, there has been a significant change in the method the municipality 
uses to conduct its elections. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 322/ Page 4 
Within 30 days after receipt of a municipality’s request, SBE, after consultation with the 
local board in the county where the municipality is located, must notify the municipality 
of its decision whether to include the municipal election on the ballot. If SBE approves a 
municipality’s request, SBE must (1) include the offices and questions at the end of the 
ballot and (2) arrange the offices and questions in a similar order as other offices and 
questions are arranged on the ballot. 
 
A municipality must reimburse SBE and the applicable local board for any additional costs 
incurred by SBE or the local board on account of including the offices and questions to be 
voted on in a municipal election on the ballot. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (FCFF) revenues may increase annually, beginning as early 
as fiscal 2025, reflecting revenues from leasing voting system or other election equipment 
to municipalities pursuant to the bill. 
 
The extent of any increase in special fund revenues cannot be reliably estimated at this 
time; however, for illustrative purposes regarding potential lease revenues from a single 
municipal election, using the City of Annapolis as an example, special fund revenues may 
increase by $23,400 from leasing equipment to the city for a single primary or general 
election. This estimate accounts for leasing of (1) 1 ballot scanner, 2 ballot marking 
devices, 15 voting booths, and 3 pollbooks for each of 8 polling places and (2) 8 ballot 
drop boxes. 
 
To the extent that SBE receives revenues from leasing equipment to municipalities even in 
the absence of the bill, the extent of the increase in State revenues due to the bill is reduced. 
SBE has received lease revenues from the cities of Annapolis and Frederick in the past but 
it is not clear whether revenues are received in the future in the absence of the bill.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Municipal expenditures may increase annually, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025, for municipalities that (1) enter into an MOU with the State Administrator and 
lease voting system or other election equipment, as illustrated above under State Revenues, 
and (2) do not otherwise pay SBE, to lease the equipment, in the absence of the bill. 
 
The bill’s repeal of the authority of local boards of elections to lease a voting system to any 
governmental or nongovernmental entity within the county is not expected to affect county 
finances. It does not appear that counties currently generate revenue from such leases. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 322/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 88 (Senator Kagan, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cities of Annapolis and Takoma Park; Montgomery County; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5