START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 375 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Bicycles, Play Vehicles, and Unicycles - Authorizations and Requirements (Jay's 
Law) 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person to ride a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a sidewalk or 
sidewalk area unless prohibited by local ordinance. (Under current law, a person may ride 
these vehicles on sidewalks or sidewalk areas only where allowed by local ordinance.) 
When riding a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a sidewalk or sidewalk area or in or 
through a crosswalk, a person must yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian or an individual 
riding on an electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in general fund revenues to the extent fewer 
citations are issued as a result of the bill. Enforcement can be handled with existing 
resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments can review and update local ordinances as needed and 
otherwise handle enforcement with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
For purposes of the Maryland Vehicle Law, “bicycle” means a vehicle that (1) is designed 
to be operated by human power; (2) has two or three wheels, with one being more than 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 375/ Page 2 
14 inches in diameter; and (3) has a drive mechanism other than pedals directly attached to 
a drive wheel. In general, the term includes an electric bicycle, a moped, and an electric 
low-speed scooter. However, a moped is not considered a bicycle with respect to provisions 
of the vehicle law relating to driving on sidewalks. 
 
“Play vehicle” means a vehicle that has two or more wheels, is propelled only by human 
power, and is not a bicycle or a wheelchair. A “unicycle” is not defined for purposes of the 
vehicle law. 
 
“EPAMD” means a pedestrian device that (1) has two nontandem wheels; (2) is 
self-balancing; (3) is powered by an electric propulsion system; (4) has a maximum speed 
capability of 15 miles per hour; and (5) is designed to transport one person. 
 
Driving on Sidewalks 
 
Subject to specified exceptions, a person may not drive a vehicle on a sidewalk or sidewalk 
area unless it is a permanent or authorized temporary driveway. Where allowed by local 
ordinance, a person may ride a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a sidewalk or sidewalk 
area. In a place where a person may ride a bicycle on a sidewalk or sidewalk area, a person 
may also ride a bicycle from the curb or edge of the roadway in or through a crosswalk to 
the opposite curb or edge of the roadway. 
 
A violation of the above restrictions is a misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of $500. 
The prepayment penalty established by the District Court is $70, and the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA) must assess one point against the driver’s license. If the violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalty is $110, and MVA must assess 
three points against the driver’s license.  
 
A person who is lawfully operating a bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle on a sidewalk or 
sidewalk area or in or through a crosswalk generally has the rights and restrictions 
applicable to pedestrians under the vehicle law. At an intersection, a person operating a 
bicycle, play vehicle, or unicycle is subject to all traffic control signals, as specified.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 77 and HB 111 of 2024; HB 519 of 2023; and HB 1153 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 392 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 375/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3