START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 367 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 367 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations Boards - English Proficiency Requirements and Licensure 
by Endorsement for Nursing 
 
 
This bill prohibits a health occupations board from requiring an applicant to provide 
additional evidence of English proficiency if the individual holds a valid, unrestricted 
license, certification, or registration from another state that requires such evidence for 
licensure, certification, or registration. Each health occupations board that requires 
evidence of English proficiency must prominently maintain on its website a statement that 
an applicant may not be required to provide additional evidence of English proficiency if 
the applicant holds a valid, unrestricted license, certification, or registration from another 
state that requires evidence of English proficiency for licensure, certification, or 
registration. The bill also alters English proficiency requirements for the State Board of 
Nursing (MBON) and the State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP) and the conditions of 
licensure by endorsement for MBON. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Generally, the bill’s changes can be absorbed with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 367/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Health Occupations Boards – Generally 
 
Under current law, twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating 
various health professions in Maryland. Many health occupations professions participate 
in interstate compacts that offer expedited authorizations to practice in other compact 
states. With specified exceptions, an individual must be licensed, certified, registered, or 
permitted by the respective board before the individual may practice in the State, such as 
the Nurse Licensure Compact (NLC). Licensure, certification, registration, and permit 
requirements vary by profession but typically require, among other things, specified 
education and experience, passage of a national and/or State examination, and a criminal 
history records check (CHRC). 
 
Pursuant to the Health Occupations Article, the following health occupations boards 
require some form of specified evidence of English proficiency:  (1) State Board of 
Acupuncture; (2) State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, 
Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists; (3) State Board of Dental Examiners 
(BDE); (4) MBON; (5) MBOP; (6) Board of Physical Therapy Examiners; (7) State Board 
of Physicians (MBP); (8) State Board of Podiatric Medical Examiners; and (9) State Board 
of Professional Counselors and Therapists. 
 
Maryland Board of Nursing 
 
Registered Nurses and Licensed Practical Nurses:  Under current law, an applicant for a 
registered nurse (RN) or licensed practical nurse (LPN) license must demonstrate written 
or oral competency in English. Acceptable proof of proficiency includes (1) after at least 
three years of enrollment, graduation from a recognized English-speaking undergraduate 
school; (2) graduation from a recognized English-speaking professional school; or 
(3) completion of at least five years of practicing nursing in another state or 
English-speaking territory of the United States. If any disciplinary charge or action that 
involves a problem with communicating in English is brought against a licensee, MBON 
must require the licensee to take and pass a board-approved standardized test of English 
language proficiency. 
 
Under the bill, two additional methods for demonstrating competency in English are added:  
(1) passing an English proficiency exam approved by the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services; or (2) holding a valid, unencumbered multistate license under the NLC. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 367/ Page 3 
The bill also clarifies that MBON may not require an applicant for licensure as an RN or 
LPN who is or was previously licensed in any other state as an RN or LPN to demonstrate 
competency in English as a part of its examination or licensing procedures if the other state 
has an English language competency component (rather than a similar English language 
competency component) as part of its examination or licensing procedures. 
 
Licensure by Endorsement:  Under current law, MBON may issue a license by 
endorsement and waive any appropriate examination requirement for an applicant who has 
an active unencumbered RN or LPN license in any other state or country if the applicant:   
 
 
submits to the board an application on the form the board requires; 
 
submits to a CHRC; 
 
pays the application fee set by the board; and 
 
provides adequate evidence that they (1) met Maryland’s educational requirements 
at the time they graduated from a nursing education program; (2) passed an 
examination at the time they were licensed that is similar to the Maryland 
examination; and (3) meet the qualifications otherwise required. 
 
The bill clarifies that an applicant may hold a valid, unencumbered multistate license under 
the NLC as an alternative to providing the evidence specified above in order to qualify for 
licensure by endorsement. 
 
State Board of Pharmacy 
 
Under current law, an applicant for a pharmacist license must demonstrate oral competency 
in English by passing a board-approved standardized test of oral competency. If a 
disciplinary charge or action that relates to a problem with the oral communication of 
English is brought against a licensee, MBOP must require the licensee to pass a 
board-approved standardized test of oral competency. 
 
The bill clarifies that MBOP may not require an applicant for a pharmacist license who is 
or was previously licensed in another state as a pharmacist, to demonstrate oral competency 
in English, if the other state’s examination and licensing procedures at the time the 
applicant was licensed include an oral competency component. The bill repeals the 
requirement that the other state’s oral competency component be similar to that in 
Maryland. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill prohibits a health occupations board from requiring an 
applicant who holds a valid, unrestricted license, certification, or registration from another 
state that requires evidence of English proficiency to provide additional evidence of such 
proficiency as a condition for licensure, certification, or registration. Additionally, each 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 367/ Page 4 
health occupations board that requires proof of English proficiency must prominently 
maintain on its website a statement that an applicant may not be required to provide 
additional evidence of English proficiency if the applicant holds a valid, unrestricted 
license, certification, or registration from another state that requires evidence of English 
proficiency for licensure, certification, or registration. 
 
MBP, MBOP, MBON, and BDE advised that the bill’s requirements can be implemented 
with existing budgeted resources. Accordingly, this analysis assumes that most of the  
nine affected health occupations boards can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 72 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4