START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 389 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 389 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and D. Jones) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Day Care Centers, Child Care Homes, and Child Care Centers 
 
   
This bill expands eligibility for a personal property tax exemption for specified child care 
homes to include large family child care homes. The bill also alters the eligibility for local 
real property tax credits for day care centers and child care homes to include large family 
child care homes and repeals a requirement that specified improvements to real property 
must be completed after a specified date in order to be eligible for the property tax credit. 
The bill specifies that the amount of the annual property tax credits for day care centers 
and child care homes may not exceed $10,000 or the amount of property tax due. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.    
  
Local Effect:  Local government property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
FY 2026 to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, the changes to 
existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the 
property tax credit, and local jurisdictions increase the maximum amount of the property 
tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 389/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
In Maryland, there is a tax on business-owned personal property that is imposed and 
collected by local governments. Personal property generally includes business property 
including furniture, fixtures, office and industrial equipment, machinery, tools, supplies, 
inventory, and any other property not classified as real property. To provide for uniform 
assessments, the State Department of Assessments and Taxation is responsible for 
assessing all personal property. Each county or municipal government is responsible for 
issuing the tax bills and collecting the tax. The tax year begins on July 1 and ends on 
June 30. The personal property tax has been a local tax exclusively since 1984 when the 
State tax rate on personal property was set at zero. 
       
Except for personal property used in connection with a business, personal property owned  
by an individual is not subject to valuation or taxation. Personal property used in 
connection with a business is also exempt if it is owned by an individual and is located at 
the individual’s residence and either (1) is used in connection with a licensed family day 
care home or (2) had a total original cost (excluding vehicles) of less than $10,000. If all 
of a person’s personal property statewide had a total original cost of less than $20,000, the 
personal property is exempt from personal property valuation and taxation. 
 
Real Property Tax Credits 
 
Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit for (1) real property used 
exclusively for a specified day care center and (2) real property used for a family child care 
home. 
 
As a point of reference, the Maryland State Department of Education reports that there are 
151 licensed large family child care homes in the State. In addition, there are 2,426 licensed 
child care centers and 4,006 registered family child care facilities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 
due to the expansion of the personal property tax exemption and to the extent that local 
jurisdictions grant the property tax credits. 
 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
Expanding the eligibility for a personal property tax exemption for specified child care 
homes to include large family child care homes should not have a significant impact on 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 389/ Page 3 
local revenues. Based on information provided by Worcester County, expanding the 
personal property tax exemption could reduce county revenues by approximately 
$7,500 per year beginning in fiscal 2026. Assuming the fiscal impact in other jurisdictions 
is similar, the potential decrease in local revenues is assumed to be minimal across the 
State.  
 
Property Tax Credits for Day Care Centers and Family Child Care Homes  
 
Four counties have authorized real property tax credits for day care centers – Frederick, 
Harford, Howard, and Montgomery. In fiscal 2024, Montgomery County provided 
five property tax credits totaling $11,122. The other counties that have authorized the 
property tax credit did not provide any tax credits in fiscal 2024. 
 
Howard County is the only jurisdiction to authorize the property tax credit for family child 
care homes. In fiscal 2024, Howard County provided one entity a property credit of $3,000. 
 
Due to the limited extent to which local governments have authorized these local property 
tax credits, the legislation is not expected to have a significant fiscal impact on local 
governments. 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 516 (Senator King, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 12, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3