START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 313 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 313 
(Delegate Korman) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Specially Designed Vintage Reproduction Registration Plates 
 
 
This bill reinstates and makes permanent a temporary requirement (established by 
Chapter 170 of 2013) for the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to make available 
specially designed vintage reproduction registration plates. As a result, an existing 
provision that limited the availability for sale of such plates to one year from the initial date 
of issuance is repealed. MVA must charge an initial ($100) and renewal ($25) fee for the 
vintage reproduction plates. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase for 
MVA to reinstate and resume issuing the specially designed vintage reproduction 
registration plates established by Chapter 170, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Negligible increase in local highway user revenues distributed from the 
Gasoline and Motor Vehicle Revenue Account (GMVRA) beginning in FY 2026, under 
the assumptions discussed below. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 170 required MVA, for a period of one year, to 
offer a specially designed vintage reproduction registration plate to a qualifying vehicle 
owner. To be eligible to receive a vintage reproduction registration plate, the vehicle for 
which the plate is to be affixed must be a Class A (passenger), Class E (small truck), 
Class L (historic), Class M (multipurpose), or Class N (street rod) vehicle. The vintage 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 313/ Page 2 
reproduction plate must be designed to resemble the 1910 Maryland registration plate, 
which has black lettering on a yellow background. 
 
The Act required MVA to set initial registration and renewal fees for recovery of the costs 
of issuing the plate and for distribution to GMVRA. The bill repeals this requirement and 
instead requires an owner of a vehicle assigned a registration plate under the bill’s 
authorization to pay (1) $100 when initially issued the registration plate and (2) $25 each 
time the registration plate is renewed. Similar to the requirements of Chapter 170, fees 
collected must be (1) used to recover MVA’s costs and (2) credited to GMVRA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MVA noted in 2024 (for a prior introduction of the bill) that, under 
the prior authorization for special vintage reproduction registration plates (which was in 
place for calendar 2014), about 742 of the originally issued plates remained in use.  
 
As noted above, the bill requires MVA to charge an initial $100 fee for the registration 
plate, with a $25 recurring fee each time the plate is renewed. MVA is unable to determine 
the exact number of special vintage reproduction registration plates that may be issued 
under the bill. However, for illustrative purposes only, TTF revenues increase by 
approximately $135,000 in fiscal 2026 and $156,250 in fiscal 2030 as shown in Exhibit 1 
and under the following assumptions: 
 
 
MVA projects that 1,250 vehicle owners may purchase the once-again-available 
registration plates in fiscal 2026 (750 plates at titling, reflecting the bill’s effective 
date, and about 500 vintage reproduction plates as substitute tags). 
 
Every new plate issued is charged the $100 fee specified in the bill, while each such 
plate issued as a substitute tag is also charged a $20 substitute tag fee, per MVA. 
 
1,000 new plates are issued in each of the out-years (fiscal 2027 through 2030). 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2028, the recurring $25 renewal fee is paid as owners renew 
their registrations associated with all the tags purchased (or renewed) two years 
earlier. 
 
The cost for MVA to produce each plate is approximately $10. 
 
Any amount remaining after cost recovery is distributed to TTF, which will be 
distributed according to GMVRA requirements, with specified portions accruing to 
TTF and the remainder distributed to local governments as capital transportation 
grants (any local highway user revenues are negligible under these assumptions). 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 313/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Illustrative Vintage Registration Plate Program Revenues and Expenditures 
Fiscal 2026-2030 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Total Fee Revenues 
$135,000 
$100,000 
$131,250 
$125,000 
$156,250 
Newly Titled Tag Fee 
75,000 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
Substitute Tag Fees 
60,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Renewal Fee 
- 
- 
31,250 
25,000 
56,250 
Cost Recovery Expenditures 
12,500 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
Net Fiscal Effect 
$122,500 
$90,000 
$121,250 
$115,000 
$146,250 
 
Notes:  The net amount shown is the amount to be distributed through the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle 
Revenue Account after cost recovery. At an estimated cost of $10 for each plate, the portion of fee revenue 
for issuance of each plate subject to cost recovery is $10. Thus, in fiscal 2026, with 1,250 plates issued, 
$12,500 of fee revenues is used for cost recovery; annually thereafter, with 1,000 plates issued, $10,000 is 
for cost recovery. 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB1004 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 54 (Senator Folden) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 313/ Page 4 
 

END OF PAGE 4