START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 360 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 360 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Community Associations - Registration Fees for 
Administrative Hearing Process  
PG 408-25 
 
 
This bill requires the registration of all cooperative housing corporations, condominiums, 
and homeowners associations, commonly referred to as common ownership communities 
(COCs), in Prince George’s County. The Prince George’s County Executive must set an 
annual registration fee in an amount sufficient to adequately fund the cost to establish and 
administer the administrative hearing process by the Office of Community Relations 
(OCR), as specified. Additionally, the bill permits the county to establish certain additional 
fees for specified purposes. Among other provisions, the bill also prohibits unregistered or 
falsely registered persons from accessing the county’s administrative hearing process until 
the person is properly registered. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County fee revenues and administrative expenditures 
increase, potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Since January 1, 2011, State statute requires the 
Prince George’s County OCR to maintain a Community Association Managers Registry. 
Any entity, including a sole proprietorship, that provides community association 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 360/ Page 2 
management services for COCs in Prince George’s County must register and renew 
annually by January 31. Each entity must pay an annual fee of $100. A person who willfully 
violates, or causes another person to willfully violate, this requirement is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000; violations under 
the bill are also subject to this penalty provision. 
 
The 
bill 
expands 
this 
registration 
requirement 
to 
all 
COCs 
located 
in 
Prince George’s County and renames the registry as the Community Association Registry. 
The bill also repeals the $100 fee required under existing statute, instead requiring the 
county executive to establish a fee in an amount sufficient to fund the cost to establish and 
administer the administrative hearing process by OCR. The fee may include (1) a per-unit 
charge for community associations to renew registrations; (2) fees for services relating to 
the administrative hearing process that seek to recover actual cost; and (3) a per-unit charge 
to developers for recording community association documents. 
 
Fees collected must fund the administrative hearing process offered by the county for 
disputes between community associations and owners. This includes covering costs 
associated with technical assistance provided by OCR and the Commission on Common 
Ownership Communities in Prince George’s County. 
 
In addition to the annual registration fee, the bill authorizes the county to implement 
reasonable fees to cover the aforementioned costs related to the administrative hearing 
process and a per-unit charge to developers for document recording. The governing body 
of the COC is responsible for compliance with the bill’s provisions. 
 
For more information on COCs, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect: According to Prince George’s County, the bill’s changes necessitate  
three additional staff members in OCR to investigate cases, facilitate administrative 
hearings, and fulfill other administrative responsibilities. Consequently, county 
expenditures increase by approximately $400,000 on an annual basis. These costs are 
assumed to be fully offset by fee revenues under the bill. For context, according to research 
conducted by Prince George’s County into similar fees in other jurisdictions, 
Montgomery County assesses an annual fee of $6.50 per unit per community, and collects 
approximately $1.0 million from registration fees annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 360/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 360/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COC). In Maryland, 
a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are located in some 
form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the 
exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation for Community 
Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community associations with an 
estimated 1.0 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 360/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. While a small number of local governments 
(Charles and Montgomery counties) created such offices before the report’s publication, 
some local jurisdictions have since created programs to regulate or provide oversight of 
COCs. For example, Prince George’s County created its Common Ownership 
Communities Program in 2007 to assist governing bodies, as well as owners and residents 
of HOAs, residential condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with 
education, training, and alternative dispute resolution. 
 

END OF PAGE 5