START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 480 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
St. Mary’s County – County Plans – Public Sewerage Systems and Water Supply 
Systems 
 
 
This bill repeals requirements and restrictions related to additional local review that must 
occur before St. Mary’s County is authorized to adopt, revise, or amend its county water 
and sewerage plan for provisions in the county plan related to new or expanded public 
sewerage systems and water supply systems. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. This bill does not have a direct impact on State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal. The bill results in operational efficiencies for St. Mary’s County 
but is not anticipated to materially affect county finances. Other local jurisdictions are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law and the bill, each county (including 
Baltimore City) must have an individual or group (with adjoining counties) plan that is 
approved by the Maryland Department of the Environment that has a 10-year forecasted 
water and sewerage plan to demonstrate how safe and adequate water and sewerage 
facilities will be provided to support planned redevelopment and new growth that is 
outlined in their comprehensive land use plans. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 480/ Page 2 
Under current law and the bill, except as specified, before a county governing body may 
adopt a county plan or a revision or amendment to the county plan, the county governing 
body must submit the county plan, revision, or amendment to each official planning agency 
that has jurisdiction in the county, as specified, for review and comment within a 30-day 
period for consistency with planning programs for the area. The county planning agency 
must also certify that the plan, revision, or amendment is consistent with the county’s 
comprehensive plan. 
 
Under current law, in St. Mary’s County, a new or expanded public sewerage system or 
water supply system may not be allowed unless the adoption, revision, or amendment to 
the county plan is reviewed by the St. Mary’s County Planning Commission and approved 
by the Board of County Commissioners (or the commissioners’ designee, as specified). 
Further, the commissioners may not approve the adoption, revision, or amendment until 
the St. Mary’s County Planning Commission conducts a complete review of the county 
plan and holds (or arranges to be held) at least one public hearing on the plan. When 
conducting its review and making a recommendation, the St. Mary’s County Planning 
Commission must consider and make certain findings of fact, as specified. Under the bill, 
these St. Mary’s County-specific provisions are repealed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2