START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 472 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 472 
(Delegate Addison) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - 45th Alcoholic Beverages District - 
Licenses 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a Class C 
beer, wine, and liquor license in the 400 block of East Oliver Street in the 45th alcoholic 
beverages district, as specified. The bill also establishes a geographic boundary in the 
45th alcoholic beverages district within which a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license 
holder or a Class B-D-7 beer, wine, and liquor license holder may only sell alcoholic 
beverages during specified hours. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  This bill authorizes the board to issue a Class C beer, wine, and liquor 
license in the 400 block of East Oliver Street in the 45th alcoholic beverages district only 
if (1) the applicant does not convert the license to a different license class; (2) alcoholic 
beverages are served outdoors only to patrons seated at tables or standing in a courtyard 
area; (3) the applicant does not allow the off-premises sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(4) alcoholic beverages sales do not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m.; and (5) the applicant 
executes a memorandum of understanding with the Greenmount West Community 
Association. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 472/ Page 2 
Additionally, the bill authorizes the holders of a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license or 
a Class B-D-7 beer, wine, and liquor license to sell beer, wine, and liquor from 9:00 a.m. 
to 10:00 p.m. in a specified area. For a license holder within the bounded area, the hours 
of sale (1) may not begin before 9:00 a.m. or end after 10:00 p.m. and (2) may not be 
extended if they begin later than 9:00 a.m. or end before 10:00 p.m. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the board is prohibited from issuing new alcoholic beverage 
licenses in the 40th, 41st, 43rd, 44th, and 45th alcoholic beverages districts, except under 
specific circumstances. 
 
The board may issue a one-day license or a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to 
restaurants in these districts if they meet a minimum capital investment of $200,000 
(excluding land and buildings) and have a seating capacity of at least 75 individuals. 
 
Additionally, Class C beer, wine, and liquor licenses may be issued in certain locations 
within the 40th, 44th, and 45th districts. Several Class B-D-7 licenses may also be issued 
in designated areas, provided applicants meet food sales requirements, execute 
memorandums of understanding with community associations, and comply with other 
licensing conditions. 
 
A Class A beer, wine, and liquor license holder may sell alcohol Monday through Saturday 
from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in the Park Heights Master Plan area and from 6 a.m. to 
midnight elsewhere in the city. On select Sundays between Thanksgiving and  
New Year’s Day, sales are permitted from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m., provided the licensee 
pays a supplementary fee of $120 per Sunday by September 30. Additionally, the license 
holder may sell on two other Sundays during the year by paying the same fee at least 
two weeks in advance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 304 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2