START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 420 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 420 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means and Health and 
Government Operations 
Finance and Education, Energy, and the 
Environment 
 
Education and Health - Emergency Use Epinephrine - Alterations 
 
 
This bill replaces the term “auto-injectable epinephrine” with “emergency use epinephrine” 
throughout the Education, Health-General, and Health Occupations articles and renames 
the Emergency Use Auto-Injectable Epinephrine Program to the Emergency Use 
Epinephrine Program, thereby including non-injectable forms of epinephrine in existing 
programs. The bill defines “emergency use epinephrine” as a portable, disposable drug 
delivery device or product approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that 
contains a premeasured single dose of epinephrine that is used to treat anaphylaxis in an 
emergency situation. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can update resources and 
regulations with existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Auto-injectable epinephrine” means a portable, disposable drug delivery 
device that contains a premeasured single dose of epinephrine that is used to treat 
anaphylaxis in an emergency situation. “Anaphylaxis” means a sudden, severe, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 420/ Page 2 
potentially life-threatening allergic reaction that occurs when an individual is exposed to 
an allergen. 
 
Education 
 
Each local board of education must establish a policy to authorize the school nurse and 
other school personnel to administer auto-injectable epinephrine, if available, to a student 
who is determined to be or perceived to be in anaphylaxis, regardless of whether the student 
(1) has been identified as having an anaphylactic allergy or (2) has a prescription for 
epinephrine from a licensed health care practitioner. The policy must also include training 
for school personnel on how to recognize the symptoms of anaphylaxis; procedures for the 
emergency administration of auto-injectable epinephrine; proper follow-up emergency 
procedures; and a provision authorizing a school nurse to obtain and store at a public school 
auto-injectable epinephrine to be used in an emergency situation. These elements are also 
required, as appropriate, for any policy voluntarily developed by nonpublic schools; 
however, nonpublic schools must also establish an ongoing process for oversight and 
monitoring by a licensed health care practitioner. Each public school must submit a report 
to MDH of each incident at school or a school-related event that required the administration 
of auto-injectable epinephrine. MDH must develop and disseminate a standard form that 
can be used for this reporting. 
 
Child Care Providers 
 
Chapter 273 of 2024 requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and 
MDH to jointly develop guidelines to reduce the risk of exposure to anaphylactic major 
food allergens in child care settings. The guidelines must identify at least one free training 
resource on reducing the risk of exposure to anaphylactic major food allergens that is 
appropriate for child care providers. Based on the guidelines, MSDE must develop a model 
policy for child care providers that, at a minimum, includes (1) emergency protocols, 
including comprehensive guidelines for storage and administration of epinephrine; 
(2) cross-contamination prevention strategies; and (3) notification of a child’s anaphylactic 
allergy to staff who come in contact with the child and child care provider administrators. 
MSDE must post the guidelines, model policy, and training resources on its website.  
 
Except for any willfully or grossly negligent act, a child care provider (or employee of a 
provider) who responds in good faith to the anaphylactic reaction of a child in accordance 
with guidelines or by use of auto-injectable epinephrine is immune from civil liability for 
any act or omission in the course of responding to the reaction. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 420/ Page 3 
Emergency and Allergy Treatment Program 
 
The Emergency and Allergy Treatment Program within MDH authorizes a certificate 
holder or their agent to administer life-saving treatment to individuals who have severe 
adverse reactions to allergens or insect stings when physician or emergency medical 
services are not immediately available in a youth camp.  
 
MDH may issue a certificate, including an endorsement on the operating certificate of a 
youth camp, to an applicant who (1) operates a youth camp; (2) is at least age 18; and 
(3) has successfully completed an educational training program, at the applicant’s expense, 
that is approved by MDH. A certificate is valid for up to one year and authorizes a 
certificate holder to obtain, store, and administer auto-injectable epinephrine. 
 
An agent is an individual at least age 18 who has completed an educational training 
program approved by MDH and has been appointed by a certificate holder to administer 
auto-injectable epinephrine in accordance with statutory provisions. 
 
An applicant also has to have a written policy that includes (1) authorization for the 
certificate holder or their agent to administer auto-injectable epinephrine (if available) to 
an individual determined, or believed, to be experiencing anaphylaxis, regardless of 
whether the individual has been previously known to experience anaphylaxis or has a 
prescription for epinephrine; (2) a requirement that youth camp personnel complete 
training on recognizing the symptoms of anaphylaxis; (3) procedures for administering 
auto-injectable epinephrine in an emergency; (4) proper emergency follow-up procedures; 
(5) authorization for a certificate holder to obtain and store auto-injectable epinephrine for 
emergency use; and (6) a requirement that each certificate holder implement a notification 
system to alert campers’ parents or guardians of the youth camp’s auto-injectable 
epinephrine policy before the campers attend the camp.  
 
A certificate holder must submit a report to MDH of each incident that occurs while the 
youth camp is in session that required the administration of auto-injectable epinephrine. 
MDH must publish a report that summarizes the information obtained from these required 
reports by January 31 annually.  
 
A licensed physician and registered nurse practitioner are authorized to prescribe and 
dispense, and a licensed pharmacist may dispense, auto-injectable epinephrine to a 
certificate holder. A certificate holder may receive, possess, and store auto-injectable 
epinephrine. Additionally, in emergency situations when physician or emergency medical 
services are not immediately available, a certificate holder or agent may administer 
auto-injectable epinephrine to an individual. However, that individual must either be 
experiencing anaphylaxis, or the certificate holder or agent must believe in good faith that 
the individual is experiencing anaphylaxis. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 420/ Page 4 
A cause of action may not arise against a certificate holder or agent if the certificate holder 
or agent acts in good faith to administer auto-injectable epinephrine to an individual 
experiencing or believed by the certificate holder or agent to be experiencing anaphylaxis, 
unless the certificate holder or agent’s conduct amounts to gross negligence, willful or 
wanton misconduct, or intentionally tortious conduct. A cause of action may not arise 
against any physician or registered nurse practitioner for any act or omission if the 
physician prescribes or dispenses auto-injectable epinephrine and the necessary 
paraphernalia for administration of auto-injectable epinephrine, in good faith, to a person 
certified by MDH under statute. Likewise, a cause of action may not arise against any 
pharmacist for any act or omission when the pharmacist in good faith dispenses 
auto-injectable epinephrine and the necessary paraphernalia for the administration of 
auto-injectable epinephrine to a person certified by MDH under statute. 
 
Emergency Use Auto-Injectable Epinephrine Program 
 
Chapter 527 of 2018 established the Emergency Use Auto-Injectable Epinephrine Program 
at Institutions of Higher Education within MDH to authorize qualified individuals (through 
issuance of a certificate) employed by a food service facility or a recreation and wellness 
facility at an “eligible institution” to obtain, store, and administer auto-injectable 
epinephrine to individuals experiencing (or believed to be experiencing) anaphylaxis. 
Eligible institutions can also obtain and store auto-injectable epinephrine under specified 
circumstances. There are legal immunities for certificate holders, prescribing physicians, 
and pharmacists acting in compliance with the program. There are also reporting 
requirements for certificate holders and MDH. Chapter 478 of 2020 renamed the program 
to the Emergency Use Auto-Injectable Epinephrine Program and expanded it to include 
any food service facility in the State that voluntarily participates. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that the Prevention and Health Promotion 
Administration would need to update existing regulations, procedures, and materials 
developed for the Emergency Use Auto-Injectable Epinephrine Program. Any necessary 
updates can be completed with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  In August 2024, the FDA approved Neffy, the first epinephrine 
nasal spray device, which can treat allergic reactions without injection. Other 
non-injectable forms of epinephrine are currently in development and awaiting FDA 
approval. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 420/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 459 (Senator Gile) - Finance and Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5