START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 412 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 412 
(Delegate Korman) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Elections - Local Boards of Elections - Open Meeting Requirements (Local 
Boards of Elections Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of elections to (1) at least 48 hours in advance of each 
open meeting, make publicly available on its website the open meeting agenda and other 
specified materials, including materials that will be voted on at the meeting, unless the 
meeting is being held due to an emergency, natural disaster, or other unanticipated situation 
(in which case the agenda and materials must be made available as far in advance as 
practicable) and (2) provide live video streaming of open meetings (with the exception of 
off-site meetings, site visits, and inspections) and maintain complete and unedited archived 
video 
recordings 
of 
the 
meetings 
for 
a 
minimum 
of 
five 
years. 
By  
December 1, 2025, the State Board of Elections (SBE) must adopt regulations to ensure 
the bill’s live streaming requirements are implemented in a manner that maximizes 
transparency of open meetings of local boards. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures increase for some counties, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 412/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Open Meetings Act – Generally 
 
The Open Meetings Act (OMA) requires State and local public bodies to hold their 
meetings in a manner that is open to the public, to give the public adequate notice of those 
meetings and their expected content, and to make minutes and any recordings of the 
meetings available to the public afterward. In certain circumstances, public bodies may 
discuss some topics confidentially in a “closed session.” Please see this Department of 
Legislative Services fact sheet for additional detail on the Act. 
 
Enhanced Open Meeting Requirements 
 
SBE, certain economic development organizations, and other specified public bodies such 
as the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA), the Maryland Transportation Authority 
(MDTA), the Public Service Commission, and the State Ethics Commission are subject to 
certain enhanced requirements under OMA. These requirements include (1) making 
available on the public body’s website each open meeting agenda and other specified 
documents at least 48 hours in advance of a meeting unless the meeting is being held due 
to an emergency, natural disaster, or other unanticipated situation (other public bodies must 
provide an agenda at least 24 hours before a meeting) and (2) offering live video streaming 
of each portion of a meeting held in open session (subject to limited exceptions for MSA 
and MDTA). However, the law establishes that, for these entities that are subject to 
enhanced requirements, a project site visit or educational field tour is not considered a 
“meeting” of the public body, for purposes of both the enhanced requirements and OMA 
in general, if no organizational business is conducted. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase for some counties, to meet the bill’s 
requirements. Currently, at least two local boards, in Anne Arundel and Montgomery 
counties, already meet the bill’s live streaming and archiving requirements. Estimated costs 
for counties whose local boards do not already meet both requirements vary. From among 
estimates provided by a small number of counties and local boards: 
 
 
Calvert County, which already provides livestreaming of its local board meetings, 
can implement the storage requirement with existing resources; 
 
Carroll County incurs a one-time cost of up to $5,300; 
 
Harford County incurs a quoted one-time cost of $11,500 and an annual 
$250 licensing fee; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 412/ Page 3 
 
Howard County incurs one-time costs totaling $25,000 (for audio/video equipment) 
and an annual cost of $2,000 for storage of video recordings; and 
 
Worcester County incurs a one-time installation cost of $6,000 and an annual cost 
of $1,400 for livestreaming and support. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 337 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Calvert, Carroll, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and Worcester counties; Baltimore City; Maryland Association of 
Election Officials; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3