START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 469 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 469 
(Delegate Nkongolo) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Local Government - Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and 
Visitors Bureau Designation 
 
 
This bill updates obsolete references in the Local Government Article relating to the 
Anne Arundel County hotel tax by changing the reference from the Annapolis and 
Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau to Visit Annapolis and 
Anne Arundel County, Inc. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Anne Arundel County finances 
or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Hotel Tax Distribution 
 
Anne Arundel County imposes an 8% hotel tax. From any revenue generated in the 
City of Annapolis from the hotel tax, Anne Arundel County must distribute:  (1) 3% to the 
Annapolis Art in Public Places Commission; (2) 3% to the Arts Council of 
Anne Arundel County; (3) 17% to the Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 469/ Page 2 
and Visitors Bureau; and (4) 3% to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund to be used only for 
housing assistance payments. 
 
From the county’s share of revenue from the hotel tax, Anne Arundel County must 
distribute 3% to the Arts Council of Anne Arundel County and 17% to the Annapolis and 
Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau. 
 
Hotel Tax Use Report 
 
By November 1 of each year, the Arts Council of Anne Arundel County and the 
Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau must provide a 
report on their use of the hotel tax revenue to the following individuals:  (1) the 
Anne Arundel County Executive; (2) the Annapolis Mayor and city council; (3) members 
of the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and House Ways and Means Committee; 
and (4) members of the General Assembly representing Anne Arundel County. 
 
The Anne Arundel County Auditor is authorized to audit the financial records of the 
Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau, among other 
organizations. If the Annapolis and Anne Arundel County Conference and Visitors Bureau 
fails to submit its annual report or correct any findings of the county auditor, the 
City of Annapolis or Anne Arundel County may withhold dedicated appropriations from 
the hotel tax. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 50 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; City of Annapolis; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2