START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 781

Chapter 781

(House Bill 490)

AN ACT concerning

St. Mary’s County – Competitive Bidding – Threshold

FOR the purpose of increasing the minimum contract value to require a competitive bidding
process in St. Mary’s County for contracts for services or supplies; and generally
relating to procurement in St. Mary’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 12–301
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

12–301.

(a) This section applies only to commission counties.

(b) The provisions of §§ 9–105 and 9–106 of this article apply to an act, an
ordinance, or a resolution adopted under this section.

(c) The county commissioners shall:

(1) establish a competitive bidding process for awarding contracts for
services or the purchase of supplies if the contract exceeds $15,000;

(2) require a bond in connection with a contract, regardless of the amount;
and

(3) if no bids are submitted in response to a request for bids, obtain the
services or supplies in a manner that the county commissioners consider appropriate.

(d) In Somerset County, subsection (c) of this section does not apply to a contract
solely for design or consultation services.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 781 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) IN ST. MARY’S COUNTY, SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION APPLIES
ONLY TO A CONTRACT FOR SERVICES OR THE PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES IF THE
CONTRACT EXCEEDS $50,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2