START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 436 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 436 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Medical Exemption for Enhanced Tinted Windows - Time 
Limitation 
 
 
This bill requires the medical exemption that allows the operation of a vehicle with 
enhanced window tinting on a highway in the State to be valid indefinitely if a licensed 
physician determines that the owner’s medical condition that necessitates the tinting is 
permanent.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a person may not operate certain types of vehicles on a highway 
in the State if the vehicle has affixed tinting materials to the windows after manufacture 
that do not allow a light transmittance through the window of at least 35%. This level of 
tinting is considered enhanced window tinting. 
 
For any vehicle, enhanced window tinting is prohibited below the AS1 line or below 
five inches from the top of the front windshield. For a private passenger vehicle 
(i.e., personal cars or trucks), the enhanced tinting is prohibited on any window of the 
vehicle. For other affected vehicles (including for-hire vehicles, certain larger trucks, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 436/ Page 2 
multipurpose vehicles), the enhanced tinting is prohibited only on the windows to the 
immediate right or left of the driver. Additionally, a person is prohibited from installing 
any window tinting that violates these requirements. 
 
A person who must be protected from the sun for medical reasons is exempt from the 
enhanced tinting prohibition if the owner has, in the vehicle at the time the vehicle is 
stopped by a police officer, a written certification meeting Department of State Police 
requirements that details the owner’s medical need for enhanced tinted windows from a 
physician licensed to practice medicine in the State. A written certification is valid for a 
period of time that the licensed physician determines the owner needs the enhanced tinted 
windows, but the timeframe may not exceed two years. 
 
If a police officer observes a vehicle is being operated with window tinting that violates 
the prohibition, the officer may stop the driver of the vehicle and, in addition to a citation 
charging the driver with the offense, issue a safety equipment repair order to have the 
tinting removed. The civil penalty for a violation is $70. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 707 (Senator Zucker) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2