START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 450 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 450 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
Finance 
 
Maryland Transit Administration - Disability Reduced Fare Program - Renewal 
for Permanently Disabled Individuals 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to automatically renew the 
Disability Reduced Fare Program certification of an enrollee who is permanently disabled; 
MTA must adopt regulations to establish a process to implement this requirement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MTA can meet the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Transit Administration – Generally  
 
MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit system throughout the Baltimore-Washington 
metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, 
such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, Maryland Area Regional 
Commuter (MARC) trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 450/ Page 2 
District of Columbia transit system, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies 
responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. Exhibit 1 shows 
MTA’s current fares for the Light Rail and Metro Subway system, as well as the fares for 
its MobilityLink Program. A separate fare structure applies for MARC and commuter bus 
services. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Basic Transit Fares for Light Rail and Metro Subway 
 
Type of Pass 
Full Fare 
Senior/Disability 
Student 
Mobility 
One-way 
$2.00 
$1.00 
$1.60 
$2.20 
Day Pass 
4.60 
2.30 
- 
- 
Weekly Pass 
22.00 
- 
- 
- 
Monthly Pass 
77.00 
23.00 
- 
- 
All Access College Pass 
- 
- 
57.00 
- 
Mobility 20-Trip Book 
- 
- 
- 
44.00 
 
Source:  Maryland Transit Administration 
 
 
Disability Reduced Fare Program and MobilityLink Program 
 
Although not established in statute, through the Disability Reduced Fare Program, MTA 
offers reduced fares (as shown above) for its transit services to people with disabilities, 
senior citizens (age 65+), and Medicare cardholders. To participate in the program, an 
individual must show a valid identification (ID) card in one of the following categories:  
(1) a government-issued photo ID showing age 65 or older; (2) an MTA Reduced Fare 
Disability photo ID card; (3) a disability ID from another transit agency and a 
government-issued photo ID; or (4) a Medicare card and a government-issued photo ID. 
To obtain an MTA Reduced Fare Disability ID card, an application must be filled out by 
the applicant and the applicant’s health care professional; there is no fee. 
 
MTA advises that under its current practice, persons with permanent disabilities must 
recertify with MTA every three years, and persons with temporary disabilities must 
recertify annually. 
 
The Disability Reduced Fare Program is distinct from MTA’s MobilityLink Program. 
MobilityLink is MTA’s paratransit service that is offered to people, who because of a 
disability, are functionally unable to get to a bus stop, wait unassisted at a stop, or board or 
ride a bus or train by themselves. MobilityLink provides door-to-door service by picking 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 450/ Page 3 
up participating riders at the first exterior door of the rider’s home or pick-up location and 
dropping the rider off at the first exterior door of their destination. 
 
Additional Comments:  MTA advises that the bill may not provide MTA with an 
opportunity to mitigate fraud related to the Disability Reduced Fare Program. Specifically, 
MTA advises that the bill does not provide it with explicit authority to periodically check 
in with program participants to verify continued eligibility for the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department 
of Disabilities; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3