START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 447 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 447 
(Delegate Chisholm) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Anne Arundel County – Property Tax Credit – Habitat for Humanity of the 
Chesapeake, Incorporated 
 
 
This bill alters the name of Arundel Habitat for Humanity to the Habitat for Humanity of 
the Chesapeake for purposes of an optional Anne Arundel County and municipal property 
tax credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County and municipal property tax revenues decrease to the 
extent that property owners qualify for the property tax credit. County and municipal 
expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Anne Arundel County and municipalities in the county are authorized to 
grant a property tax credit for real property owned by Arundel Habitat for Humanity. 
 
In addition, Section 9-252 of the Tax – Property Article authorizes counties and 
municipalities to provide a property tax credit for real property that is (1) owned by Habitat 
for Humanity with the intention of relinquishing ownership in the near future; (2) used for 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 447/ Page 2 
the purposes of development, rehabilitation, and transfer to a private owner; and (3) not 
occupied by administrative or warehouse buildings owned by Habitat for Humanity. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County and municipal property tax revenues decrease 
to the extent specified property owners qualify for the property tax credit. The amount of 
the revenue decrease depends on assessed value of eligible property and amount of the 
property tax credit established by the county and/or municipality. 
 
For fiscal 2023 and 2024, no State property tax credits were claimed. Anne Arundel County 
reports that the county did not provide any county property tax credits in 
fiscal 2023 or 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 178 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2