START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 347

Chapter 347

(House Bill 458)

AN ACT concerning

University of Maryland, College Park Campus – TerpsEXCEED Program –
Funding

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Governor to include in the annual budget bill,
beginning in a certain fiscal year, a certain appropriation to the University of
Maryland, College Park Campus TerpsEXCEED (EXperiencing College through
Education and Employment Discovery) Program to provide educational and
employment opportunities to students with intellectual disabilities; and generally
relating to funding for the TerpsEXCEED Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 13–107
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

13–107.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PROGRAM” OR “TERPSEXCEED PROGRAM” MEANS THE
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK CAMPUS TERPSEXCEED
(EXPERIENCING COLLEGE THROUGH EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT DISCOVERY)
PROGRAM.

(3) “UNIVERSITY” MEANS THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND,
COLLEGE PARK CAMPUS.

(B) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$350,000 FOR THE TERPSEXCEED PROGRAM AT THE UNIVERSITY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 347 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) THE FUNDING PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION MAY SERVE AS A SUSTAINABLE FUNDING SOURCE FOR THE MANAGEMENT
OF THE TERPSEXCEED PROGRAM TO PROVIDE EDUCATIONAL AND EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES TO STUDENTS WITH INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES AND TO ENABLE
THE PROGRAM’S FUTURE EXPANSION.

(2) THE FUNDING PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION MAY BE USED FOR:

(I) ADVISING AND COUNSELING STUDENTS IN THE PROGRAM
TO ASSIST WITH SCHEDULING AND REGISTRATION FOR CLASSES, OUTREACH TO
PROFESSORS, DESIGNING COURSE MODIFICATIONS, PROVIDING IN–CLASS SUPPORT
AND ACCOMMODATIONS, AND OFFERING MENTOR TUTORING;

(II) ADVISING AND COUNSELING STUDENTS IN THE PROGRAM
TO ASSIST WITH CALENDAR MANAGEMENT;

(III) ADVISING AND COUNSELING STUDENTS IN THE PROGRAM
TO FACILITATE STUDENT CLUB AND ACTIVITY CHOICES;

(IV) TRAINING AND COMMUNICATING WITH RESIDENT
ASSISTANTS AND RESIDENT DIRECTORS IN THE PROGRAM;

(V) OFFERING COURSES IN PEER MENTORSHIP IN THE
PROGRAM;

(VI) ADVISING PEER MENTORS IN THE PROGRAM;

(VII) OFFERING COURSES IN CAREER DEVELOPMENT IN THE
PROGRAM;

(VIII) DEVELOPING INTERNSHIP AND JOB OPPORTUNITIES ON
AND OFF CAMPUS, GATHERING SUPERVISOR FEEDBACK, AND PROVIDING DIRECT
EMPLOYMENT SUPPORT, INCLUDING GOAL SETTING AND CAREER PLANNING FOR
EACH STUDENT IN THE PROGRAM;

(IX) CONNECTING STUDENTS IN THE PROGRAM WITH STATE
AGENCIES THAT SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES;

(X) MANAGING THE USE OF SELF–DIRECTED WAIVER BUDGETS
FOR ON–CAMPUS SUPPORTS IN THE PROGRAM;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 347

(XI) MANAGING FINANCIAL AID SYSTEMS FOR THE PROGRAM;

(XII) SHARING RESOURCES NEEDED FOR POST–PROGRAM
SUPPORT; AND

(XIII) FACILITATING A CROSS–AGENCY, INTEGRATED RESOURCE
TEAM FOR EACH STUDENT IN THE PROGRAM AND ANY OTHER CUSTOMIZED
PROGRAMMING OR DIRECT COUNSELING THAT SUPPORTS THE WELL–BEING OF
EACH STUDENT IN THE PROGRAM AND FOSTERS SPECIFIC OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SELF–DETERMINATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3