START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 486 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 486 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
St. Mary's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Civil Penalty for Sales Violations 
 
 
This bill increases, from $1,000 to $2,500, the maximum civil penalty the St. Mary’s 
County Board of License Commissioners may impose on a person who violates a law 
relating to licensing the sale of alcoholic beverages in St. Mary’s County. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County revenues may increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the 
extent that license holders violate the provisions of the bill and additional fines are 
imposed. St. Mary’s County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board issues multiple alcoholic beverages licenses in  
St. Mary’s County. Each license affords the license holder certain privileges and 
responsibilities related to the sale, distribution, and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
 
Unlicensed Establishments 
 
An unlicensed establishment may not (1) sell or serve alcoholic beverages; (2) keep 
alcoholic beverages; (3) allow a customer to consume or to be served alcoholic beverages 
that they purchased; or (4) sell, serve, or keep component parts of mixed alcoholic drinks 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 486/ Page 2 
to a member or guest. An operator of a for-profit establishment that is not licensed may not 
knowingly allow a customer to bring alcoholic beverages into the establishment. 
 
In St. Mary’s County, a person who violates a law relating to licensing the sale of alcoholic 
beverages is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, subject to a fine of up to $1,000, 
the revocation of their license, or both. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  St. Mary’s County revenues may increase up to $1,500 dollars per 
civil penalty imposed, beginning in fiscal 2026, depending on the number of licensing 
violations that result in a civil penalty. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2