START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 406 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 406 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-
Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists - Appointment of Hearing Aid 
Dispenser Members 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to appoint the hearing aid dispenser members of the State 
Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech Language 
Pathologists, and Music Therapists, with the advice of the Secretary of Health, from a list 
submitted to the Secretary and the Governor by the board, instead of by the Maryland 
members of the Hearing Society of Maryland, Washington, DC, and Delaware. The board 
must notify all licensed hearing aid dispensers of relevant vacancies for the purpose of 
soliciting nominations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and does not materially affect 
State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the board to practice 
audiology, to provide hearing aid services, to practice speech-language pathology, or to 
practice music therapy in Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 406/ Page 2 
The board comprises 15 members:  (1) 3 licensed audiologists; (2) 3 licensed 
speech-language pathologists; (3) 2 physicians; (4) 2 consumer members; (5) 3 licensed 
hearing aid dispensers; and (6) 2 licensed music therapists. Professional members are 
appointed by the Governor, with the advice of the Secretary; consumer members are 
appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary and the advice and consent of 
the Senate. Members serve four-year terms until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
 
Several professional associations currently submit nominations for board members, 
including the Maryland Academy of Audiology; the Maryland Society of Otolaryngology; 
the Hearing Society of Maryland, Washington, DC, and Delaware; and the 
Maryland Association for Music Therapy. The board itself submits nominations for 
speech-language pathologist members. No nominations are required for the consumer 
members, but an organization representing patients or family members of patients served 
by individuals licensed by the board may submit recommendations to the Governor. 
 
Vacancies for the licensed audiologist and licensed speech-language pathologist members 
require the board to notify all relevant licensed professionals in the State to solicit 
nominations to fill the vacancy. There are no notification requirements for physician, 
licensed hearing aid dispenser, or licensed music therapist members. For the consumer 
members, the board and the Secretary of Health may notify organizations representing 
patients or family members of patients served by individuals licensed by the board of a 
vacancy for the consumer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2