START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 421 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 421 
(Delegate S. Johnson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Public Safety - 9-1-1 Trust Fund - 9-8-8 Suicide Prevention Hotline 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funds for costs 
related to the operation of the 9-8-8 suicide prevention hotline that may be shared with 
9-1-1 activities, including software interfaces and joint training. The bill also repeals the 
prohibition that prevents the 9-1-1 Trust Fund from being utilized for any purpose 
associated with the 9-8-8 suicide prevention hotline and, instead, prohibits the 9-1-1 Trust 
Fund from being utilized for any costs that solely support the 9-8-8 suicide prevention 
hotline. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the 9-1-1 Trust Fund increase, likely 
minimally, as additional activities and projects are funded; however, the bill is anticipated 
to result in administrative efficiencies and may decrease special fund expenditures for the 
9-8-8 Trust Fund, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
9-1-1 Trust Fund and Fee Revenues 
 
The 9-1-1 Trust Fund is managed by the Maryland 9-1-1 Board within the Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) and funded through a State 9-1-1 fee 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 421/ Page 2 
and county 9-1-1 fee. Telephone companies, wireless carriers, and other 9-1-1 accessible 
service providers collect and remit the fees monthly to the Comptroller for deposit into the 
fund. 
 
The State 9-1-1 fee is distributed to counties at the discretion of the Maryland 9-1-1 Board 
in response to county 9-1-1 system enhancement requests. The county fee, the prepaid 
wireless 9-1-1 fee remittances, and any investment earnings of the fund are all distributed 
quarterly to each county in prorated amounts according to the level of fees collected in 
each jurisdiction. Among other things, the purpose of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund is to fund the 
operation and maintenance of 9-1-1 systems, public safety answering point facilities costs, 
costs for public education materials, costs to maintain the cybersecurity of 9-1-1 systems, 
and training costs for specified personnel. 
 
Directly related to the bill, the 9-1-1 Trust Fund may not be used to pay for any purpose 
associated with the 9-8-8 suicide prevention hotline. 
 
9-8-8 Trust Fund and Fee Revenues 
 
Under Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide Hotline Designation 
Act of 2020, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) designated 9-8-8 as the State’s 
behavioral health crisis hotline on July 16, 2022. The chapters also established the 
9-8-8 Trust Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund to provide reimbursement for costs 
associated with designating and maintaining 9-8-8 as the universal telephone number for a 
national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline and developing and 
implementing a statewide initiative for the coordination and delivery of the continuum of 
behavioral health crisis response services. MDH administers the fund. 
 
Chapters 780 and 781 of 2024 established a State 9-8-8 fee with a structure and application 
nearly identical to the structure and application of the State’s 9-1-1 fee. The 9-8-8 fee is set 
at $0.25 and applied on specified 9-8-8 accessible services in Maryland (including on 
phoneline subscribers beginning October 1, 2024, and prepaid wireless purchasers 
beginning July 1, 2027). Notably, for the 9-1-1 fee, a telephone company may retain 0.5% 
of the 9-1-1 fees it collects to cover specified administrative expenses; however, a 
telephone company may not retain any portion of the 9-8-8 fee. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under current law, any training or technological upgrades that would 
benefit both the 9-1-1 and 9-8-8 systems would have to be procured separately to ensure 
9-1-1 funds are not spent for the benefit the 9-8-8 system. By allowing 9-1-1 Trust Fund 
monies to be used on projects that benefit both systems, the bill allows collaboration 
between the systems and removes any potential duplication of effort. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 421/ Page 3 
Therefore, while the bill increases special fund expenditures from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund as 
additional activities and projects are funded, the bill is anticipated to result in, at the very 
least, administrative efficiencies for both systems and may decrease expenditures from the 
9-8-8 Trust Fund. Nevertheless, MDEM advises that any increase in expenditures from the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund is anticipated to be minimal and not affect the solvency of the fund. In 
the long-term, the efficiencies made possible by the bill may decrease expenditures for both 
trust funds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 36 (Senators Kagan and Augustine) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3