START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 489 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 489 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Department of Labor - Study on Building Code Requirements for 
Single-Staircase Buildings 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) to (1) conduct a study 
on building code requirements for single-staircase buildings in the State and other states 
and (2) make recommendations regarding potential legislative or regulatory changes to 
authorize the construction of single-staircase buildings up to six stories above grade plane 
in the State for the purpose of increasing the affordable housing supply. By 
December 1, 2026, MD Labor must report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor, the General Assembly, and specified standing committees of the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $58,200 in FY 2026 and by $21,300 
in FY 2027 for contractual staff to complete the required report. No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
58,200 
21,300 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($58,200) 
($21,300) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 489/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must survey and document a representative sampling of state 
and local laws, ordinances, and policies in North America. The study must also analyze 
best practices for state and local governments when drafting building code requirements 
for single-staircase buildings up to six stories above grade, taking into consideration  
(1) the availability of an adequate water supply; (2) the presence and response capability 
of a professional fire department; (3) the practicality or feasibility of compliance with 
modern fire codes, as specified; (4) the practicability or feasibility of building in urban or 
infill settings; (5) the viability of redevelopment or adaptive reuse of historic properties; 
(6) any impacts of laws, ordinances, or policies on housing development or the cost of 
housing; and (7) any other relevant factors, as determined by MD Labor.  
 
The study must also make legislative and regulatory recommendations, including potential 
amendments to the Maryland Building Performance Standards (MBPS), to authorize the 
construction of single-staircase buildings up to six stories above grade plane in the State 
for the purpose of increasing the affordable housing supply by reducing barriers to 
multifamily housing development.  
 
In carrying out the study, MD Labor must consult with (1) a fire engineer who is a faculty 
member at a public institution of higher education that has a fire protection program;  
(2) a representative of the Professional Fire Fighters of Maryland, designated by its 
president; (3) a representative of the Maryland State Firefighters Association, designated 
by its president; (4) a representative of the Maryland Fire Chiefs Association, designated 
by its president; (5) a representative of the Metropolitan Fire Chiefs Association, 
designated by its president; (6) a representative of the Office of the State Fire Marshal; and 
(7) a representative of a Maryland nonprofit organization that advocates for safe and 
affordable housing. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards 
 
MD Labor currently incorporates by reference the International Building Code 
(2021 Edition), including the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 
(2021 Edition), with modifications, as MBPS. In general, the standards apply to all 
buildings and structures within the State for which a building permit application is received 
by a local government. Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) required 
MD Labor to adopt IECC (2018 Edition) by January 1, 2023, and to adopt each subsequent 
version of IECC within 18 months after it is issued. Each local jurisdiction must implement 
and enforce the most current version of MPBS and any local amendments to MPBS. In 
addition, any modification to MBPS adopted by the State after December 31, 2009, must 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 489/ Page 3 
be implemented and enforced by a local jurisdiction no later than 12 months after the 
modifications are adopted by the State. 
 
Generally, the International Building Code (2021 Edition) establishes minimum standards 
for the number of stairwells in buildings based on occupancy, the number of dwelling units, 
the maximum exit access travel distance, and other specified criteria. 
 
State Fire Prevention Code 
 
The State Fire Marshal must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among other things, 
the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of all kinds of equipment 
intended to control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also enforce 
regulations adopted by the State Fire Prevention Commission (SFPC). SFPC within the 
Department of State Police (DSP) must adopt comprehensive regulations as a State Fire 
Prevention Code. The commission adopted by reference, subject to some exceptions noted 
in the regulations, the NFPA 1 Fire Code (2018 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 
(2018 Edition), and some requirements of the International Building Code as the State Fire 
Prevention Code. The State Fire Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the 
political subdivisions of the State, and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire 
Marshal, a legally designated fire official of a county or municipal corporation of the State, 
or other persons legally appointed by the State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public 
Safety Article). 
 
Generally, NFPA 101 (2018 Edition) establishes minimum standards for the number of 
stairwells in all buildings based on building type, occupancy, and other specified criteria. 
 
Workgroup to Develop Fire Safety Best Practices for Pre-1974 High-rise Apartment 
Buildings 
 
Chapter 744 of 2024, among other things, established the Workgroup to Develop Fire 
Safety Best Practices for Pre-1974 High-rise Apartment Buildings. Staffed by DSP, the 
workgroup was required to (1) study fire safety risks in high-rise apartment buildings that 
do not have automatic sprinkler systems or other fire safety technology; (2) study current 
strategies, practices, and technology to mitigate fire risks, maximize evacuation of 
occupants, and allow for greater access and more expedient responses by emergency 
response professionals; and (3) develop recommendations and best practices for the 
improvement of fire safety in high-rise apartment buildings that do not have fire sprinkler 
systems and other fire safety technology. In developing its recommendations, the 
workgroup was required to consider (1) the availability, feasibility, and degree of fire 
hazard mitigation of each alternative fire protection system or arrangement; (2) the cost, 
design, installation, testing, and maintenance of each fire protection system; and (3) the 
duration of installation for each alternative fire protection system and the intensity of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 489/ Page 4 
disruption of normal occupancy caused by installation. The workgroup submitted its 
final report on December 23, 2024. 
 
State Expenditures:  MD Labor lacks the expertise to conduct the required study and is 
unable to absorb the additional duties required by the bill. The study (1) involves complex 
regulatory and statutory analysis from other states and municipalities and (2) must consider 
complex fire protection and fire suppression measures. Consequently, two temporary 
contractual staff members are needed to conduct the required study. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $58,222 in fiscal 2026, which assumes 
that contractual staff begin work on the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date, and by $21,317 
in fiscal 2027. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (25%) contractual 
assistant attorney general and one part-time (25%) contractual regulatory economist to 
consult with specified entities, compile relevant data, and submit the required report. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Contractual Positions (New) 
0.5 
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$44,589 
$21,038 
Operating Expenses 
  13,633 
       279 
Total State Expenditures 
$58,222 
$21,317 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
This estimate reflects termination of the contractual positions midway through fiscal 2027, 
following the completion of the required study. 
 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal can consult with MD Labor using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 436 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 489/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of State Police; International Code Council; National Fire Protection 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5