START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 497 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 497 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Rules 
 
Residential Child Care Programs - Transportation Companies - Regulation 
(Preventing Abduction in Youth Transport Act of 2025) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “youth transportation company” from using specified visual 
impairment or physical or mechanical restraints while transporting children to a 
“residential child care program,” except under specified circumstances. When the final 
intended destination is a residential child care program, a youth transportation company 
may not pick up a child for transport between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless 
the youth transportation company is under contract with the Department of Human 
Services (DHS). The Attorney General or an individual is authorized to bring an action 
against a youth transportation company that violates the bill’s prohibitions. The bill applies 
prospectively only.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. The 
Office of the Attorney General can implement the bill’s provisions using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Residential child care program” includes a facility or program that:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 497/ Page 2 
 
provides a residential environment such as (1) a program with a wilderness or 
outdoor experience, expedition, or intervention; (2) a boot camp experience or other 
experience designed to simulate characteristics of basic military training for 
correctional regimes; (3) an educational or therapeutic boarding school; or (4) a 
behavioral modification program; and  
 
serves children who have a history of diagnosis of (1) an emotional, behavioral, or 
mental health disorder; (2) a substance misuse or use disorder, including alcohol 
misuse or use disorder; or (3) an intellectual, developmental, physical, or sensory 
disability. 
 
“Residential child care program” does not include (1) a hospital licensed by the State;  
(2) a detention facility licensed by the State; (3) a youth correctional facility; (4) a 
substance abuse treatment facility; (5) a foster family home that provides 24-hour substitute 
care for children placed away from their parents or guardians for which the State child 
welfare services agency has placement and care responsibility and that is licensed and 
regulated by the State as a foster family home; or (6) any other secure facility. 
 
“Youth transportation company” means a business that specializes in transporting a child 
to a residential child care program.  
 
When the final intended destination is a residential child care program, a youth 
transportation company may not use:   
 
 
visual impairment, such as blindfolds and hoods;  
 
mechanical restraints, such as handcuffs, chains, irons, straitjackets, cloth restraints, 
leather restraints, plastic restraints, or similar items; or 
 
physical restraints, including holds, or other use of physical force to restrict free 
movement, unless (1) the restraints are necessary due to a substantial likelihood of 
imminent serious physical harm to a child or others and (2) there are no less 
restrictive alternatives that will alleviate the substantial likelihood of imminent 
serious physical harm to the child or others. 
 
Physical restraints may not be used as punishment, for convenience, or as a substitute for 
staff supervision. Only youth transportation company staff who have been adequately 
trained in restraint device usage may use and apply restraints during transportation. If 
restraints are necessary due to a substantial likelihood of imminent serious physical harm 
to a child or others, the restraints may be used only as long as the imminent risk persists.  
 
The Attorney General may bring an action against a youth transportation company for 
violating the bill’s restrictions and may seek injunctive relief and statutory damages up to 
(1) $1,000 for a first offense and (2) $3,000 for a subsequent offense. An individual may 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 497/ Page 3 
bring an action against a youth transportation company for violation of the bill’s 
prohibitions and may seek (1) restitution; (2) compensatory damages; (3) statutory 
damages up to $500 per violation; and (4) if awarded restitution or damages, reasonable 
attorney’s fees. An action must be filed within 10 years after the date that the victim reaches 
age of majority. 
 
Current Law:  Under the Human Services Article, “residential child care program” means 
an entity that provides 24 hours per day care for children within a structured set of services 
and activities that are designed to achieve specific objectives relative to the needs of the 
children served and that include the provision of food, clothing, shelter, education, social 
services, health, mental health, recreation, or any combination of these services and 
activities. “Residential child care program” includes a program (1) licensed by the 
Maryland Department of Health, DHS, or the Department of Juvenile Services and (2) that 
is subject to the licensing regulations of the members of the Children’s Cabinet governing 
the operations of residential child care programs. 
 
Statute does not directly address or prohibit the use of physical restraints and visual 
impairment under the circumstances specific to the bill. However, there are similar 
prohibitions applicable to other situations. For example, certain entities, including the 
Maryland State Department of Education, a local school system, the Maryland School for 
the Deaf, the Maryland School for the Blind, and the Juvenile Services Education Program 
are prohibited from using physical restraint on a student as a behavioral health intervention 
unless (1) physical restraint is necessary to protect the student or another individual from 
imminent serious physical harm and (2) other, less intrusive, nonphysical interventions 
have failed or been demonstrated to be inappropriate for the student. Additional restrictions 
are specified in applicable regulations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business youth transportation companies may not use 
specified visual impairment or physical or mechanical restraints, except under certain 
circumstances, and are subject to legal action and specified penalties for violations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 400 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Maryland Association of Counties; Office of 
the Attorney General; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 497/ Page 4 
Health; Department of Human Services; Military Department; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - April 4, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4