START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 438 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 438 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Civil Actions - Tortious Injury to or Death of Pet - Compensatory Damages 
(Buddy's Law) 
 
 
This bill increases, from $10,000 to $25,000, the maximum amount of compensatory 
damages that may be awarded to the owner of a pet from a person who tortiously causes 
an injury to or the death of a pet under specified circumstances. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person who tortiously causes an injury to or the death of a pet while 
acting individually or through an animal under the person’s ownership, direction, or control 
is liable to the owner of the pet for up to $10,000 in compensatory damages. The current 
damages cap went into effect on October 1, 2017. 
 
“Pet” means a domesticated animal and does not include livestock. “Compensatory 
damages” mean (1) the reasonable and necessary cost of veterinary care for a pet that was 
injured and (2) in a case involving the death of a pet, the fair market value of the pet before 
death and the reasonable and necessary cost of veterinary care. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 438/ Page 2 
In Anne Arundel County, Maryland and Rodney Price v. Michael H. Reeves, 474 Md. 46 
(2021), the Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) held that § 11-110 of 
the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article (the statute amended by the bill) defines and 
caps the recovery of compensatory damages for the tortious injury or death of a pet to the 
amount specified by the statute (currently $10,000) and does not allow for the recovery of 
additional uncapped compensatory damages, including noneconomic damages. The court 
specifically noted that while its analysis is based on the statutory language, “[t]he 
Legislature may wish to amend CJP § 11-110 in response to the various policy arguments 
in this case in order to allow for other forms of compensatory damages in cases involving 
the tortious injury or death of pets.” 
 
The case concerned the fatal shooting of a Chesapeake Bay Retriever by an Anne Arundel 
County police officer while the officer was canvassing a neighborhood for information 
regarding a series of burglaries. The case involved claims of trespass to chattel, violations 
of constitutional rights under the Maryland Declaration of Rights, and gross negligence. A 
detailed summary of this case can be found in the 2021 Court of Appeals Cases and 
Decisions Update. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 965 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 581 (Senator Henson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2