START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 426 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 426 
(Delegates Kaiser and Wilkins) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Postelection Tabulation Audits - Risk-Limiting Audits 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE), in collaboration with each local board 
of elections, to conduct a specified risk-limiting audit of at least one statewide contest and 
any other contests selected for audit by SBE following each statewide election. In addition, 
the bill (1) authorizes a local board to conduct a risk-limiting audit of a local contest at its 
discretion; (2) authorizes risk-limiting audits following special general elections; 
(3) modifies an automated software audit requirement so that it is instead an authorization; 
and (4) repeals an existing requirement to conduct a specified manual audit following each 
statewide general election. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $77,000 in FY 2026, $72,000 in 
FY 2027, and $51,000 in FY 2028 and future years. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
77,000 
72,000 
51,000 
51,000 
51,000 
Net Effect 
($77,000) 
($72,000) 
($51,000) 
($51,000) 
($51,000)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase annually beginning in 
FY 2026, as discussed below. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 426/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Risk-limiting Audit 
 
The bill requires SBE, in collaboration with each local board of elections, to audit the 
accuracy of the voting system’s tabulation of votes in each county by conducting a 
risk-limiting audit, following each statewide election, of (1) at least one statewide contest 
and (2) any other contests selected for audit by SBE. SBE must select the specific contests 
to be audited; however, a contest for an office for which the term begins in the month of 
December may not be selected for audit unless the election director for the county agrees 
to audit the contest. The bill authorizes a local board to conduct a risk-limiting audit of a 
local contest at the discretion of the local board. In addition, following a special general 
election, SBE, in collaboration with the local boards, may conduct a risk-limiting audit. 
 
“Risk-limiting audit” is defined as a postelection audit procedure that employs statistical 
methods to ensure a large, predetermined minimum chance of requiring a full manual count 
of voter-verifiable paper records in an audited contest if a full manual count of the 
voter-verifiable paper records would find a different outcome than the outcome determined 
by the electronic count. “Risk limit” is defined as the small, predetermined maximum 
chance that a risk-limiting audit will not require a full manual count of voter-verifiable 
paper records in an audited contest if a full manual count of the voter-verifiable paper 
records would find a different outcome than the outcome determined by the electronic 
count. “Electronic count” is defined as the vote totals produced by the voting system, and 
“manual count” is defined as inspection of voter-verifiable paper records by hand and eye 
to obtain vote totals in a contest. “Local contest” is defined as a contest that (1) is not a 
statewide contest and (2) appears on the ballot in all or part of a county, including a contest 
to represent a district that includes more than one county. 
 
A risk-limiting audit must (1) manually examine randomly chosen individual 
voter-verifiable paper records or batches of voter-verifiable paper records until the risk 
limit is met or the correct election outcome is established; (2) be completed before the 
Board of State Canvassers transmits a certified statement of the election results to SBE; 
and (3) be observable by the public to the maximum extent practicable. 
 
If a risk-limiting audit finds that the election outcome determined by the electronic count 
is inaccurate, the State Administrator, in consultation with SBE, must direct the relevant 
board of canvassers (a local board of elections after it organizes itself for the purpose of 
canvassing) to immediately investigate the matter to determine an accurate election result. 
The board of canvassers must conclude the investigation within three days and correct the 
election result in accordance with regulations adopted by SBE. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 426/ Page 3 
The State Administrator of Elections must report the results of the risk-limiting audit to the 
Board of State Canvassers and SBE. 
 
SBE must adopt regulations to carry out the bill, which must include, with respect to 
risk-limiting audits, (1) criteria for determining the contests to be audited; (2) the risk limit; 
and (3) the audit method. 
 
Modification of Automated Software Audit Requirement 
 
The bill modifies a requirement that an automated software audit of all ballots cast in an 
election be conducted after each statewide election, so that the automated software audit is 
instead authorized, rather than required, to be conducted after a statewide election. The bill 
also (1) requires that the audit be conducted in collaboration with the local boards of 
elections and (2) defines “automated software audit” as an audit of electronic images of 
ballots cast in an election using software that is independent of the voting system. 
 
Repeal of Existing Manual Audit and Audit Effect Provisions 
 
The bill repeals an existing requirement enacted under Chapter 523 of 2018 that SBE 
conduct a specified manual audit of voter-verifiable paper records following each statewide 
general election and an authorization for SBE to complete a manual audit of 
voter-verifiable paper records following each statewide primary election in a manner 
prescribed by the board. Under the existing manual audit requirement, voter-verifiable 
paper records are inspected by hand and eye to obtain vote totals in a contest that are 
compared to the vote totals produced for that contest by the electronic voting system. The 
manual audit is conducted on at least 2% of precincts statewide and a number of early 
votes, absentee votes, and provisional votes equal to at least 1% of the statewide total in 
the previous comparable election for each of those categories of votes. 
 
The bill also repeals a provision enacted under Chapter 523 that establishes that the manual 
audit and the automated software audit of the electronic images of ballots cast in each 
statewide election may not have any effect on the certified election results and must be 
used to improve the voting system and voting process for future elections. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Post-election Audit Requirements 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 523, SBE is required to conduct an audit of the accuracy of the voting 
system’s tabulation of votes, following each statewide general election, by completing 
(1) an automated software audit of the electronic images of all ballots cast in the election 
and (2) a specified manual audit of voter-verifiable paper records. Following each 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 426/ Page 4 
statewide primary election, SBE (1) must complete an automated software audit of the 
electronic images of all ballots cast in the election and (2) may complete a manual audit of 
voter-verifiable paper records in a manner prescribed by SBE. 
 
Manual Audit (Post-general Election) and Reporting 
 
The manual audit of voter-verifiable paper records required to be conducted following each 
statewide general election must be of (1) at least 2% of precincts statewide, including at 
least one randomly chosen precinct in each county and additional precincts selected by 
SBE and (2) a number of votes equal to at least 1% of the statewide total in the previous 
comparable general election of early votes, of absentee votes, and of provisional votes, 
including at least a minimum number of early votes, absentee votes, and provisional votes 
in each county, as prescribed by SBE. “Previous comparable general election” is defined 
as (1) in a presidential election year, the presidential election held four years earlier and 
(2) in a gubernatorial election year, the gubernatorial election held four years earlier. 
 
The manual audit must be completed within 120 days after the general election. If the 
manual audit shows a discrepancy, SBE is authorized to expand the manual audit and take 
any other actions it considers necessary to resolve the discrepancy. 
 
Within 14 days after the conclusion of the audit, SBE must post a report on its website that 
describes (1) the precincts and number of votes selected for the manual audit in each county 
and the manner in which the precincts and votes were selected; (2) the results of the manual 
audit; and (3) any discrepancy shown by the manual audit and how the discrepancy was 
resolved. SBE must allow for public observation of each part of the manual audit process 
to the extent practicable. 
 
State Board of Elections Regulations and the Effect of the Audits 
 
An audit pursuant to the provisions established under Chapter 523 may not have any effect 
on the certified election results and must be used to improve the voting system and voting 
process for future elections. 
 
SBE is required to adopt regulations to implement the provisions established under 
Chapter 523. 
 
Board of State Canvassers 
 
The Board of State Canvassers must convene within 30 days after each statewide election 
and, within 1 day after convening, (1) review the certified copies of the statements of 
election results made by the local boards of canvassers and (2) determine which candidates 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 426/ Page 5 
have been elected to each office and which questions have been adopted or approved. The 
board then prepares and transmits a certified statement of the election results to SBE. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $77,000 in fiscal 2026, 
$72,000 in fiscal 2027, and $51,000 in fiscal 2028 and future years. This estimate reflects 
the following costs:   
 
 
Software Costs – $35,000 in Fiscal 2026 – Software is expected to be needed to 
coordinate the exchange of audit data between the State and local boards of 
elections, organize data, and make calculations necessary for the audit. Software 
that originated from the development of risk-limiting audit software in Colorado, 
but that has been adapted for use by other states, is available as a hosted 
software-as-a-service, for a fee. Based on past available costs for the software, the 
cost is assumed to be $35,000 in fiscal 2026 (a one-time set up fee of $5,000 and an 
annual fee of $30,000) and $30,000 annually thereafter. 
 
Consultant Costs – $42,000 in Fiscal 2026 – The estimate assumes a consultant is 
needed to assist SBE and the local boards of elections with (1) development of 
regulations and (2) implementation and oversight of the audits following the 
2026 primary and general elections. SBE entered into a $21,000 contract for a legal 
and election administration support consultant for a 2016 audit pilot program, and 
this estimate assumes that at least double that amount ($42,000) is needed in each 
of fiscal 2026 and 2027. In future years (beyond fiscal 2027), it is assumed that cost 
decreases to $21,000 annually, for ongoing assistance with implementation of 
risk-limiting audits for each statewide election going forward. 
 
It is assumed, for the purposes of this fiscal and policy note, that the automated software 
audit is still conducted for the 2026 elections and future elections, despite the requirement 
for the audit being modified in the bill to be an authorization rather than a requirement; 
therefore, the modification of the requirement to be an authorization is assumed to not result 
in savings. 
 
Despite the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date, this estimate assumes that costs are not incurred 
until fiscal 2026. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase annually, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, primarily for personnel costs related to preparing for and conducting the 
risk-limiting audits following each statewide election, beginning with the 2026 primary 
election. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 426/ Page 6 
As described by the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), statistically based 
audit techniques, referred to as risk-limiting audits:   
 
... cut down on the number of ballots that need to be audited, while also 
providing statistical confidence that an incorrect election result is not 
certified (i.e., made official). As the name suggests, [a risk-limiting audit] is 
designed to limit the risk that a contest is certified with the wrong winner. It 
does this by increasing the initial sample when discrepancies are found until 
either the level of confidence has been met or a full recount has been 
performed. 
 
[Risk-limiting audits] are an incremental audit system:  If the margin of an 
election is wide, very few ballots must be reviewed. If the margin is narrow, 
more will be reviewed up to the point that enough evidence is provided to 
confirm the declared election result. 
 
There are two primary types of risk-limiting audits:  ballot-polling audits; and ballot-level 
comparison audits. A ballot-polling audit polls the votes of a random sample of ballots 
from the audited contest in order to, using statistical calculations, provide sufficiently 
strong evidence that the outcome of the contest is correct. A ballot-level comparison audit 
compares a random sample of ballots from the audited contest with the votes recorded by 
the voting system for each of those ballots in order to, using statistical calculations, provide 
sufficiently strong evidence that the outcome is correct. 
 
A ballot comparison audit requires fewer ballots to be audited, but a May 2019 Democracy 
Fund report (Knowing It’s Right, Part One:  A Practical Guide to Risk-Limiting Audits, 
p. 10) indicated that there was no voting system on the market at the time that allowed for 
a ballot scanned on a precinct scanner at a polling place to be checked against the votes 
recorded by the voting system for the ballot. Generally, ballots are not imprinted with a 
unique number, and the ballots and/or the vote records associated with each ballot are not 
maintained in sequential order by a precinct scanner, which helps preserve the secrecy of 
voters’ votes. If ballots are scanned centrally (such as in a vote-by-mail state like 
Colorado), after the ballots have been separated from voters’ identities, there are ways to 
maintain the association between a ballot and the votes recorded by the voting system for 
the ballot in order to compare the two in a ballot-level comparison audit. 
 
Exhibit 1 illustrates the number of ballots that would have needed to be audited initially in 
the 2022 general election gubernatorial contest – if a ballot-polling audit of that contest 
was conducted, using a 5% risk limit – as well as three hypothetical scenarios of closer 
margins of victory. The risk limit, as stated by NCSL, is “the largest chance that the audit 
will fail to detect and correct an incorrectly reported outcome.” A ballot-polling audit takes 
an initial random sample of ballots from all the ballots cast that contain the audited contest. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 426/ Page 7 
The size of the initial sample is dependent on the risk limit that is established for the audit 
and the percentage margin between the winning and second-place candidates in the contest, 
with the total ballots cast in the contest as the denominator. The initial sample size is 
intended to be sufficient to satisfy the risk limit and complete the audit, but dependent on 
the tally of votes within the initial sample of ballots, more randomly selected ballots may 
need to be tallied to satisfy the risk limit. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, on December 18, 2024, Harford County successfully 
conducted a pilot risk-limiting audit of contests on the November 2024 general election 
ballot. Based on this experience, Harford County estimates its costs increase by up to 
$9,100 to conduct a risk-limiting audit, consisting of personnel costs ($8,200) and 
one-time costs for supplies ($900). 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Initial Sample Sizes for Audit of Governor/Lt. Governor Contest – 5% Risk Limit 
 
Office 
Margin of Victory Initial Sample Size (Statewide)* 
Governor/Lt. Governor –  
2022 General Election Actual 
32% 
58 
Governor/Lt. Governor – 
Hypothetical 5% Margin of Victory 
5% 
2,307 
Governor/Lt. Governor – 
Hypothetical 1% Margin of Victory 
1% 
57,095 
Governor/Lt. Governor –  
Hypothetical 0.5% Margin of Victory 
0.5% 
229,445 
 
* The initial sample sizes were calculated using this ballot-polling audit tool, developed by 
Dr. Philip B. Stark, Professor, Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, the number of ballots included in the initial sample size increases 
exponentially as the margin of victory narrows. In cases where relatively small numbers of 
ballots need to be audited, there would nonetheless be administrative tasks to undertake to 
facilitate the audit, including creating a ballot manifest. The ballot manifest is a detailed 
catalog of the numbers of paper ballots in a county and how they are stored, that facilitates 
the random sampling of ballots under a risk-limiting audit. Local boards of elections would 
need a certain amount of resources devoted to the risk-limiting audits (whether permanent 
staff, temporary staff, or a consultant) regardless of the number of ballots that end up 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 426/ Page 8 
needing to be audited, to ensure the audit process is completed in an accurate and timely 
manner and to be prepared, on short notice, to adjust to a need to audit a large number of 
ballots. If large numbers of ballots need to be audited, due to a small margin of victory in 
a contest, certain counties may also need to pay for additional space in which to conduct 
the audits. 
 
There may be an offsetting reduction in costs for local boards of elections, or even savings 
(depending on the sample size of the risk-limiting audit), during general elections 
(beginning in fiscal 2027), as a result of the repeal of the existing manual audit; however, 
the existing manual audit is not required to be completed before statewide certification of 
election results and provides more flexibility for local boards to complete the audit with 
existing staff to the extent possible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 40 and SB 523 of 2024; HB 572 of 2023; and HB 745 and SB 742 of 
2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 313 (Senator M. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Board of Elections; Allegany, Harford, and 
Wicomico counties; Baltimore City; National Conference of State Legislatures; 
Democracy Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8