START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 490 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 490 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
St. Mary's County - Competitive Bidding - Threshold 
 
 
This bill exempts St. Mary’s County contracts for services and contracts for supplies valued 
up to $50,000 from existing requirements to (1) establish a competitive bidding process for 
awarding contracts for services or supplies up to $15,000; (2) require a bond in connection 
with a contract of any amount; and (3) obtain services or supplies in a manner the county 
commissioners consider appropriate if no bids are submitted for a contract. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill affects only local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may create operational efficiencies for St. Mary’s County but does 
not materially affect county finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  County commissioners in commission counties must (1) establish a 
competitive bidding process for awarding contracts for services or the purchase of supplies 
if a contract exceeds $15,000; (2) require a bond in connection with a contract of any 
amount; and (3) obtain services or supplies in a manner the county commissioners consider 
appropriate if no bids are submitted. Contracts solely for design or consultation services 
are exempt from these requirements in Somerset County. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 490/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2