START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 448 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Modernization of Military Laws Act 
 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the Election 
Law, General Provisions, Public Utilities, and State Government Articles of the Maryland 
Code, primarily by reference to definitions in the U.S. Code. While numerous alterations 
within the bill represent only stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. 
Notably, among other provisions, the bill expands eligibility for burial in a State veterans’ 
cemetery and access to certain housing and employment privileges and protections. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General and federal fund expenditures for the Department of Veterans and 
Military Families (DVMF) increase beginning in FY 2026 for additional burials at State 
veterans’ cemeteries. General/federal fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent fees are collected/reimbursed, as discussed below. The bill’s other provisions apply 
in a limited number of cases and are not anticipated to materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the 
State Government Article (specifically, § 9-901). This includes the definition of “military 
family” as well as all terms found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse 
and dependent children of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or 
adoption. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 448/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 448/ Page 3 
Election Law 
 
Under current law, a “common access card” is defined as the identification card issued by 
the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) to active-duty military personnel, eligible reserve 
personnel, DOD civilian employees, and eligible DOD contractor personnel. The bill 
expands that definition to encompass members of the uniformed services and eligible 
members of a reserve component. This aligns the definition with that of DOD, ensuring the 
inclusion of members of the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service (PHS) and 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).  
 
Current law permits an individual to file a certificate of candidacy for election via mail or 
delivery service if (1) the individual filing the certificate is unable to do so in person 
because of illness, military service, or temporary absence from the State and (2) the 
certificate is accompanied by a signed affidavit explaining the facts that prevented the 
individual from filing in person. The bill expands this option to those serving in the 
uniformed services, thereby explicitly including members of the commissioned corps of 
PHS and NOAA. 
 
Public Utilities – Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission 
 
Under current law, the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission may, without violating 
any State or local equal employment opportunity law, grant a preference in hiring and 
promotion to an eligible veteran, the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a 
service-connected disability, or the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran. 
“Eligible veteran” means a veteran of any branch of the armed forces of the United States 
who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of 
military service, including the National Guard, the military reserves, the Commissioned 
Corps of PHS, and the Commissioned Corps of NOAA.  
 
The bill alters the definition of “eligible veteran” to be a veteran of any branch of the 
uniformed services who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate of satisfactory 
completion of service, including a reserve component, the Commissioned Corps of PHS, 
and the Commissioned Corps of NOAA. This results in no change, as the revised definition 
of “eligible veteran” is inclusive of those previously considered in this section. 
 
Governor’s Role as Commander‐in‐Chief 
 
Under current law, the Governor is the commander-in-chief of the land and naval militia 
of the State, except for any part of the militia that is in the active military service of the 
United States. The bill alters language to exclude from the Governor’s control any part of 
the militia that is in the active service of the uniformed services. This results in no change, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 448/ Page 4 
as the additional groups covered under “uniformed services” – NOAA and PHS – are 
already under federal control. 
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families 
 
DVMF exists as a principal department of State government and is responsible for, among 
other duties, delivering services and programs to assist the State’s veterans, their families, 
and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in recognition 
for their service. The head of DVMF is the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families.  
 
Existing statute generally specifies that the Secretary is responsible for the operation of 
DVMF and must establish guidelines and procedures to promote efficient operation. The 
bill specifies that the Secretary is explicitly required to develop coordinated policies to lead 
veterans, service members, and their families through life’s transitions, including by 
helping them secure benefits earned through service in the uniformed services and reserve 
components. 
 
Current law also requires the Secretary to submit an annual report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly that includes:   
 
 
the number of (1) requests for help in obtaining benefits; (2) public contacts made 
by the Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy Program; (3) veterans enrolled in 
the United States Veterans Health Administration; and (4) veterans receiving 
benefits; 
 
the average amount of disability and pension benefits received by qualified 
individuals in Maryland compared to those in other states; 
 
an account of the costs of operating the Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy 
Program; 
 
a status update on several programs, including cemeteries, memorials, and veterans 
homes, among others; 
 
a general assessment of the status of Maryland veterans; 
 
the estimated impact current military operations may have on the needs of veterans 
in the future (the bill repeals the reference to “military”); 
 
the status of federal veterans programs as they relate to Maryland veterans; and 
 
any other issues concerning veterans at the Secretary’s discretion. 
 
Under the bill, the Secretary’s annual report must also include any other issues concerning 
service members, including issues uniquely pertaining to active service members that the 
Secretary considers appropriate. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 448/ Page 5 
Veterans’ Cemeteries 
 
Under current law, in the State Government Article, §§ 9-906 and 9-907, “veteran” means 
an individual who (1) served other than dishonorably on active duty in the armed forces of 
the United States or (2) served other than dishonorably as a member of the State militia 
ordered into active service of the United States by order of the President and was killed in 
the line of duty. To qualify for a plot in a State veterans’ cemetery, the applicant must be 
(1) a veteran who meets the requirements for burial at a national veterans’ cemetery or 
(2) an eligible spouse or dependent of a veteran who meets the specified requirements. A 
veteran must have also been a resident of the State (1) when the veteran entered the armed 
forces; (2) when the veteran died; or (3) for two years, unless DVMF waives the time 
requirement for a compelling reason. 
 
Under current law, “eligible dependent” and “eligible spouse” are defined by the 
requirements outlined under federal regulations. As specified in 38 CFR § 38.620, this 
generally means (1) the spouse, surviving spouse, minor child, or unmarried adult child of 
a person eligible for burial in a national cemetery or (2) a biological or legally adoptive 
parent who dies on or after October 13, 2010, and whose deceased child is a veteran who 
dies on or after October 7, 2001, and meets additional requirements.  
 
The bill defines “eligible decedent” as (1) a veteran; (2) a qualified reserve member; or 
(3) an eligible spouse or dependent. The bill also expands the definition of “eligible 
dependent” to include a parent or child related by blood, marriage, or adoption of a 
qualified reserve member, and the definition of “eligible spouse” to include the spouse of 
a qualified reserve member. The bill defines “qualified reserve member” as a reserve 
component member who does not meet the requirements for burial at a national veterans’ 
cemetery but served other than dishonorably and completed the individual’s contractual 
obligation of service.  
 
Based on these revised definitions, the bill expands eligibility for burial in a State veterans’ 
cemetery to include qualified reserve members and their eligible family members, as well 
as those individuals who served as full‐time commissioned officers of the 
Commissioned Corps of PHS or NOAA, so long as other requirements are met. 
 
The bill specifies that, for qualified reserve members, the member must also have been a 
resident of the State when the member entered the reserve component, when the member 
died, or for two years (unless DVMF waives the time period for a compelling reason). 
Other veterans are no longer required to meet this residency requirement. 
 
Under current law, DVMF must provide a plot and burial in a State veterans’ cemetery to 
a veteran or the veteran’s eligible spouse or dependent at no charge. The bill establishes 
that DVMF must collect a fee at the time of burial that is equal to the annual plot allowance 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 448/ Page 6 
established by the National Cemetery Administration if the individual being buried is a 
qualified reserve member or the qualified reserve member’s eligible spouse or dependent. 
The bill also makes numerous conforming changes. 
 
Veterans Homes 
 
Under current law, a veterans home must be open to (1) a veteran who has an honorable 
discharge from active service with a uniformed service of the United States and is a resident 
of the State or (2) a spouse of an eligible veteran. In appointing or employing staff at a 
veterans home, DVMF must give preference to a veteran who has an honorable discharge 
from the armed forces. The bill alters hiring preferences to include veterans with an 
honorable discharge from the uniformed services, thereby ensuring the inclusion of PHS 
and NOAA.  
 
Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program 
 
Among other purposes, the Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program refers eligible 
veterans to selected nonprofit training organizations to be paired with service dogs or 
support dogs and facilitate their training. Under current law, an “eligible veteran” for this 
program means an individual who (1) served on active duty in the armed forces of the 
United States, the National Guard, or a reserve component of the armed forces of the 
United States; (2) served in a capacity other than for training; (3) was discharged or 
released under conditions other than dishonorable; and (4) is a resident of the State, or 
receives treatment or care from a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (USVA) or DOD 
medical facility in the State.  
 
The bill alters the definition of “eligible veteran” to include veterans, defined as specified 
above, who are (1) residents of Maryland or (2) receive treatment or care from a USVA or 
DOD medical facility in the State. This results in no change, as the revised definition of 
“veteran” includes a nondishonorable discharge. 
 
Employment Discrimination 
 
Chapters 322 and 323 of 2024 prohibit employment and housing discrimination based on 
military status, making military status a protected category under certain discrimination 
laws. In this context under current law, “military status” means the status of being a 
member of the uniformed services, a member of a reserve component of the armed forces 
of the United States, or a dependent, as defined in federal law. The bill amends the 
definition to include members of a reserve component of the uniformed services, thereby 
expanding protections to members of the Reserve Corps of PHS.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 448/ Page 7 
State Fiscal Effect:  In January 2020, the latest date for which information is readily 
available, there were an estimated 2,200 PHS officers living in Maryland, with about 
1,500 on active duty and 700 retired. As of September 2024, there are 53 NOAA officers 
in the State, and as of January 2025, about 6,000 National Guard members in Maryland. 
There are approximately 321,000 veterans living in Maryland who are already covered by 
these programs. Although the definition changes in the bill expand access to various 
State benefits and privileges to certain members of PHS, NOAA, and the National Guard, 
these changes represent a small number of people. Most of the bill’s changes would, 
therefore, be absorbable by any affected agency’s existing funds – except for the provisions 
altering eligibility for burial in a State veterans’ cemetery.  
 
Repealing the State Residency Requirement for Veterans 
 
DVMF federal fund expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for costs associated 
with burying additional veterans as a result of repealing the State residency requirement. 
However, any costs associated with these burials are reimbursed by USVA, resulting in a 
corresponding increase in federal fund revenues and no net impact on DVMF. The number 
of additional veterans that may be buried under this provision cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Expanding Eligibility for Burial  
 
DVMF general fund expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for costs associated 
with burying members of the reserve components or their eligible spouses or dependents. 
As DVMF must charge a fee equal to the annual plot allowance ($948 as of August 2024), 
expenditures are offset by general fund revenues and have no net impact on DMVF. The 
number of additional veterans that may be buried under this provision cannot be reliably 
estimated. 
 
DVMF general fund expenditures further increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for costs 
associated with burying eligible commissioned officers of NOAA, PHS, and eligible 
spouses or dependents of veterans (as expanded under the bill). As the bill prohibits DVMF 
from charging a fee for these burials, there is no offset in general fund revenues. As the 
number of additional veterans that may be buried under this provision cannot be reliably 
estimated, general fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount. 
 
DVMF advises that additional staff and equipment may eventually be required to handle 
additional burials at State veterans’ cemeteries as a result of the bill. However, any 
additional volume cannot be reliably estimated at this time. To the extent there are a 
significant number of additional burials under the bill, DVMF may request additional 
resources through the annual budget process. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 448/ Page 8 
Additional Comments:  Under additional definitions under 38 U.S.C. § 101, “active 
military, naval, air, or space service” includes full-time duty in a reserve component of the 
armed forces, full-time duty as a commissioned officer of the Regular or Reserve Corps of 
PHS or commissioned officer corps of NOAA, and service as a cadet or midshipman at a 
service academy (Military, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Naval academies). 
 
According to the 2024 DVMF annual report, the Cemetery Program has averaged 
3,519 interments each year for the past five years, or approximately 704 interments each 
fiscal year. DVMF advises that the elimination of residency requirements for interment in 
the State’s veterans’ cemeteries is a precondition for future cemetery expansion grants from 
USVA. DVMF further advises that expanding those eligible for burial in a State veterans’ 
cemetery can attract veterans living in neighboring states. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 275 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Maryland State Board of Elections; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Public Service Commission; State Retirement Agency; Governor’s Office 
of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8