START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 459 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 459 
(Delegate Pruski, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Counties - Cancer Screening for Professional Firefighters - Required Coverage 
(James "Jimmy" Malone Act) 
 
This bill requires a county that offers a self-insured employee health benefit plan to provide 
to each firefighter employed by the county coverage for preventive cancer screenings in 
accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued by the International Association of 
Fire Fighters (IAFF). The recommendations currently include specified screenings for 
bladder, breast, cervical, colorectal, lung, oral, prostate, skin, testicular, and thyroid 
cancers. A county may not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible on such 
coverage. Each county subject to the bill must collect and submit specified data to the 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), which must consider the data and study and 
report on the impact of expanding coverage for preventive cancer screenings for 
firefighters to the commercial insurance market by December 1, 2028. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2029 only to 
conduct the required study. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
100,000 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($100,000) 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Health insurance expenditures may increase for counties that provide a 
self-insured health benefit plan and employ firefighters, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 459/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A county may satisfy the bill’s coverage requirement by (1) providing a 
no-cost annual examination to firefighters employed by the county that includes the 
required preventive screenings or (2) applying for a grant from the Professional and 
Volunteer Firefighter Innovative Cancer Screening Technologies Program to pay for 
innovative cancer screening technologies. 
 
The bill may not be construed to prohibit a county from providing coverages that are greater 
than or more favorable to an insured or enrollee than the coverage required under the bill. 
 
Each county must collect, for calendar 2026 and 2027, the following data:  (1) the number 
of firefighters eligible for coverage under the bill; (2) the number of firefighters provided 
preventive cancer screenings; (3) the number of preventive screenings that resulted in a 
cancer diagnosis; and (4) the cost to provide preventive screenings. By June 1, 2027, and  
June 1, 2028, each county must report to MHCC the data collected. 
  
Current Law:   
 
Health Insurance  
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
certain carriers must provide. These mandates generally apply only to fully insured health 
insurance policies and do not apply to self-funded employer plans. With respect to cancer 
screenings, certain carriers must cover the following screenings or testing for breast, 
colorectal, lung, and prostate cancer: 
 
 
Breast cancer screenings in accordance with the latest screening guidelines issued 
by the American Cancer Society (ACS). Currently, (1) women ages 40 to 44 may 
get annual breast cancer screenings with mammograms and (2) starting at age 45, 
women should have annual mammograms. Carriers must also provide coverage for 
digital tomosynthesis if an enrollee’s treating physician determines it is medically 
appropriate and necessary. A deductible may not be imposed for covered digital 
tomosynthesis or mammograms.  
 
Colorectal screening in accordance with the latest guidelines issued by ACS. 
Coverage may be subject to a copayment or coinsurance requirement provided it is 
no greater than that imposed for similar coverages.  
 
Recommended follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist in the diagnosis of lung 
cancer for individuals for whom lung cancer screening is recommended by the  
U.S. Preventative Services Task Force. Coverage must include diagnostic 
ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and image-guided 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 459/ Page 3 
biopsy. A carrier may not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible on the 
coverage that is greater than that for breast cancer screening and diagnosis (with the 
exception for a high deductible health plan deductible requirement). 
 
Expenses incurred in conducting a digital rectal exam and a prostate-specific antigen 
(more commonly known as PSA) blood test for men between 40 and 75 years of age 
who are at high risk for prostate cancer. Carriers may not apply a deductible, 
copayment, or coinsurance to coverage for preventive care screening services for 
prostate cancer.  
 
Innovative Cancer Screening Technologies Program 
 
Chapter 219 of 2019 established the Professional and Volunteer Firefighter Innovative 
Cancer Screening Technologies Program in the Maryland Department of Health. The 
program provides grants to local fire departments and volunteer fire companies and 
departments to procure innovative cancer screening tests. The Governor must include at 
least $100,000 in the annual budget for the program.  
 
In fiscal 2024, 513 individuals were screened through the program. All the individuals were 
tested using the OneTestTM Premium by 20/20 GeneSystems, Inc., which is a multi-cancer 
early detection blood test that predicts an individual’s risk of being identified as having 
cancer in the coming 12-month period. On average, the cost of each test was $192. The 
OneTestTM Premium is designed to detect 12 biomarkers that can aid in the detection of 
cancers. As the OneTestTM Premium only detects cancer risk and does not diagnose 
cancer, no cancers were detected by the test. However, among the individuals tested, the 
risk predictor for certain cancers was elevated in some of the individuals (breast, colon, 
liver, lung, ovarian, pancreas, prostate, and stomach). 
 
State Expenditures:  MHCC advises that additional resources are required to consider the 
data reported by counties in 2027 and 2028 and study the impact of expanding preventive 
cancer screening coverage for firefighters to the commercial insurance market. Thus, 
MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in fiscal 2029 only for contractual 
services to complete the required study.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Health insurance expenditures may increase for counties that offer 
a self-insured employee health benefit plan to provide each firefighter employed by the 
county with coverage for preventive cancer screenings without cost-sharing in accordance 
with the latest screening guidelines issued by IAFF. The magnitude of expenditures 
depends on the degree to which such screenings are already covered (and if so, whether 
they are provided with or without cost-sharing).  
 
The Maryland Association of Counties advises that the bill has a minimal impact on most 
jurisdictions that employ professional firefighters.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 459/ Page 4 
Affected counties can report the required data with existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill establishes that a county may satisfy the preventive 
cancer screening requirement by applying for a grant through an existing program, which 
is currently funded at $100,000 a year. Accordingly, a county that applies for a grant but 
not does not receive an award under that program appears to have no further obligation to 
provide the screenings.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 374 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; City of Frostburg; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4