START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 367

Chapter 367

(House Bill 415)

AN ACT concerning

State Library Agency – Family Literacy Pilot Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Family Literacy Pilot Program administered by the
State Library Agency in consultation with the Department of Public Safety and
Correctional Services and the Correctional Education Council to enable certain
incarcerated individuals to read aloud to their children by preparing a recording;
requiring the State Library Agency to submit a certain report on or before a certain
date; and generally relating to the Family Literacy Pilot Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–101(a) and (c) and 23–103
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 23–112
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

23–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “State Library Agency” means the Maryland State Library Agency.

23–103.

There is a State Library Agency and a State Library Board. The State Library
Agency is the central State library agency.

23–112.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 367 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CHILD” MEANS A BIOLOGICAL OR ADOPTED CHILD, A
STEPCHILD, A GRANDCHILD, OR A LEGAL WARD OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE FAMILY LITERACY PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A FAMILY LITERACY PILOT PROGRAM.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO FOSTER FAMILY LITERACY AND
STRENGTHEN PARENT–CHILD RELATIONSHIPS BY PROVIDING CHILDREN’S BOOKS
IN STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES TO INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS AND A
MEANS FOR AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL TO READ ALOUD TO THE
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S CHILD.

(D) THE PROGRAM SHALL BE ADMINISTERED BY THE STATE LIBRARY
AGENCY.

(E) THE STATE LIBRARY AGENCY, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND THE
CORRECTIONAL EDUCATION COUNCIL, SHALL SELECT FOUR STATE
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY LIBRARIES OR PRERELEASE CENTERS TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE PROGRAM THAT SHALL:

(1) REPRESENT EACH OF THE WESTERN, CENTRAL, AND EASTERN
REGIONS OF THE STATE;

(2) CONSIST OF AT LEAST ONE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SERVING
FEMALE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS; AND

(3) CONSIST OF AT LEAST ONE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY SERVING
MALE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

(F) THE STATE LIBRARY AGENCY SHALL SELECT THE CHILDREN’S BOOKS
FOR USE IN THE PROGRAM INCLUDING CHILDREN’S BOOKS IN LANGUAGES OTHER
THAN ENGLISH.

(G) THE STATE LIBRARY AGENCY, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES AND THE
CORRECTIONAL EDUCATION COUNCIL, SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 367

(1) ESTABLISH A PROCESS TO SECURE WRITTEN PERMISSION TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM FROM THE CUSTODIAL PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF AN
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S CHILD;

(2) ESTABLISH A PROCESS TO ASSIST AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL
IN SELECTING AN AGE–APPROPRIATE CHILDREN’S BOOK, PREPARING A RECORDING
OF THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL READING THE BOOK ALOUD, AND
DISTRIBUTING A COPY OF THE BOOK AND THE RECORDING TO THE INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUAL’S CHILD; AND

(3) ENSURE PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM IS FREE OF CHARGE
FOR THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL, THE CHILD, AND THE CUSTODIAL PARENT OR
GUARDIAN.

(H) THE STATE LIBRARY AGENCY MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY
TO CARRY OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2028, the State Library Agency shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the results of the Family Literacy Pilot
Program.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and 3 months and, at the
end of December 31, 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3