START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 466 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 466 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance and Education, Energy, and the 
Environment 
 
Health Equality for Service Members Act 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the 
General Provisions, Health-General, Health Occupations, Housing and Community 
Development, and State Government Articles of the Maryland Code, primarily by 
reference to definitions in the U.S. Code. While numerous alterations within the bill 
represent only stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. These changes 
generally make certain provisions applicable to all members of the uniformed services, 
thereby expanding eligibility for certain privileges, benefits, and disciplinary procedures 
(e.g., expedited health occupations licensing, fee exemptions for vital records, continued 
eligibility for certain waiver programs, punishment for license violations, etc.). 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that this bill applies in a limited number of cases, State 
finances are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the State Government Article 
(specifically, § 9-901). This includes the definition of “military family” as well as all terms 
found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse and dependent children 
of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 466/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 466/ Page 3 
Expanded Eligibility for Privileges, Benefits, and Disciplinary Procedures 
 
In General:  Numerous provisions within the Health‐General, Health‐Occupations, and 
Housing and Community Development Articles explicitly extend certain benefits or 
privileges to members of the armed forces or the military. Other provisions extend benefits 
or privileges to service members; however, the applicable definitions for “service 
members” refer only to active-duty members of the armed forces, a reserve component of 
the armed forces, or the National Guard of any state. The bill expands certain provisions to 
apply more broadly. 
 
Vital Records:  For instance, under current law, the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) collects a $10 or $12 fee to access copies of vital records, including birth and death 
certificates and marriage and divorce records, among other documents. MDH may not 
collect a fee for a copy of a vital record issued to a current or former member of the 
armed forces of the United States (or the surviving spouse or child of the member). The 
bill substitutes the term “uniformed services,” thereby extending that privilege to a current 
or former member of the Public Health Service (PHS) or the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 
 
Waitlist and Eligibility for Services:  Also under current law, a dependent of a legal resident 
of the State who is eligible to receive services from the Developmental Disabilities 
Administration (DDA) retains eligibility regardless of whether the legal resident leaves the 
State due to military assignment elsewhere. If a dependent is on a waitlist for DDA services 
while the legal resident is outside of the State for military assignment, DDA must allow 
the dependent to remain on the waitlist. If a dependent resides with the legal resident while 
outside of the State for military assignment, DDA must reinstate services on the 
dependent’s return to Maryland and if a request for services is made. The bill substitutes 
the term “military” with “uniformed services,” thereby ensuring dependents of those on 
assignment with PHS and NOAA retain eligibility for (and receive reinstated) services. 
 
Occupational Licensing:  Among other provisions, Chapters 154 and 155 of 2013 (also 
known as the Veterans Full Employment Act of 2013) require health occupations boards 
to expedite the licensure, certification, or registration of a service member, veteran, or 
military spouse. The boards must also assign an advisor to assist the individual with the 
application process and provide specified information to assist in the licensing, 
certification, or registration process. MDH must also credit specified military training and 
education completed by a service member toward licensure or certification requirements 
and allow the renewal of a license or certificate after the expiration of the renewal period 
without payment of a penalty or reinstatement fee if the late renewal is a direct result of 
the deployment. In the applicable provisions, however, “service member” is limited to 
active-duty members of the armed forces, a reserve component of the armed forces, or the 
National Guard. The bill repeals this definition, instead using the definition of “active 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 466/ Page 4 
service member” (as specified above), which includes members of the uniformed services 
(and the reserve components). Related definitions and terms are also altered, thereby 
extending these licensing privileges to active service members of PHS and NOAA (as well 
as eligible spouses and veterans, as applicable). The bill also makes conforming changes 
to provisions regarding the publishing of information on the website of each health 
occupations board and recommended courses for continuing education. 
 
Discipline of Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Electrologists, Midwives, Dialysis Technicians, 
and Medication Technicians:  Under current law, the State Board of Nursing (MBON) may 
deny a certificate/license (credential), reprimand any credential holder, place any credential 
holder on probation, or suspend or revoke a credential if the applicant, licensee, or 
certificate holder is disciplined or convicted by a licensing, military, or disciplinary 
authority or court in any state or country for an act that would be grounds for action under 
MBON’s disciplinary statutes. The bill alters this provision, establishing that MBON can 
take the aforementioned actions if that individual is disciplined by a licensing or 
disciplinary authority of any state or country, convicted or disciplined by a court of any 
state or country, or disciplined by any branch of the uniformed services or the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs for an act that would be grounds for disciplinary 
action under MBON’s disciplinary statutes. This change, therefore, explicitly incorporates 
violations that occur while an individual is serving in PHS or NOAA into existing 
disciplinary practices. This conforms MBON to existing statute under several other health 
occupations boards, including the State Board of Physicians, State Board of Examiners of 
Psychologists, and State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners. 
 
Optometry Practitioners:  Under current law, the State Board of Examiners in Optometry 
may waive the requirement of practicing optometry actively for an applicant who was a 
military optometrist for three years. The bill expands the waived requirement to uniformed 
services optometrists, thereby ensuring the inclusion of PHS and NOAA. 
 
Health Care Facilities:  Under Part II of the Health Care Planning and Systems Regulation 
Subtitle, for purposes of providing an exception to the requirement for a certificate of need, 
the definition of “health care facility” does not include a facility to provide comprehensive 
care that restricts admissions to individuals who meet the residency requirements 
established by the Department of Veterans and Military Families and are (1) veterans who 
were discharged or released from the armed forces of the United States under honorable 
conditions; (2) former members of a reserve component of the armed forces of the 
United States; or (3) nonveteran spouses of eligible veterans. The bill repeals references to 
the “armed forces.” The bill’s changes thereby explicitly incorporate veterans of PHS and 
NOAA, as well as former members of the Reserve Corps of PHS. 
 
Other Changes:  The bill alters several other provisions that confer certain benefits and 
rights to members of the armed services or the military. In general, as noted above, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 466/ Page 5 
substituting “uniformed services” and/or incorporating the definition of “service member” 
reflected in Exhibit 1, definitively includes PHS and NOAA. This substitution occurs for 
the following provisions: 
 
 
documentation of veteran status in certain medical records;  
 
authorization to direct disposition of a decedent;  
 
the Sheila E. Hixson Behavioral Health Services Matching Grant Program for 
Service Members and Veterans and other behavioral health services;  
 
inclusion on the registry/eligibility for certain waiver services administered by the 
Medicaid program in MDH;  
 
inclusion on the registry/eligibility for the Medicaid program Autism Waiver 
administered by the Maryland State Department of Education;  
 
informal kinship care arrangements;  
 
prioritization for vouchers and housing assistance payments; and 
 
the Post‐Traumatic Stress Disorder and Traumatic Brain Injury Fund (the bill’s 
changes limit applicability to veterans with a nondishonorable discharge). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although the changes in the bill expand access to various State 
benefits and privileges to certain members (or former members) of PHS and NOAA 
(including reserve components, as applicable), these changes represent a small number of 
people.  
 
In January 2020, the latest date for which information is readily available, there were an 
estimated 2,200 PHS officers living in Maryland, with about 1,500 on active duty and 
700 retired. As of September 2024, there are 53 NOAA officers in the State, and as of 
January 2025, about 6,000 National Guard members in Maryland. Compared to the 
321,000 veterans living in Maryland who are already covered by these programs, this 
change is very small and can be absorbed by any affected agency’s existing funds. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under additional definitions under 38 U.S.C. § 101, “active 
military, naval, air, or space service” includes full-time duty in a reserve component of the 
armed forces, full-time duty as a commissioned officer of the Regular or Reserve Corps of 
PHS or commissioned officer corps of NOAA, and service as a cadet or midshipman at a 
service academy (Military, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Naval academies). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 466/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  SB 277 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Finance and Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of Commerce; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6