START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 477 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 477 
(Delegates Barnes and McCaskill) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Department of Education - Family Child Care Homes and Child Care 
Centers - Regulatory Analysis 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to conduct a 
thorough analysis of the State’s regulatory requirements for child care facilities. MSDE 
must submit (1) by January 1, 2026, an interim report and (2) by September 1, 2026, a final 
report on the results to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the analysis, MSDE must pay particular attention to current 
regulations that limit the ability of a person to (1) register a family child care home or large 
family child care home; (2) receive a license to operate a child care center; or (3) operate a 
child care facility in a profitable manner while providing quality, affordable child care.  
 
In conducting the analysis, MSDE must also, at a minimum, analyze the current regulatory 
framework governing (1) the staffing of child care facilities, including the requirements to 
work in child care and the supervisory requirements for child care staff; (2) the physical 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 477/ Page 2 
requirements for child care facilities; and (3) the programs in place to support child care 
facilities.  
 
Furthermore, MSDE must examine the framework that governs the regulation of child care 
and child care facilities in different states and regions and how they compare to those in 
the State. For each regulation examined, MSDE must determine whether the regulation 
results in or contributes to (1) a safer environment for children and child care facility 
employees; (2) a quality early childhood education; or (3) a significant impact on the 
opening or operation of child care facilities. 
 
In conducting its analysis, MSDE must consult with stakeholders, including (1) the Office 
of Child Care Advisory Council; (2) State and local early childhood advisory councils; 
(3) private child care providers; and (4) nonprofit organizations and unions that represent 
child care providers.  
 
Current Law:  Generally, family child care homes and large family child care homes may 
not operate in the State unless they are registered. The State Board of Education is required 
to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of family child care homes and large 
family child care homes. A family child care home is a residence in which family child 
care is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is a residence in which 
family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 12 children. 
 
Similarly, the State Board of Education must adopt rules and regulations for licensing and 
operating child care centers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 477/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3