START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 491 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 491 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
St. Mary's County - Metropolitan Commission - Discontinuance of Service 
 
   
This bill authorizes the St. Mary’s County Metropolitan Commission (MetCom) to 
discontinue all or any part of water or sewer service provided to a private property 
determined to be unsafe, unfit, or unsuitable for human occupancy due to an accident, 
artificial disaster, or natural disaster. MetCom must suspend the ready-to-serve charge for 
these properties at the time of discontinuance until the service is restored. The bill 
authorizes MetCom to assess applicable parties for the full actual costs incurred by 
MetCom resulting from violations of MetCom rules and regulations by repealing the 
previous cap of $1,000 for these assessments. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State operations and finances are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  While the bill does not materially affect MetCom expenditures, it does give 
MetCom the authority to assess and be reimbursed its actual costs for certain expenditures. 
MetCom revenues may increase to the extent that assessments for actual costs to MetCom 
are levied against parties who violate certain rules and regulations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MetCom, a component unit of St. Mary’s County, was established by the 
General Assembly in 1957 as a quasi-governmental, nonprofit body, to supply water and 
sewer service to St. Mary’s County. MetCom has been providing water and sewer service 
since 1964. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 491/ Page 2 
MetCom is authorized to discontinue water and sewer service for nonpayment of any 
service, connection, inspection, benefit or any other charge if not paid within 30 days of 
the due date. In addition to payment of the bill, MetCom must collect a turn-off and turn-on 
charge before resuming service.  
 
MetCom may use administrative or judicial enforcement remedies for violations of any 
rules or regulations adopted by MetCom concerning public sewer use, including public 
sewer drains, the installation of building sewer connections, and the discharge of waters 
and wastes into the public sewer systems.  
 
Among other actions, MetCom may issue a reimbursement assessment for actual costs 
(including time and materials) up to $1,000 as an administrative enforcement remedy under 
certain circumstances.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  St. Mary’s County advises in fiscal 2025 there have been 11 incidents 
of violations affecting water and sewer assets resulting in $105,000 in uncollected costs. 
The bill removes the cap of $1,000 on assessments for such violations and authorizes 
MetCom to assess its actual costs. Therefore, under the bill, to the extent such violations 
continue, MetCom will be authorized to seek full reimbursement of actual costs and not 
have to absorb any actual costs it incurs above $1,000, as specified.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Public Service Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2