START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 402 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 402 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County Board of Education - Student Member Scholarship - 
Increase 
 
 
This bill increases the scholarship award for a student member of the Anne Arundel County 
Board of Education who completes a full term from $8,000 to $15,000. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by $7,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2025. County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: The Anne Arundel County Board of Education consists of 
seven nonpartisan elected members and one student member. The school board is  
1 of 20 elected boards in the State, there are also 4 hybrid boards. The student member of 
the Anne Arundel County Board of Education generally has the same voting rights and 
authority to attend executive sessions of the board as a nonstudent member of the board. 
 
The president of the board is entitled to receive $17,000 annually as compensation, the 
vice president is entitled to receive $16,000 annually, and the other nonstudent members 
of the board are entitled to receive $15,000 annually. A student member who completes a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 402/ Page 2 
full term on the county board must be granted a scholarship of $8,000, applied toward the 
student’s higher education costs. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by $7,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025, as student member scholarships are awarded upon the completion 
of a full term and the term of the current student member of the board expires 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 307 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2