START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 425 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 425 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - State Boat Act - Auctioneers 
 
 
This bill excludes a licensed auctioneer from the definition of “dealer,” under the State 
Boat Act, if (1) the auctioneer is acting on behalf of a seller, secured party, or owner; 
(2) title does not pass to the auctioneer; and (3) the auction is not for the purpose of 
avoiding the provisions of Title 10 (“Waters”) of the Natural Resources Article (which 
includes the State Boat Act). This bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Boat Act, enacted in 1960, governs boating in the State. Under 
the Act, a “dealer” is any person who (1) engages in whole or in part in the business of 
buying, selling, or exchanging new and unused vessels or used vessels, or both, either 
outright or on conditional sale, bailment, lease, chattel mortgage, or otherwise and (2) has 
an established place of business for sale, trade, and display of vessels. In addition, a 
“dealer” is a yacht broker, and a holder of a lien created under Title 16, Subtitle 2 (“Lien 
on Aircraft, Boats, Mobile Homes, and Motor Vehicles”) of the Commercial Law Article 
who sells the vessel pursuant to that title, including an auctioneer and a company 
commonly known as a lien and recovery company. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 425/ Page 2 
A manufacturer or dealer may not conduct business in the State unless licensed as a 
Maryland boat dealer. The annual license fee is $25, and a surety bond or other security (of 
a specified amount based on whether the dealer is a new dealer in the State and the gross 
annual sales of the dealer) must accompany each application for a boat dealer license or 
license renewal. 
 
A licensed boat dealer is also required to collect the excise tax on all sales of vessels to be 
titled and numbered and on all sales of vessels to be federally documented for use in the 
State. If the vessel excise tax is not collected by a licensed dealer, the owner must remit 
the tax directly to DNR within 30 days of the date of sale. 
 
Additional Comments:  DNR indicates there are currently eight auctioneers licensed as 
boat dealers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 23 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2