START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 485 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 485 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
St. Mary's County - Corrections 
 
 
The bill modifies and expands provisions relating to the St. Mary’s County’s release 
programs for individuals in the custody of the sheriff. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect St. Mary’s County’s finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the St. Mary’s County Sheriff may 
establish (1) a home detention program; (2) a work release program; (3) a pretrial release 
program; and (4) a prerelease program. If the sheriff establishes a program pursuant to this 
authority, the sheriff must adopt implementing regulations for each program. If a condition 
that a court imposes on an incarcerated individual is inconsistent with a regulation adopted 
under these provisions, the court-imposed condition controls as to that incarcerated 
individual. The bill expands the programs that the sheriff is authorized to establish to 
include a day reporting program, an in-patient treatment program, and a pretrial release 
supervision program. The bill also removes the term “incarcerated” from these provisions. 
 
Under current law, at the time of sentencing or at any time during an individual’s 
confinement, the court may allow the individual to participate in any established program 
if the individual is sentenced to the custody of the sheriff and has no other charges for a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 485/ Page 2 
felony or a violation of a crime of violence, as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law 
Article, pending in any jurisdiction. Under the bill, at the time of a court proceeding 
(instead of at the time of sentencing) or at any time during an individual’s participation in 
a program (instead of during an individual’s confinement), the court may allow the 
individual to participate in any established program if the individual is court-ordered 
(instead of sentenced) to the custody of the sheriff and has no other charges for a felony or 
a crime of violence, as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article, pending in any 
jurisdiction. 
 
Under current law, an incarcerated individual who is participating in any established 
program and who is sentenced to the St. Mary’s County Detention and Rehabilitation 
Center may leave the detention center to (1) continue regular employment; (2) seek new 
employment; (3) attend any court-ordered treatment appointments; (4) receive intensive 
counseling; (5) obtain academic education; or (6) maximize use of other community 
resources or other similar rehabilitative activities. Under the bill, an individual who is 
participating in any established program and who is authorized to participate in a 
St. Mary’s County Detention and Rehabilitation Center Program (instead of sentenced to 
the center), is authorized to conduct those listed activities with the approval of the sheriff 
or the sheriff’s designee.  
 
Under current law, the sheriff or the sheriff’s designee must collect the earnings of an 
incarcerated individual participating in an established program, less required payroll 
deductions. From the incarcerated individual’s earnings, the sheriff may deduct (1) the 
amount determined to be the cost to the county of providing food, lodging, clothing, and 
transportation for the incarcerated individual; (2) actual and necessary food, travel, and 
other expenses incidental to the incarcerated individual’s participation in the program; 
(3) an amount the incarcerated individual is legally obligated or desires to pay for the 
support of a dependent; (4) if applicable, a reasonable amount to repay the State or the 
county for an attorney appointed by the court; and (5) court-ordered payments for 
restitution. The sheriff must credit to the incarcerated individual’s account the remaining 
balance and dispose of the balance in the incarcerated individual’s account as the 
incarcerated individual requests and the sheriff approves. The bill repeals those provisions. 
Instead, under the bill, the sheriff or the sheriff’s designee may direct an individual 
participating in an established program to provide proof that the individual has made 
payments toward any of the following obligations:  (1) an amount the individual is legally 
obligated to pay for the support of a dependent; (2) court-ordered payments for restitution; 
or (3) court-ordered fees or fines. 
 
Under current law, if an incarcerated individual violates a trust or a condition that a court 
or the sheriff has established for participating in an established program, the sheriff or the 
sheriff’s designee must notify the court in writing of the violation. An incarcerated 
individual who violates a trust or condition that a court or the sheriff has established for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 485/ Page 3 
program participation is subject to removal from the program and cancellation of any 
earned diminution credits. The bill modifies these provisions to remove the term 
“incarcerated.” 
 
Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of violence” as  
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, except 
involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; (9) robbery;  
(10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree sexual 
offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of violence, 
except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; (13) child 
abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified circumstances;  
(15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; (17) an attempt to 
commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual conduct with a 
child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, rape, rob, or 
commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3