START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 473 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 473 
(Delegate Harris) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship Program - Revisions 
 
 
This bill allows part-time associate’s degree students to receive Maryland Community 
College Promise (MCCP) Scholarship awards for up to six years while maintaining the 
three-year maximum for full-time associate’s degree students and other eligible recipients. 
It also clarifies that students pursuing licensure, certification, or participating in a registered 
apprenticeship program may receive the award for up to three years. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) expenditures minimally 
increase for software upgrades. Altering the duration of MCCP Awards does not require 
additional spending, as discussed below. Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) can 
update award duration information in relevant materials with existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can update award duration information in 
relevant materials with existing resources. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, each recipient may hold the award until 
the earlier of (1) three years after enrolling as a candidate for a vocational certificate, 
certificate, or an associate’s degree at a community college in the State or (2) the date that 
the individual is awarded an associate’s degree. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 473/ Page 2 
Under the bill, each recipient may hold the award until the earlier of (1) three years after 
first enrolling as a candidate for a noncredit vocational certificate, in a sequence of credit 
or noncredit courses leading to licensure or certification, in credit or noncredit courses that 
are required for participation in a registered apprenticeship program, as a candidate for a 
certificate, or as a full-time candidate for an associate’s degree at a community college in 
the State; (2) six years after fist enrolling as a part-time candidate for an associate’s degree 
at a community college in the State; or (3) the date that the individual is awarded an 
associate’s degree. 
 
Community College Promise Scholarship Overview 
 
Chapter 554 of 2018 created a scholarship program in Maryland to provide tuition 
assistance to students who attend a community college in the State and who meet specified 
eligibility criteria, including an income limitation. The MCCP Scholarship is a last-dollar 
award that is applied after State or federal non-loan aid to eligible recipients has been 
applied; an award cannot exceed $5,000 annually or actual tuition, whichever is less. 
Chapter 464 of 2019 specified that, if a local community college offers a Promise 
Scholarship, an award from the statewide program must be applied before the award of the 
local scholarship. 
 
To be eligible for the program, a student must:   
 
 
be eligible for in-state tuition and enroll at a community college, in an eligible 
program; 
 
with certain exemptions, have earned at least a 2.3 high school GPA at the end of 
the first semester or the end of the senior year unless the applicant graduated from 
high school five or more years before the date of application, for an initial award, 
or have earned at least a 2.5 GPA while enrolled at a community college in the State; 
and 
 
have a gross adjusted income of $100,000 or less if the applicant is single or resides 
in a single-parent household or of $150,000 or less if married or resides in a 
two-parent household. 
 
An applicant also has to attend the applicant’s local community college, except under 
specified circumstances. In addition, an applicant must either enroll as a candidate for a 
vocational certificate, a certificate, or an associate degree or participate in a registered 
apprenticeship at a community college in the State. Further, an applicant must enroll in at 
least six credits per semester or a sequence of credit or noncredit courses that leads to 
licensure or certificate. 
 
The Governor must appropriate at least $15.0 million annually for the program. Under 
Chapter 634 of 2023, each community college in the State, rather than the MHEC Office 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 473/ Page 3 
of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), is responsible for the selection and distribution 
of awards. Nevertheless, annually, OSFA must allocate MCCP Scholarship funding to each 
community college in the State based on the proportion of Pell Grant-eligible students at 
each community college. If a community college does not award all funding allocated, the 
community college must distribute the remaining funding to other community colleges to 
make MCCP Scholarship awards in the award year. 
 
Initial awards are made based on greatest demonstrated need. Eligible applicants who do 
not receive an award are placed on a waiting list. For non-initial awards, priority must be 
given to prior-year recipients who remain eligible for the program as well as all eligible 
students who are enrolled in either at least 12 credits per semester or a sequence of credit 
or noncredit courses that lead to licensure or certification. Then, if any funds remain to be 
allocated, students enrolled in at least 6 credits per semester may be awarded scholarships. 
A recipient can receive the award for a total of three years. To maintain the award, the 
recipient must complete 6 credits per semester or make satisfactory progress toward a 
vocational certificate and earn a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5. The recipient must meet 
the designated income requirements for the program, remain eligible for in-state tuition, 
apply annually, and continue to make satisfactory academic progress as determined by the 
community college. 
 
MHEC must contact each school counselor at each public high school in the State with 
information on the MCCP Scholarship, including eligibility, availability, and deadlines for 
the scholarship. In addition, MHEC and each community college must post this 
information in a readily accessible location on their respective websites. Finally, 
MHEC must annually report to the General Assembly on specified aspects of its 
implementation of the MCCP Scholarship, including its outreach activities. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding the maximum duration for which an individual may hold 
an MCCP Scholarship may result in additional years of awards being made to recipients in 
enrolled programs affected by the bill. Nevertheless, expanding award duration does not 
alter the overall level of State funding for the program, which is set in the State operating 
budget subject to the requirement that the Governor must appropriate at least $15.0 million 
annually. The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 as passed by the 
General Assembly lowers this mandated funding amount to $13.5 million annually 
beginning fiscal 2026. To the extent that allowing individuals to hold awards for longer 
periods would cause awards to exceed available funding, more individuals may be added 
to the waiting list or fewer scholarships may be awarded. The fiscal 2025 budget included 
$15 million for the program, however the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes (1) a $1.5 million reduction to the fiscal 2025 amount and 
(2) a $13.5 million appropriation for the scholarship in fiscal 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 473/ Page 4 
MHEC advises that tracking award length differently for full-time and part-time recipients 
as specified by the bill requires system enhancements to the Maryland College Aid 
Processing System estimated at $7,000 in fiscal 2026. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not alter the funding amount or distribution processes 
for MCCP scholarships. Each community college (including State-funded BCCC) 
continues to receive a portion of the MCCP allocation in the State budget based on a 
calculation of each college’s Pell Grant-eligible population. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 269 (Senator M. Jackson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 28, 2025 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4