START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 458 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 458 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
University of Maryland, College Park Campus - TerpsEXCEED Program - 
Funding 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Governor to include $350,000 in the annual budget bill for the 
TerpsEXCEED (EXperiencing College through Education and Employment Discovery) 
Program at the University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP), beginning in 
fiscal 2027. The funding may serve as a sustainable funding source for the management of 
the TerpsEXCEED Program. The bill specifies permitted uses for the funding, including 
advising and counseling, offering courses, and developing internship and job opportunities. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2027, general fund expenditures are assumed to increase 
by $350,000 annually. Higher education revenues and expenditures for the allowed 
purposes increase correspondingly.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Higher Ed Rev. 
$0 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$0 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
$350,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($350,000) 
($350,000) 
($350,000) 
($350,000)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 458/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The TerpsEXCEED Program is an inclusive post-secondary education 
program at UMCP that provides Maryland students with intellectual disabilities the 
opportunity to participate in a college experience for two years, culminating in a certificate.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Beginning in fiscal 2027, the bill authorizes the Governor to include 
$350,000 in the annual budget bill for the TerpsEXCEED Program. As under current law, 
any such funding is discretionary. To the extent funding is provided under the bill, 
UMCP higher education revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly for the 
purposes permitted by the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 603 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2