START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 470 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 470 
(Delegate Ziegler, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Obscured, Modified, or Blocked Registration Plates and 
Registration Plate Covers 
 
 
This bill makes several changes to laws pertaining to registration plate covers. The bill 
(1) alters the definition of “registration plate cover” applicable to specified prohibitions; 
(2) prohibits a person from advertising for, or promoting the sale of, an unlawful 
registration plate cover by falsely claiming that the registration plate cover is lawful in the 
State; and (3) establishes that a violation of this prohibition is punishable under the 
Maryland Vehicle Law and as an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). The bill also alters an existing offense by 
prohibiting a person from obscuring or modifying a vehicle registration plate in a manner 
that may prevent identification, rather than the current statutory requirement of an intent 
to avoid identification. Under the bill, a police officer may enforce a violation of this altered 
prohibition only as a secondary offense. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Revenues are not materially affected. The bill can likely be implemented 
and enforced using existing budgeted State resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 470/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Vehicle Registration Plates (Unchanged by the Bill) 
 
Under current law, unless exempt, all vehicles are required to display two registration 
plates – one plate on the front and the other on the rear of the vehicle. The vehicle in an 
exempt class must only display one license plate, as specified. In addition, the 
Motor Vehicle Administration must issue only one plate for vehicles with temporary 
registration. 
 
At all times, each registration plate must be (1) maintained free from foreign materials, 
including registration plate covers (defined below), and in a condition to be clearly legible 
and (2) securely fastened to the vehicle in a horizontal position, in a manner that prevents 
the plate from swinging, and in a place and position to be clearly visible. A police officer 
may enforce this provision involving the placement of an object framing or bordering the 
edges of a registration plate only as a secondary action when the policer officer detains a 
driver of a motor vehicle for a suspected violation of another provision of State law. A 
violation of these provisions is a misdemeanor, subject to a fine of up to $500. The 
District Court has established a prepayable fine of $70 for these violations.  
 
Vehicle Registration Plate Covers – Definition and Commerce-related Prohibitions 
 
Under current law, for the provisions discussed below, “registration plate cover” means 
any tinted, colored, painted, marked, clear, or illuminated object that is designed (1) to 
cover any of the characters of a vehicle’s registration plate or (2) to distort a recorded image 
of any of the characters of a vehicle’s registration plate recorded by a traffic control signal 
monitoring system under § 21-202.1 of the Transportation Article.  
 
The bill repeals the reference to clear objects and further alters the definition of 
“registration plate cover” to mean any tinted, colored, painted, marked, or illuminated 
object that is designed (1) to obscure or block any of the characters of a vehicle’s 
registration plate or (2) to distort a recorded image of any of the characters of a vehicle’s 
registration plate recorded by a traffic control signal monitoring system under § 21-202.1 
of the Transportation Article. 
 
Under current law, a person may not (1) sell or offer for sale a registration plate cover or 
(2) advertise for the purpose of promoting the sale of registration plate covers. A violation 
of these provisions is a misdemeanor, subject to a fine of up to $500. The District Court 
has established a prepayable fine of $70 for these violations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 470/ Page 3 
The bill further prohibits a person from advertising for, or promoting the sale of, an 
unlawful registration plate cover by falsely claiming that the registration plate cover is 
lawful in the State. A violation of this prohibition is (1) a misdemeanor punishable by a 
$500 maximum fine (the general penalty for violations of the Maryland Vehicle Law) and 
(2) subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions for unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade 
practices under MCPA. 
 
Obscuring or Modifying a Vehicle Registration Plate 
 
Under current law, a person may not obscure or modify any vehicle registration plate with 
intent to avoid identification. The bill alters this offense to prohibit a person from obscuring 
or modifying any vehicle registration plate in a manner that may prevent identification. 
 
Under current law, a violation is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The 
prepayment penalty is $280, with one point assessed against the individual’s driver’s 
license. While the bill does not alter the penalties for this offense, the bill establishes that 
a police officer may enforce a violation of this prohibition only as a secondary action when 
the police officer detains a driver of a motor vehicle for a suspected violation of another 
provision of State law. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act – Unfair, Abusive, or Deceptive Trade Practices 
 
As noted above, the bill classifies specified registration plate cover violations as unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade practices under MCPA. 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any (1) false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual 
description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect 
of deceiving or misleading consumers; (2) failure to state a material fact if the failure 
deceives or tends to deceive; (3) advertisement or offer of consumer goods, consumer 
realty, or consumer services without the intent to sell, lease, or rent them as advertised or 
offered; and (4) deception, fraud, false pretense, false premise, misrepresentation, or 
knowing concealment, suppression, or omission of any material fact with the intent that a 
consumer rely on the same in connection with the promotion or sale of any consumer 
goods, consumer realty, or consumer service. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the Attorney General is responsible for 
enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division 
may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in 
court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each 
violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. In addition to any 
civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is guilty of a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 470/ Page 4 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts) notes that, in 
fiscal 2024, there were 418 charges issued for obscuring or modifying vehicle plates with 
intent to avoid identification, with 143 guilty dispositions. These figures represent an 
increase of 64% in charges issued for obscuring or modifying vehicle plates, and an 
increase of 61% in guilty dispositions, from fiscal 2023 violations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 322 (Senator Kagan) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4