START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 476 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 476 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
St. Mary's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class A License Quota 
 
 
This bill increases, from 1,350 to 4,000 individuals, the quota used by the 
St. Mary’s County Board of License Commissioners when issuing Class A alcoholic 
beverages licenses in the 8th election district of the county. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent fewer Class A alcoholic beverages licenses are issued in the county’s 
8th election district under the bill’s new license quota. St. Mary’s County expenditures are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board may not issue more than one Class A license for every 
1,350 individuals in an election district in the county or approve the transfer of a 
Class A license from one election district to another unless the transfer can be made 
without exceeding the license quota. The board must use the population statistics from the 
most recent St. Mary’s County Planning Commission annual report to maintain the 
licensing quota. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 476/ Page 2 
The board issues various Class A licenses throughout the county that generally authorize 
license holders to sell beer, wine, and/or liquor for off-premises consumption, as specified. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  St. Mary’s County advises the population of the 8th election district 
is 41,565. Therefore, there is a maximum number of 30 Class A licenses that can be issued 
in the 8th election district under current law and this number is reduced to a maximum 
number of 10 Class A licenses under the bill’s new quota for the 8th election district. The 
county further advises there are currently 20 Class A alcoholic beverages licenses that have 
been issued in the 8th election district. Therefore, St. Mary’s County revenues from 
Class A licenses decrease, beginning in fiscal 2026, to the extent the number of 
Class A licenses issued in the 8th election district decreases under the bill. 
 
St. Mary’s County advises it is the county’s intent to maintain the number of 
Class A licenses issued in the 8th election district at the current level of 20 licenses and the 
number of Class A licenses issued in the 8th election district would only decrease if a 
business license was canceled, revoked, or the business owner otherwise failed to renew a 
license. 
 
Small Business Effect:  There are nine election districts in St. Mary’s County. The bill 
reduces the maximum number of Class A licenses that can be issued in the county’s 
8th election district to one Class A license for every 4,000 individuals that live in the 
8th election district while maintaining the quota under current law for the county’s other 
eight election districts at one Class A license for every 1,350 individuals. Therefore, the 
bill would have a potential meaningful impact to the extent small businesses are unable to 
obtain Class A licenses in the county’s 8th election district under the bill’s more restrictive 
quota for the 8th election district. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 476/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3