START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 423 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 423 
(Delegate Lopez) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Safety - Maryland 9-1-1 Board and Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management - Regulatory Authority 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) and 
the Maryland 9-1-1 Board (which is housed within MDEM) to adopt regulations to 
implement and enforce the requirements of State law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established MDEM as a principal department of the 
Executive Branch of State government and as the successor to the Maryland Emergency 
Management Agency, which had been housed within the Military Department. MDEM is 
responsible for developing emergency management policies and coordinating the State’s 
risk reduction strategies and disaster response during any major emergency or disaster. 
This includes supporting local governments as needed or requested and coordinating 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 423/ Page 2 
assistance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other federal partners. 
MDEM manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of initiatives leading 
to enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural and man-made 
disasters that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 
Maryland’s 9-1-1 System and the Maryland 9-1-1 Board 
 
The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through public safety answering points 
(PSAPs), which are generally owned and operated by local governments. 9-1-1 specialists 
working within PSAPs answer, redirect, and take action on 9-1-1 calls received based on 
the location of the originating 9-1-1 call. State and local governments are preparing for 
“next generation” 9-1-1 technology that will allow PSAPs to access not only more accurate 
information about caller location but also other information that will assist emergency 
personnel in communicating with callers and responding more efficiently. Legislation has 
been enacted in recent years to, among other things:   
 
 
transfer the Maryland 9-1-1 Board, which is responsible for administering the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund and overseeing the State’s 9-1-1 system, from the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services to MDEM; 
 
expand the uses of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding for 
9-1-1 specialist training activities; and  
 
increase funding for the State’s 9-1-1 system. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDEM advises that the Maryland 9-1-1 Board’s regulatory 
authority was inadvertently repealed between 2016 and 2020 as the board was transferred 
to MDEM and numerous bills were enacted to modify the board’s responsibilities and 
authority. Also, regulatory authority was omitted from MDEM’s authorizing legislation in 
2021. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 138 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Kent, 
Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 423/ Page 3 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3