START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 445 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 445 
(Delegate Hill) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Interference With a Public Safety Answering Point - Penalties 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from committing a violation of § 7-302 of the Criminal Law 
Article (unauthorized access to computers and related material) with the intent to interrupt 
or impair the functioning of a “public safety answering point” (PSAP). A violator is guilty 
of a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of 
$25,000. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through PSAPs. A PSAP is a 
communications facility that (1) is operated on a 24-hour basis; (2) first receives 
9-1-1 requests for emergency services in a 9-1-1 service area; and (3) as appropriate, 
dispatches public safety services directly, transfers 9-1-1 requests for emergency services, 
or transmits incident data. 
 
Computer-related Offenses 
 
Under § 7-302 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not intentionally, willfully, and 
without authorization, access or attempt to access, cause to be accessed, or exceed the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 445/ Page 2 
person’s authorized access to all or part of a computer, computer network, computer control 
language, computer software, computer system, computer service, or computer database. 
A person may not intentionally, willfully, and without authorization, copy, attempt to copy, 
possess, or attempt to possess the contents of all or part of a computer database that was 
unlawfully accessed. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and are subject to 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
A person may not commit the prohibited acts described above with the intent to (1) cause 
the malfunction or interruption of all or any part of a computer, computer network, 
computer control language, computer software, computer system, computer service, or 
computer data or (2) alter, damage, or destroy all or any part of data or a computer program 
stored, maintained, or produced by a computer, computer network, computer software, 
computer system, computer service, or computer database. A person is also prohibited from 
intentionally, willfully, and without authorization (1) possessing, identifying, or attempting 
to identify a valid access code or (2) publicizing or distributing a valid access code to an 
unauthorized person. If the aggregate amount of the loss is $10,000 or more, a violator is 
guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a maximum fine 
of $10,000. If the aggregate amount of the loss is less than $10,000, a violator is guilty of 
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or a maximum fine of 
$5,000. 
 
A person may not commit any of these computer-related offenses with the intent to 
interrupt or impair the functioning of (1) the State government; (2) a natural gas or electric 
service, device, or system owned, operated, or controlled in the State by a person other than 
a public service company; (3) a service provided in the State by a public service company; 
(4) a health care facility; or (5) a public school. If the aggregate amount of the loss 
associated with a violation of this prohibition is $10,000 or more, a violator is guilty of a 
felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a maximum fine of $100,000. 
If the aggregate amount of the loss is less than $10,000, a violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or a maximum fine of 
$25,000. 
 
Except for a person who has a bona fide scientific, educational, governmental, testing, 
news, or other similar justification for possessing ransomware, a person may not knowingly 
possess ransomware with the intent to use the ransomware for the purpose of introduction 
into the computer, computer network, or computer system of another person without the 
authorization of the other person. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to two years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000. 
 
Prohibited access under a single scheme or a continuing course of conduct may be 
considered one violation. A defendant may be tried in any county in Maryland where the 
act was performed, or the accessed computer was located. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 445/ Page 3 
A person who has suffered a specific and direct injury as a result of any prohibited act may 
bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction, and maintaining a civil action is 
not dependent upon a criminal conviction against the defendant. A court may award actual 
damages and reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 496 and HB 70 of 2024; SB 405 and HB 744 of 2023; and SB 83 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 81 (Senator Kagan) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Cecil, 
Frederick, 
and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3