START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 427 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 427 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Public Accountancy - Emeritus Status 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Board of Public Accountancy to place a licensee on emeritus 
status if the applicant meets specified requirements. Additionally, the board is required to 
reinstate the license of an individual on emeritus status under certain circumstances. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that this bill applies in a limited number of cases, special 
fund revenues and expenditures for the board are likely not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board must place a licensee on emeritus status if the individual applies 
for emeritus status and:   
 
 
has an active or inactive license to practice certified public accountancy under State 
law; 
 
is not under investigation by the board for a violation of Title 2 of the Business 
Occupations and Professions Article (which governs the licensing of accountants in 
the State); 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 427/ Page 2 
 
is not the subject of a pending disciplinary action related to the practice of certified 
public accountancy in Maryland (or another state); 
 
has practiced public accountancy in the State for at least 20 years and is at least 
60 years old or has at least 40 years of experience as a certified public accountant; 
and 
 
attests that (1) the individual is retired and is no longer actively practicing public 
accountancy in the State and (2) the individual will not provide certified public 
accountancy services unless reinstated in accordance with the bill. 
 
The board must review an application for emeritus status within 60 days of receipt. If 
approved, the board must send the licensee written notice of the approval and a certificate 
of emeritus status. A licensee on emeritus status is exempt from (1) the continuing 
education requirements otherwise required under State law and (2) the reinstatement fee 
for expired licenses. 
 
Prohibitions for Licensees on Emeritus Status 
 
A licensee on emeritus status may not (1) practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice 
certified public accountancy in the State; (2) sign or certify financial statements, tax 
returns, or audit reports; or (3) provide attestation services. 
 
Misrepresentation as Authorized Practitioner 
 
An individual on emeritus status is not prohibited from describing their status to the public, 
provided that the individual does not represent that the licensee is authorized to practice 
certified public accountancy in the State. Further, a licensee on emeritus status may use the 
words “certified public accountant emeritus” or the abbreviation “CPA emeritus” to 
describe the occupation of the individual, provided that the licensee does not represent to 
the public that the licensee is authorized to practice certified public accountancy in the 
State. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Public Accountancy regulates and licenses individuals 
acting as certified public accountants and issues permits to business entities that provide 
public accountancy services. Practicing certified public accountancy means, among other 
things, to (1) conduct an audit; (2) conduct any examination, review, or agreed-upon 
procedures engagement to be performed in accordance with the Statements on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements issued by the American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants; or (3) provide a written certificate or opinion offering positive or negative 
assurance or full or limited assurance on the correctness of the information or on the 
fairness of the presentation of the information in certain documentation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 427/ Page 3 
To qualify for a license, an applicant must meet certain educational and experience criteria 
and pass the Uniform Certified Public Accountant Examination. Additionally, a firm that 
has an office in the State and either uses the title of “CPA” or “CPA firm” or performs 
certain services must have a permit issued by the board. To qualify for a permit, a firm 
must meet certain requirements depending on the type of firm. 
 
Reinstatment of Expired Licenses 
 
In accordance with its regulations, the board may reinstate the license of an individual who 
has failed to renew the license for any reason if the individual (1) otherwise is entitled to 
be licensed; (2) complies with each continuing education requirement that the board sets 
for this purpose; and (3) pays to the board a reinstatement fee set by the board. 
 
Practicing without a License  
 
Generally, a person may not practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice certified 
public accountancy in Maryland unless licensed by the board or qualified for a practice 
privilege under provisions of State law governing licensed out-of-state accountants. 
 
Misrepresentation as Authorized Practitioner  
 
Unless authorized by State law to practice certified public accountancy, a person may not 
represent to the public, by use of a title (e.g., “licensed certified public accountant,” 
“certified public accountant,” etc.), by description of services, methods, or procedures, or 
otherwise, that the person is authorized to practice certified public accountancy in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 148 (Senator Ellis) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3