START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 455 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 455 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Braille Flag Memorial Act of 2025 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) to designate 
a location for an “American braille tactile flag” to be placed on one or more State veterans’ 
cemeteries as authorized by the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families to honor 
members of the uniformed services, veterans, and other individuals in the State who are 
blind or visually impaired. “American braille tactile flag” means a tactile flag designed to 
allow blind people to experience the American Flag, including a flag created by the 
Kansas Braille Transcription Institute. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill only requires DVMF to designate a location for an  
American braille tactile flag, DVMF can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DVMF is authorized to establish one or more cemeteries in the State for 
the burial of veterans and their eligible spouse or dependents as authorized by the Secretary 
of Veterans and Military Families. DVMF’s Cemetery Program operates and maintains 
five veterans’ cemeteries to provide for their internment. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 455/ Page 2 
To qualify for a plot in a State veterans’ cemetery, an applicant must be a veteran who 
meets the requirements for burial at a national veterans’ cemetery or an eligible spouse or 
dependent of a veteran who meets specified requirements. In addition, if the applicant is a 
veteran, the veteran must have been a resident of the State when the veteran entered the 
U.S. Armed Forces; when the veteran died; or for two years, unless DVMF waives the time 
period. DVMF must provide a grave liner at no cost to the veteran, eligible spouse, or 
dependent. In addition, DVMF must bury the veteran, eligible spouse, or dependent 
without charge. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires DVMF to designate a location for an  
American braille tactile flag to be placed in one or more State veterans’ cemeteries. As the 
bill does not require DVMF to install an American braille tactile flag, DVMF can designate 
at least one location with existing resources. To the extent DVMF installs an  
American braille tactile flag at one or more State veterans’ cemeteries, general fund 
expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount to purchase American braille tactile 
flag(s), installs the flag(s), and maintain the installation(s). 
 
For illustrative purposes only, American braille tactile flags from the Kansas Braille 
Transcription Institute range in price from $250 for a full-color polymer flag with 
programmable audio functioning suitable for permanent indoor display to $850 for a 
bronze flag suitable for permanent indoor or outdoor display. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 85 (Senators Simonaire and M. Jackson) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2