START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 431 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 431 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Consumer Contracts - Limitation Periods 
 
 
This bill establishes that a provision in a consumer contract that sets a shorter period of 
time to bring an action under or on the contract than required by State law when the contract 
is issued or delivered is against State policy, illegal, and void. The bill does not apply to:  
(1) any consumer contract provided by a business, including an affiliate or subsidiary of 
the business, that is doing business under a license, franchise agreement, certificate, or 
other authorization issued by a State agency, political subdivision, or public utility 
commission; (2) a service regulated by the Maryland Public Service Commission, the 
Federal Communications Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission; or 
(3) a person or business licensed to provide security system services under Title 18 of the 
Business Occupations and Professions Article. The bill only applies prospectively and may 
not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on (or application to) any contract entered 
into before the bill’s effective date. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Consumer contract” means a contract involving the sale, lease, or 
provision of goods or services that are for personal, family or household purposes. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 431/ Page 2 
If a consumer contract contains a provision that is illegal under the bill (1) a court may not 
give effect to the provision and (2) a defense to liability under the consumer contract may 
not be based on the shorter limitation period. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, pursuant to § 5-101 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article, a civil action must be filed within three years from the date it accrues, unless 
otherwise specified by State law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 413 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2