START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

Chapter 263

(House Bill 475)

AN ACT concerning

Transportation Equality for Service Members Act

FOR the purpose of establishing rules of interpretation related to the uniformed services;
altering the rule of interpretation for “veteran”; altering the application of certain
provisions of law governing transportation to apply to all uniformed services, rather
than only certain uniformed services; and generally relating to veterans and
uniformed services.

BY renumbering
Article – Transportation
Section 11–103.4
to be Section 11–103.5
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 1–101.1, 1–101.2, 1–103.1, 1–114.1, 1–114.2, and 1–116
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 1–117
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 11–101, 12–301(i)(4)(i), 13–616.2(a)(2)(ii)1., 16–115(a)(1) and (2), and
23–202(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 263 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Transportation
Section 11–101.1, 11–101.2, 11–103.4, 11–148.2, 11–158.1, 11–174.2, and 11–178
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 12–301(i)(4)(ii)1., 13–402.1(c), 13–616.2(a)(2)(ii)2.B., 13–619.1(a)(2) and (3),
(c), and (d)(1), 13–619.4(b) and (c), 13–810(f), 16–102(a)(7), 16–111(e)(1) and
(4), 16–115(d)(1), and 23–206.2(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 11–103.4 of Article – Transportation of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
renumbered to be Section(s) 11–103.5.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – General Provisions

1–101.1.

“ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–101.2.

“ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–103.1.

“ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–114.1.

“RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–114.2.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

“SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–116.

“UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–117.

(A) “VETERAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(B) With respect to any State program of benefits, rights, or privileges applicable
to a veteran under this Code, “veteran” includes[, if the individual is eligible under 38
U.S.C. § 101, a member of the commissioned corps of:

(1) the Public Health Service; or

(2) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or its
predecessor, the Coast and Geodetic Survey] AN INDIVIDUAL WHO MEETS THE
DEFINITION OF “VETERAN” UNDER § 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

Article – State Government

9–901.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

(C) “ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS:

(1) AN ACTIVE DUTY MEMBER OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES; OR

(2) SERVING IN A RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE UNIFORMED
SERVICES ON ACTIVE DUTY ORDERS.

(D) “ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 10 U.S.C. § 101.

(E) “Board” means the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust.

[(c)] (F) “Department” means the Department of Veterans and Military
Families.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 263 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) “MILITARY FAMILY” INCLUDES THE SPOUSE AND DEPENDENT
CHILDREN OF A SERVICE MEMBER OR VETERAN RELATED BY BLOOD, MARRIAGE, OR
ADOPTION.

(H) “RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

[(d)] (I) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families.

(J) “SERVICE MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A MEMBER OF:

(1) THE UNIFORMED SERVICES; OR

(2) A RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.

[(e)] (K) “Trust” means the Maryland Veterans Trust.

(L) “UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

[(f)] (M) Except as otherwise provided [in this subtitle], “veteran” [means an
individual who served on active duty in the armed forces of the United States, other than
for training, and was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable] HAS
THE MEANING STATED IN 38 U.S.C. § 101.

Article – Transportation

11–101.

In the Maryland Vehicle Law, the following words have the meanings indicated,
unless the context requires otherwise.

11–101.1.

“ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

11–101.2.

“ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

11–103.4.

“ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

11–148.2.

“RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

11–158.1.

“SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

11–174.2.

“UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

11–178.

“VETERAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

12–301.

(i) (4) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
Administration may issue a temporary renewal for an identification card that extends the
expiration date for a period not exceeding 2 years for an applicant who:

1. Has the documentation required by federal law, as
enumerated in subsection (a)(4) and (5) of this section, on file with the Administration;

2. Has a photograph on file with the Administration that will
not be 16 years old or older by the expiration date of the temporary renewal; and

3. Has an identification card that was issued for the full term
under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(ii) The Administration may make temporary renewal of an
identification card available to:

1. An active [duty] SERVICE member [of the armed forces of
the United States] or a spouse or dependent of the ACTIVE SERVICE member;

13–402.1.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 263 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) If a nonresident is a member of the [armed forces of the United States or of
the United States Public Health Service] UNIFORMED SERVICES and is serving on active
duty in this State or an adjoining state or the District of Columbia, the nonresident need
not register [his] THE MEMBER’S personal passenger vehicles in this State if the vehicles
are registered in the state of [his] THE MEMBER’S residence.

13–616.2.

(a) A person may apply to the Administration for a temporary parking placard on
a form provided by the Administration if:

(2) (ii) The applicant, a dependent of the applicant, or any individual
who depends on the applicant for transportation:

1. Submits proof satisfactory to the Administration that the
individual has a disability as described in § 13–616(b)(1) of this subtitle; and

2. B. Is serving in the [armed forces of the United States]
UNIFORMED SERVICES and is stationed in the State;

13–619.1.

(a) (2) To be eligible for a special registration described under subsection
(c)(2)(i) of this section, an applicant shall provide proof that is satisfactory to the
Administration that the applicant is a recipient of an individually earned, combat–related
armed forces medal OR A NON–COMBAT–RELATED UNIFORMED SERVICES MEDAL OF
THE HIGHEST LEVELS.

(3) To be eligible for a special registration described under subsection
(c)(2)(ii) of this section, an applicant shall provide proof that is satisfactory to the
Administration that the applicant is [an honorably discharged] A veteran [of a branch of
the armed forces of the United States].

(c) Special registration plates issued under this section:

(1) May consist of any combination of letters, numerals, or both; and

(2) Shall include:

(i) For registration plates issued for an applicant described in
subsection (a)(2) of this section:

1. An emblem or logo as authorized by the Administration
that depicts the applicant’s [armed forces] UNIFORMED SERVICES medal; and

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

2. Except on plates issued for Class D (motorcycle) vehicles,
words describing the medal printed across the bottom of the plates;

(ii) Words or an emblem or logo indicating that the special
registration plate holder is [an honorably discharged] A veteran [of a branch of the armed
forces of the United States]; or

(iii) An emblem or logo indicating that the registration plate holder
is the recipient of the U.S. Department of Defense Gold Star or Next of Kin lapel button.

(d) (1) The Administration, in consultation with the U.S. Department of
Defense, THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY, THE COMMISSIONED CORPS
OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE, THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION, and appropriate representatives of the various branches of the [armed
forces] UNIFORMED SERVICES, shall adopt regulations specifying those [armed forces]
UNIFORMED SERVICES medals that are of the type described in subsection (a)(2) of this
section and which, when awarded to an individual, qualify that individual to apply for
special registration under this section.

13–619.4.

(b) To be eligible for a special disabled veteran registration plate under this
section, an applicant shall provide proof that is satisfactory to the Administration that the
applicant is [an armed forces] A veteran who is between 50% and 99%, inclusive,
service–connected disabled as designated or classified by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs.

(c) The Administration may issue a special disabled veteran registration plate
that does not display the international symbol of access in recognition of the vehicle owner’s
service–connected disability to an individual who is [an armed forces] A veteran and is
between 50% and 99%, inclusive, service–connected disabled.

13–810.

(f) [(1) In this subsection, “military” includes the Commissioned Corps of the
Public Health Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the
Coast and Geodetic Survey.

(2)] A vehicle is exempt from the excise tax imposed by this part on issuance
of an original certificate of title if the vehicle:

[(i)] (1) Is owned by [a] AN ACTIVE SERVICE member [of the
military on active duty] or A SERVICE MEMBER who returns to the State from active duty;
and

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 263 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(ii)] (2) Was formerly titled and registered in another state by the
present owner of the vehicle.

16–102.

(a) The licensing requirements of this title do not apply to:

(7) A member of the [armed forces of the United States or of the United
States Public Health Service] UNIFORMED SERVICES who is serving on active duty and
any dependent of the member, if:

(i) The driver has [with him] IN THE DRIVER’S POSSESSION a
license to drive issued to [him] THE DRIVER by [his] THE DRIVER’S state of domicile; and

(ii) The license authorizes the driver to drive in [his] THE DRIVER’S
state of domicile vehicles of the class [he] THE DRIVER is driving in this State;

16–111.

(e) (1) Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section or any other provision of
this subtitle, the Administration may issue a provisional license to an individual who has
been licensed to drive in another state or country, or by the armed forces [of the United
States] for less than 18 months.

(4) Notwithstanding § 16–103(c)(3) of this subtitle, the Administration may
issue a license under § 16–111.1 of this subtitle without issuing a learner’s instructional
permit or a provisional license if the individual has been licensed to drive in another state
or country, or by the armed forces [of the United States], for at least 18 months.

16–115.

(a) (1) Subject to paragraph (5) of this subsection, a license issued under this
title to a driver at least 21 years old shall expire on the birth date of the licensee at the end
of a period of not more than 8 years determined in regulations adopted by the
Administration following the issuance of the license.

(2) Subject to paragraph (5) of this subsection, a license issued under this
title to a driver under the age of 21 years shall expire not later than 60 days after the
driver’s 21st birthday.

(d) (1) A license shall remain in full force and effect during an absence from
the State if the license is held by:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

(i) 1. A member of the [armed forces of the United States]
UNIFORMED SERVICES who is absent from this State on active service in the [armed
forces of the United States] UNIFORMED SERVICES; or

2. A dependent of the member who is residing with the
member outside the State; or

(ii) 1. A contract employee working on behalf of a federal agency
or branch of the [armed] UNIFORMED services who is absent from the State in service of
the contract; or

2. A dependent of the contract employee who is residing with
the contract employee outside the State.

23–202.

(a) (1) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, the Administration and the
Secretary shall establish an emissions control program in the State in accordance with the
federal Clean Air Act.

23–206.2.

(c) (1) A motor vehicle owned by at least one active duty member of the
[armed] UNIFORMED services [of the United States] at the time of a scheduled mandatory
inspection under this subtitle is exempt from the mandatory inspections required by this
subtitle if:

(i) An owner of the motor vehicle who is a member of the [armed]
UNIFORMED services [of the United States] has received [military] OFFICIAL orders:

1. For deployment outside the United States; or

2. To a duty station in a jurisdiction that is not subject to a
vehicle emissions control inspection and maintenance program; and

(ii) The exemption is not otherwise prohibited by federal law.

(2) In order to qualify for an exemption under paragraph (1) of this
subsection, all owners of the motor vehicle shall certify that at least one owner of the motor
vehicle has received [military] OFFICIAL orders for deployment outside the United States
or to a duty station in a jurisdiction that is not subject to a vehicle emissions control
inspection and maintenance program.

(3) The certification required in paragraph (2) of this subsection shall be
made on a form provided by the Administration.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 263 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10