START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 492 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 492 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Frederick County - County Employees and Volunteers - Criminal History 
Records Check 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Frederick County Director of Human Resources to request 
State and national criminal history records checks for a prospective or current employee or 
volunteer of the county. The director must submit fees and two complete sets of the 
prospective or current employee’s or volunteer’s fingerprints to the Criminal Justice 
Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR), as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. CJIS-CR can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in Frederick County expenditures from criminal 
history records checks beginning in FY 2026. Frederick County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The records checks are confidential, may not be redisseminated, and may 
only be used for a personnel-related purpose as authorized under the bill. Further, the 
subject of a criminal history records check may contest the contents of the statement issued 
by CJIS-CR. 
 
Frederick County must adopt guidelines for criminal history records checks under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 492/ Page 2 
Current Law:  CJIS-CR collects, manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history 
records information for criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and 
licensing) purposes. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) charges a fee of $12 for a 
national check. CJIS-CR collects the fee from the applicant and reimburses the FBI. 
CJIS-CR submits requests for national criminal records to the FBI electronically. When 
State legislation includes a national check, the FBI requires that the bill contain certain 
language. If the FBI does not approve the language of an enacted bill, national checks will 
not be provided. Each individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a criminal history records 
check is required to pay $50 for a State and national records check, including a 
$20 fingerprinting fee, a $12 FBI fee, and an $18 fee to CJIS-CR. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 995 (Frederick County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2