START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 428 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 428 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Medical Debt - Complaints for Money Judgment and Real Property Liens 
 
 
This bill prohibits the creation of a lien on owner-occupied residential property by contract 
or as a result of a breach of contract for the payment of “medical debt.” If a lien is created 
in violation of the bill’s provisions, the court must remove the lien. The bill also requires 
for a complaint seeking a money judgment to indicate whether the judgment sought is for 
medical debt. Additionally, a complaint seeking a money judgement for medical debt must 
include the address of the primary residence of the defendant. The bill’s provisions only 
apply prospectively to complaints filed on or after the bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Medical debt” means a debt owed by a consumer to a person whose 
primary business is providing medical services, products, or devices, or to the person’s 
agent or assignee, for the provision of the medical services, products, or devices. Medical 
debt does not include debt charged to a credit card unless the credit card is issued under an 
open-end or closed-end credit plan offered solely for the payment of health care services. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 428/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Generally, under the Maryland Contract Lien Act, a party seeking to create 
a lien as a result of a breach of contract must give written notice, within 2 years of the 
breach, to the person whose property is subject to the lien. Within 30 days after service of 
the notice, the person served may file a complaint in circuit court to determine whether 
probable cause exists to establish a lien. If the court orders a lien or the property owner 
fails to file a complaint, the party seeking to create a lien may file a statement of lien in the 
land records. With specified exceptions, a lien may be enforced and foreclosed by the lien 
holder in the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as the foreclosure of 
mortgages or deeds of trust on property containing a power of sale or an assent to a decree. 
An action to foreclose a lien must be brought within 12 years following recordation of the 
lien statement. 
 
Statute includes various requirements related to hospital debt collection policies that 
prohibit a hospital from taking certain actions when collecting a debt. For example, a 
hospital is prohibited from, among other actions (1) forcing the sale or foreclosure of a 
patient’s primary residence to collect a debt owed on a hospital bill or (2) requesting a lien 
against a patient’s primary residence in an action to collect debt owed on a hospital bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 630 and HB 673 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 349 (Senator Love) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2