START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 415 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 415 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and Amprey) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Library Agency - Family Literacy Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Family Literacy Pilot Program, administered by the Maryland State 
Library Agency (MSLA), to foster family literacy and strengthen parent-child relationships 
by providing children’s books in State correctional facilities to incarcerated individuals and 
a means for an incarcerated individual to read aloud to the individual’s child. MSLA, in 
consultation with the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) and 
the Correctional Education Council within the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor), must select four State correctional facility libraries or prerelease centers to 
participate in the program, as specified. The bill authorizes MSLA to adopt regulations 
necessary to carry out the bill’s requirements. MSLA must report on the results of the 
program by December 1, 2028. The bill terminates December 31, 2028.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $69,200 in FY 2026. 
Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs and reflect termination of the pilot 
program in FY 2029. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
69,200 
70,800 
73,800 
38,500 
0 
Net Effect 
($69,200) 
($70,800) 
($73,800) 
($38,500) 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 415/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The four State correctional facility libraries or prerelease centers selected 
to participate in the program must (1) represent each of the western, central, and eastern 
regions of the State; (2) consist of at least one correctional facility serving female 
incarcerated individuals; and (3) consist of at least one correctional facility serving male 
incarcerated individuals.  
 
MSLA must select the children’s books for use in the program, including children’s books 
in languages other than English. MSLA, in consultation with DPSCS and the Correctional 
Education Council, must:   
 
 
establish a process to secure written permission to participate in the program from 
the custodial parent or guardian of an incarcerated individual’s child;  
 
establish a process to assist an incarcerated individual in selecting an 
age-appropriate children’s book, preparing a recording of the incarcerated 
individual reading the book aloud, and distributing a copy of the book and the 
recording to the incarcerated individual’s child; and 
 
ensure participation in the program is free of charge for the incarcerated individual, 
the child, and the custodial parent or guardian.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Correctional Education Council 
 
The Correctional Education Council is under the joint jurisdiction of MD Labor and 
DPSCS. The council must develop and recommend an educational and workforce training 
program for adult correctional institutions in the State. These programs must meet the 
special needs and circumstances of the inmates in each correctional institution.  
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
MD Labor’s Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees 
Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State correctional facilities. DWDAL’s 
Office of Correctional Education provides career training opportunities “behind the fence.” 
Offerings vary by institution but include training in automotive skills, barbering, 
construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead to a portable, industry-recognized 
credential that contributes to an inmate’s employability after release. In addition to 
occupational programming, the Office of Correctional Education oversees academic and 
transitional courses throughout Maryland’s prisons. Academic programming includes 
GED preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high school diploma and English as a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 415/ Page 3 
second language courses. Prior to release, inmates may complete transitional courses to 
ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include classes in parenting, employment 
readiness, financial literacy, and life skills.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $69,207 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date.  
 
DPSCS has determined that four regular full-time positions are needed to implement the 
bill (i.e., one administrator at each of the four facilities participating in the program). 
However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that the added 
responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and, thus, may be performed 
by a contractual employee instead. Furthermore, DLS advises that the pilot program can 
likely be implemented with one contractual administrator, as the bill does not explicitly 
require the pilot program to be conducted simultaneously at each of the four facilities.  
 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual program administrator within 
DPSCS to assist with the administration of the program within DPSCS facilities. It includes 
a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. In 
addition, the estimate includes supplies and equipment for MSLA (e.g., books, recording 
equipment, and other miscellaneous administrative expenses) to conduct the required 
activities.  
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$54,588 
MSLA Supplies, Equipment, and Communications 
7,250 
Operating Expenses 
    7,369 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$69,207 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This estimate assumes the 
contractual position terminates December 31, 2028, (consistent with the bill’s termination 
date and about four weeks after the submission of the report by MSLA).  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
The Correctional Education Council within MD Labor can consult with MSLA and DPSCS 
using existing resources.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 415/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 378 (Senator A. Washington, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Library Agency; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 12, 2025 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4