START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 424 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Board - Authority and Stakeholder Council 
Membership (Lowering Prescription Drug Costs for All Marylanders Now Act) 
 
 
This bill repeals reporting requirements for the Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) 
regarding upper payment limits (UPLs). Instead, PDAB must determine whether it is in the 
best interest of the State to set UPLs for purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription 
drug products in the State that have led or will lead to an affordability challenge. If PDAB 
makes this determination, it must establish a specified process and set UPLs accordingly. The 
bill also (1) authorizes PDAB to reconsider a UPL for a drug that becomes a “current 
shortage”; (2) prohibits PDAB from taking specified actions that pertain to UPLs; (3) modifies 
the requirements and criteria for setting UPLs; (4) repeals obsolete language related to the 
Prescription Drug Affordability Fund (PDAF); (5) imposes additional reporting requirements 
on PDAB; and (6) adds new members to the Prescription Drug Affordability Stakeholder 
Council. The bill’s requirement that PDAB set UPLs for purchases and payor 
reimbursements is contingent on specified actions taking place by September 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
increase by $106,700 in FY 2026. PDAB special fund expenditures increase by at least 
$264,900 in FY 2027; special fund revenues increase correspondingly. Future years reflect 
annualization and ongoing costs. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) or the Department of Budget and Management 
(DBM), as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$264,900 
$263,200 
$268,200 
$273,300 
GF Expenditure 
$106,700 
$128,700 
$134,300 
$140,300 
$146,300 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$264,900 
$263,200 
$268,200 
$273,300 
Net Effect 
($106,700) 
($128,700) 
($134,300) 
($140,300) 
($146,300)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 424/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill may result in some cost savings for local governments; however, 
the overall impact on local finances and operations is expected to be minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Upper Payment Limits on Purchases and Payor Reimbursements 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that PDAB, in consultation with its stakeholder council, 
report to specified committees of the General Assembly by December 1, 2026, on (1) the 
legality, obstacles, and benefits of setting UPLs on all purchases and payor reimbursements 
of prescription drug products in the State and (2) recommendations regarding whether the 
General Assembly should pass legislation to expand the authority of PDAB to set UPLs to 
all purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State. 
 
Instead, the bill specifies that PDAB, in consultation with the stakeholder council, must 
determine whether, in addition to setting UPLs for prescription drug products purchased or 
paid for by or on behalf of a unit of State or local government, it is in the State’s best 
interest for the board to establish a process for setting UPLs for purchases and payor 
reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State that, in the board’s 
determination, have led or will lead to an affordability challenge. 
 
When making this determination, PDAB must consider, if applicable, (1) contract and 
budget data provided to the board that demonstrates savings to the State or local 
governments as a result of specified UPLs; (2) the success of setting UPLs in other states; 
and (3) the expected savings from Medicare Maximum Fair Prices set by the federal 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
 
If PDAB determines it is in the State’s best interest to establish a process for setting UPLs 
for purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State that it 
concludes have led or will lead to an affordability challenge, the board must establish a 
process for setting UPLs in consultation with the stakeholder council. The process, to the 
extent appropriate, must use the action plan approved by the Legislative Policy Committee 
(LPC) and otherwise comply with all existing requirements for setting UPLs. 
 
PDAB may set UPLs for purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription drug 
products in the State, except for (1) payor reimbursements under Medicare Part C and D; 
(2) purchases under the federal 340B Drug Pricing Program; and (3) purchases and payor 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 424/ Page 3 
reimbursements by federal agencies or federal programs that the State is preempted from 
regulating by federal law.  
 
Before establishing a UPL that applies to Medicaid, PDAB must confer with Medicaid to 
approve the application of the UPL by assessing whether the UPL will (1) conflict with the 
Medicaid Drug Debates Program, the Covered Outpatient Drug Rule (CMS-2345-FC), or 
any other federal requirements, as applicable and (2) require additional funding to be 
allocated to the Medicaid budget. 
 
Upper Payment Limits for Prescription Drug Products in Short Supply 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that PDAB’s process for setting UPLs must prohibit the 
application of a UPL for a prescription drug product that is on the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) prescription drug shortage list. The bill also repeals the requirement 
that the board must (1) monitor the availability of any prescription drug product on which 
it sets a UPL and (2) reconsider or suspend the UPL if there becomes a shortage of that 
prescription drug product in the State. 
 
However, if PDAB sets a UPL for a drug that becomes a “current shortage” (defined as a 
drug listed as current on FDA’s Drug Shortage Database or otherwise determined by the 
board to be in short supply in the State), the board may reconsider the previously set UPL. 
PDAB may not apply a new UPL to a drug in a current shortage.  
 
Changes to Setting Upper Payment Limits 
 
Setting Upper Payment Limits in Accordance with Approved Plan of Action:  The bill 
specifies that PDAB may set UPLs through regulations for prescription drug products 
purchased or paid for by or on behalf of a unit of State or local government. 
 
Prohibited Board Actions:  PDAB is prohibited from (1) enforcing a UPL against provider 
or pharmacy reimbursement requirements for Medicare Part C or D plans and (2) counting 
a pharmacy dispensing fee toward or subjecting a dispensing fee to a UPL. 
 
Modifications to Criteria:  In addition to the existing criteria that PDAB must consider 
when setting UPLs, the board must consider the effect a UPL will have on providers of 
340B drugs and, for a UPL on a drug designated as a drug for a rare disease or condition, 
the impact of the UPL on patients with rare diseases. 
 
Repeal of Requirements:  The bill repeals requirements pertaining to UPLs that are obsolete 
in light of LPC’s October 2024 approval of PDAB’s action plan for establishing UPLs for 
prescription drugs identified as causing or likely to cause affordability challenges. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 424/ Page 4 
Repeal of Obsolete Language – Prescription Drug Affordability Fund 
 
The bill repeals obsolete language that (1) requires PDAB to be established using special 
or general funds, which must be repaid to the State with funds from PDAF and (2) requires 
that, if the board receives funding from the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), 
it must repay the funds over a three-year period beginning June 1, 2021. PDAB received 
general funds to repay MHCC and such repayment is complete. 
 
Additional Reporting Requirements 
 
If PDAB sets a new UPL, to the extent practicable, it must include – in the first annual 
report required after the UPL has been in effect for one year – information on the effects 
of the UPL, based on available timely data, for the following: 
 
 
patient out-of-pocket costs, including whether the UPL was associated with 
increases or decreases in what patients pay for prescription drug products;  
 
patient health insurance premiums, including whether the UPL is associated with 
increases or decreases in health insurance costs for patients; 
 
pharmacies operating in the State, including the impact on reimbursement rates and 
financial viability of retail and independent pharmacies; 
 
patient health insurance formularies, including whether the prescription drug 
product subject to the UPL remained on formularies; 
 
provider-administered medications subject to the UPL, including whether providers 
were able to acquire the affected prescription drug product at a rate to account for 
acquisition costs and whether there was an impact on provider reimbursement;  
 
patient access to the prescription drug product subject to the UPL, which may 
include information as specified; 
 
covered entity providers participating in the 340B Drug Discount Program, 
including the impact of the UPL on their operations and contracted pharmacies; and 
 
the biotechnology industry in the State, including the impact on pharmaceutical 
research and development, investment, and job growth.  
 
PDAB may request information necessary to complete the required annual report from an 
affected entity. If contacted by PDAB for this purpose, an affected entity must make a good 
faith effort to provide the requested information. 
 
Effective Dates 
 
The bill generally takes effect October 1, 2025. However, Section 2 of the bill, which 
requires PDAB to set UPLs for purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription drug 
products in the State that have led or will lead to an affordability challenge if the board 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 424/ Page 5 
establishes such a process, is contingent on other actions. Specifically, PDAB must set, 
through regulations, UPLs on two prescription drugs (in accordance with the approved 
action plan) and each UPL must be in effect for one year. Within five days of these 
conditions being met, PDAB must notify the Department of Legislative Services (DLS). If 
DLS receives this notice by September 30, 2030, the provision takes effect on the date the 
notice is received. If the notice is not received by this date, the provision terminates. 
 
Current Law:  Established by Chapter 692 of 2019, PDAB is required to study the entire 
pharmaceutical distribution and payment system in Maryland and the policy options being 
used in other states and countries to lower the list price of pharmaceuticals. This includes 
setting UPLs, using reverse auction marketplaces, and implementing a bulk purchasing 
process. 
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Stakeholder Council 
 
Chapter 692 also established a Prescription Drug Affordability Stakeholder Council. The 
purpose of the stakeholder council is to provide stakeholder input to assist PDAB in making 
decisions. The council comprises specified stakeholders appointed by the Governor, the 
President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House. Collectively, members of the council 
must have knowledge in the following areas:  the pharmaceutical business model; supply 
chain business models; the practice of medicine or clinical training; consumer or patient 
perspectives; health care costs, trends, and drivers; clinical and health services research; or 
the State’s health care marketplace.  
 
Upper Payment Limits – Action Plan 
 
On October 22, 2024, LPC approved PDAB’s action plan for establishing UPLs for 
prescription drugs identified as causing or likely to cause affordability challenges. 
 
The action plan’s approval was made in accordance with § 21-2C-13 of the Health-General 
Article, which specifies that if PDAB finds that it is in the State’s best interest to establish 
a process for setting UPLs for prescription drug products that it determines have led or will 
lead to an affordability challenge, the board, in conjunction with the stakeholder council, 
must draft a plan of action for implementing the process that includes the criteria the board 
must use to set UPLs. The criteria must include consideration of (1) the cost of 
administering the prescription drug product; (2) the cost of delivering the prescription drug 
product to consumers; and (3) other relevant administrative costs related to the prescription 
drug product. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 424/ Page 6 
Implementation of Upper Payment Limits Following Action Plan Approval 
 
Upon approval of an action plan, the board may set UPLs for prescription drug products 
that are (1) purchased or paid for by a unit of State or local government or an organization 
on behalf of a unit of State or local government, including State or county correctional 
facilities, State hospitals, and health clinics at State institutions of higher education; 
(2) paid for through a health benefit plan on behalf of a unit of State or local government, 
including a county, bicounty, or municipal employee health benefit plan; or (3) purchased 
for or paid for by the Maryland Medicaid program. The UPLs must be for prescription drug 
products that have led or will lead to an affordability challenge and be set in accordance 
with the criteria established in board regulations. The board must monitor the availability 
of any prescription drug product for which it sets a UPL. If there becomes a shortage of a 
prescription drug product in the State, the board must reconsider whether the UPL should 
be suspended or altered. A UPL may not be applied to a prescription drug product while 
the prescription drug product is on FDA’s prescription drug shortage list. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
In accordance with § 21-2C-09 of the Health-General Article, by December 31, 2020, and 
annually thereafter, PDAB must submit, to specified committees of the General Assembly, 
a report that includes (1) price trends for prescription drug products; (2) the number of 
prescription drug products subject to board review, including the results of the review; and 
(3) any recommendations for legislation to make prescription drug products more 
affordable in the State. 
 
By December 1, 2026, PDAB, in consultation with the stakeholder council, is required to 
report to specified committees of the General Assembly on (1) the legality, obstacles, and 
benefits of setting UPLs on all purchases and payor reimbursements of prescription drug 
products in the State and (2) recommendations regarding whether the General Assembly 
should pass legislation to expand the board’s authority to set UPLs to all purchases and 
payor reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State.  
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Fund and Annual Fee 
 
PDAF provides funding for the board. The fund consists of fee revenue, money 
appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any other money from any other 
source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only to provide funding 
for the board and related purposes, including administrative expenses and any costs 
expended by a State agency to implement the board’s duties. 
 
PDAB must assess and collect an annual fee on manufacturers that sell or offer for sale 
prescription drug products to persons in the State, as well as pharmacy benefit managers 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 424/ Page 7 
(PBMs), carriers, and wholesale distributors that sell or offer for sale prescription drug 
products to persons in the State. The fee must be calculated in a fair and equitable manner 
and assessed and collected in accordance with criteria established in board regulations. 
Each entity assessed a fee must pay the fee by October 1 each year, but the board must 
allow entities to make partial payments. Any fee not paid within 30 days may be subject to 
an interest penalty. Total fees collected in each calendar year are capped at $2.0 million. 
 
340B Drugs 
 
The federal 340B Drug Pricing Program requires pharmaceutical manufacturers to sell 
outpatient drugs to covered entities (certain hospitals and federal grantees like health 
centers and clinics) at reduced prices in order to have their drugs covered under Medicaid. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that PDAB, as it implements the bill, 
determines that it is in the State’s best interest to set UPLs for purchases and payor 
reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State that have led or will lead to 
affordability challenges, subsequently establishes a process for setting such UPLs, and sets 
UPLs in accordance with that process. To the extent PDAB deviates from these 
assumptions, actual expenditures are lower than the estimates provided below. 
 
Under the bill, beginning in fiscal 2027, PDAB special fund expenditures increase by at 
least $264,925 for personnel and contractual expenses; PDAF special fund revenues 
increase correspondingly. OAG general fund expenditures increase by $106,659 in 
fiscal 2026, increasing to $146,304 in fiscal 2030, for personnel to provide legal support to 
PDAB. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the finances or operations of MDH 
or DBM.  
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Board 
 
PDAB is currently funded by an annual fee assessment. The board is authorized to assess 
and collect up to $2.0 million in fees annually. According to PDAB, the current annual 
assessment of approximately $1.2 million will not be sufficient to cover its costs under the 
bill beginning in fiscal 2027. Therefore, PDAB advises that it intends to revise its 
regulations to permit the board to increase its annual fee assessment on manufacturers, 
PBMs, carriers, and wholesale distributors. PDAB intends to have these revised regulations 
in place by July 1, 2026, so that the board can increase its fiscal 2027 assessment to 
adequately fund its operations. 
 
Due to the requirements the bill imposes on PDAB, the board advises that it must hire  
one full-time program administrator, with a start date of July 1, 2026, to assist with 
planning, coordinating, implementing, and monitoring UPLs for all payors in the State. 
PDAB further advises that, beginning in fiscal 2027, its budget for consulting services 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 424/ Page 8 
increases by a minimum of $150,000 annually to provide data, studies, and other 
information to the board as it considers implementing and later sets UPLs on purchases 
and payor reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$107,269 
Contractual Expenses 
150,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,656 
Minimum FY 2027 PDAB Expenditures 
$264,925 
 
Future year expenditures – which reflect minimum costs – reflect a full salary with annual 
increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that PDAF special fund revenues in fiscal 2027 
(and beyond) increase by a corresponding amount to the increase in PDAB special fund 
expenditures. However, actual PDAF special fund revenues depend on how the board sets 
the annual fee assessment. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
OAG is responsible for providing legal advice to PDAB. Under the bill, its legal work on 
behalf of PDAB is likely to include efforts to expand the scope of the board’s authority, 
assist with rewriting board regulations, and advise the board on potential litigation 
challenges. Therefore, OAG advises that the bill’s expansion of PDAB’s authority to set 
UPLs likely requires additional resources. DLS concurs with this assessment. 
 
Accordingly, OAG general fund expenditures increase by $106,659 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one full time assistant attorney general to provide additional legal assistance to 
PDAB. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$99,290 
Operating Expenses 
7,369 
FY 2026 OAG Expenditures 
$106,659 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Should OAG require additional resources to comply with the bill, it can request additional 
staffing through the annual budget process.  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 424/ Page 9 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
According to MDH, the bill is likely to have a minimal impact on the Maryland Medicaid 
program. While setting UPLs on certain prescription drug products could prevent MDH 
from receiving federal and supplemental rebates for those products, MDH advises that the 
bill, as written, sufficiently mitigates against this risk.  
 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
PDAB is already authorized to set UPLs on any purchases of prescription drug products 
made by the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
Accordingly, DBM advises that the bill has no impact on the program at this time. 
However, DBM advises that the bill’s implementation may cause disruptions to the 
program’s operations in the future. 
 
Local Effect:  According to the Maryland Association of Counties (MACo), the bill is 
likely to have a negligible impact on county operations and expenditures. However, MACo 
advises that, once PDAB’s UPLs are in place, there could be savings on pharmaceutical 
expenses in county budgets. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that implementing UPLs for purchases and payor 
reimbursements of prescription drug products in the State that PDAB determines have led 
or will lead to affordability challenges reduces drug prices, small business health care 
expenditures decrease. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 357 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 424/ Page 10 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10