START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 409 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 409 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Board of License Commissioners - Part-Time Deputy 
Chief Inspector - Compensation 
 
 
This bill increases, from $9,000 to $18,000, the annual salary of the part-time deputy chief 
inspector employed by the Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County salary expenditures increase by $9,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2026. Anne Arundel County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board is authorized to employ a part-time deputy chief inspector and 
18 part-time inspectors. In enforcing alcoholic beverage law in Anne Arundel County, an 
inspector has all the powers of a peace officer or sheriff and may serve a summons and 
issue a civil citation for a license violation, as specified. 
 
The annual salary of the part-time deputy chief inspector is $9,000. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by $9,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the increase in annual salary for the part-time  
deputy chief inspector under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 409/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last 
three years. See SB 655 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 568 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2