START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 475 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 475 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Transportation Equality for Service Members Act 
 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the  
General Provisions, State Government, and Transportation Articles of the Maryland Code, 
primarily by reference to definitions in the U.S. Code. While certain alterations within the 
bill represent only stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. These 
changes generally make certain provisions within the Transportation Article applicable to 
all members of the uniformed services, thereby expanding eligibility for certain benefits 
(e.g., special registration plates, license expirations/renewals, emissions exemptions, etc.). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that this bill applies in a limited number of cases, State 
finances, including those of the Transportation Trust Fund, are not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the State Government Article 
(specifically, § 9-901). This includes the definition of “military family” as well as all terms 
found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse and dependent children 
of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 475/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 475/ Page 3 
Maryland Vehicle Law Provisions 
 
The contribution of the U.S. Armed Forces is recognized through several provisions within 
the Maryland Vehicle Law. For example, Maryland has exemptions from registration fees 
for veterans with certain disabilities and vehicles owned by national veterans’ 
organizations as well as special registration plates for honorably discharged veterans; 
recipients of individually earned, combat-related U.S. Armed Forces medals; and 
recipients of a U.S. Department of Defense Gold Star indicating status as a surviving 
spouse, parent, or next of kin of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who lost his or her 
life in combat. The bill expands certain provisions to apply more broadly. 
 
Recipients of an Individually Earned Combat-related Armed Forces Medal:  Under the 
bill, special registration plates for recipients of an individually earned combat-related, 
armed forces medal are also made available to recipients of a non-combat-related 
uniformed services medal of the highest levels. In addition, the requirement under current 
law for the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to consult with the U.S. Department of 
Defense regarding qualifying medals is expanded to include consultation with the 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health 
Service (PHS), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and 
appropriate representatives of the various branches of the uniformed services. 
 
Disabled Veterans:  Under current law, the owner of a motor vehicle (or a lessee) may 
apply to MVA for a special disabled veteran registration plate for certain vehicle classes. 
To be eligible, an applicant must be an armed forces veteran. The bill repeals the reference 
to the armed forces; as a result, any veteran who meets other existing criteria for a special 
disabled veteran registration plate may apply under the bill. 
 
Excise Taxes:  Under current law, a vehicle is exempt from the excise tax imposed on 
original certificates of title if, in addition to other requirements, the vehicle is owned by a 
member of the military on active duty or who returns to the State from active duty, with 
“military” defined for this purpose as including PHS and NOAA. Under the bill, active 
service members or service members who return to the State from active duty are eligible, 
so long as the other requirements are met. Accordingly, the bill standardizes the terms used 
but does not expand eligibility for this exemption. 
 
Other Changes:  The bill alters several additional provisions that confer certain benefits 
and rights to members of the armed services or the military (sometimes also including PHS 
in current law). As noted above, “uniformed services” (or “service member”) is generally 
substituted for “armed services” and related terms, thereby definitively including PHS and 
NOAA. Specifically, the bill makes those substitutions within sections of the Maryland 
Vehicle Law related to: 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 475/ Page 4 
 
temporary renewals of identification cards; 
 
vehicle registration exemptions for nonresidents stationed in the State (or a 
surrounding jurisdiction, as specified); 
 
temporary parking placards; 
 
exemptions from driver’s licensing requirements; 
 
expiration and renewal periods for driver’s licenses; and 
 
emissions inspection exemptions. 
 
As a result of the above changes, under the bill, these provisions of the Maryland Vehicle 
Law are more standardized in the application of various benefits and privileges. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 281 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings and 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Veterans and Military Families; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4