START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 478 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 478 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Hagerstown Community College Police Force - Jurisdiction 
 
 
This bill authorizes a Hagerstown Community College police officer to exercise powers 
granted to a peace and police officer on any other property outside Hagerstown Community 
College if (1) engaged in fresh pursuit of a suspected offender; (2) necessary to facilitate 
the orderly flow of traffic to and from property owned, leased, operated by, or under the 
control of Hagerstown Community College; (3) ordered to do so by the Governor; or (4) in 
Washington County when responding to an imminent threat to life, property, or public 
safety or complying with a memorandum of understanding between the Hagerstown 
Community College Police Force and another law enforcement agency with jurisdiction. 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to (1) supersede the authority or jurisdiction of the 
Washington County Sherriff’s Office or any other law enforcement agency or (2) limit the 
authority or jurisdiction of the Hagerstown Community College Police force authorized 
under provisions relating to the statewide jurisdiction of officers for controlled dangerous 
substance offenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect local government 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 478/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Hagerstown Community College Police Force 
 
A Hagerstown Community College police officer has the powers granted to a peace and 
police officer and may exercise these powers only on property that is owned, leased, 
operated by, or under the control of Hagerstown Community College. The police officer 
may not exercise these powers on any other property unless: 
 
 
engaged in fresh pursuit of a suspected offender; 
 
necessary to facilitate the orderly flow of traffic to and from property owned, leased, 
operated by, or under the control of Hagerstown Community College; or 
 
ordered to do so by the Governor. 
 
In consultation with the Secretary of State Police and the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission, the Hagerstown Community College Board of Trustees must adopt 
standards, qualifications, and prerequisites of character, training, education, human and 
public relations, and experience for Hagerstown Community College police officers, 
including standards for the performance of their duties. To the extent practicable, the board 
of trustees must adopt standards that are similar to the standards adopted for the 
Department of State Police (DSP). The board of trustees must adopt regulations governing 
the operation and conduct of the Hagerstown Community College Police Force and of 
Hagerstown Community College police officers. 
 
Statewide Jurisdiction for Officers 
 
Under § 5-802 of the Criminal Law Article, notwithstanding any other law, a law 
enforcement officer of the Maryland Transportation Authority Police, a municipal 
corporation, or a county may investigate and otherwise enforce Title 5 of the Criminal Law 
Article (Controlled Dangerous Substances, Prescriptions, and Other Substances) and 
Title 12 of the Criminal Procedure Article (Forfeiture – Controlled Dangerous Substances 
Violations) throughout the State without any limitation as to jurisdiction and to the same 
extent as a DSP law enforcement officer. This authority may be exercised only in 
accordance with regulations that the Secretary of State Police adopts. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 478/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 504 (Washington County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; City of Hagerstown; Governor’s Office; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3