START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 446 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 446 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Invasive Blue Catfish Pilot Program 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to establish an 
Invasive Blue Catfish Pilot Program, which includes (1) a for-hire/commercial program, 
under which eligible participants can run for-hire and commercial fishing trips 
simultaneously and (2) a mid- and lower-bay trotline program, under which finfish trotlines 
can be used south of the William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge (Bay Bridge). For 
harvesting blue catfish under the pilot program, DNR must consider, among other things, 
authorizing the use of electrofishing and the use of trotlines of up to 2,400 feet in length. 
DNR must (1) report its findings and recommendations under the pilot program by 
December 1, 2025; (2) expand the use of practices determined to be effective throughout 
the duration of the program; and (3) continue to implement and update the program until 
the bill’s termination date. The bill terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DNR can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources; the bill 
establishes, in State law, pilot programs that DNR is already in the process of 
implementing. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires DNR, in coordination with the Invasive Catfish Advisory 
Committee, to establish the Invasive Blue Catfish Pilot Program to curb the spread of the 
invasive blue catfish in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 446/ Page 2 
The pilot program consists of: 
 
 
the For-Hire/Commercial Blue Catfish Program, under which DNR may  
(1) authorize eligible participants to run for-hire and commercial fishing trips 
simultaneously and (2) make any regulatory or administrative changes it believes 
will increase the commercial harvest of blue catfish; 
 
the Mid- and Lower-Bay Blue Catfish Trotline Program, under which DNR (1) must 
authorize the use of finfish trotlines south of the Bay Bridge to the maximum extent 
feasible to harvest blue catfish, but (2) may restrict the areas south of the bridge 
where finfish trotlines may be used to harvest blue catfish based on potential 
bycatch, user conflicts, or other issues the department considers relevant; and 
 
any other program DNR determines to be effective in curbing the spread of blue 
catfish in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
 
In implementing the pilot program, DNR must consider, for the harvest of blue catfish,  
(1) authorizing the use of electrofishing; (2) authorizing the use of finfish trotlines of up to 
2,400 feet in length; (3) eliminating any limits on the number of hooks used on a finfish 
trotline; and (4) authorizing the use of hooks that are not corrodible. 
 
DNR must (1) expand the use of practices determined to be effective under the pilot 
program throughout the duration of the program and (2) continue to implement and update 
the program until the bill’s termination date. 
 
By December 1, 2025, DNR must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on its 
findings and recommendations under the pilot program. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Pilot Program Authority 
 
DNR regulations, under COMAR 08.02.01.10, authorize the department to conduct pilot 
programs, with the participation of tidal fish licensees, to demonstrate and evaluate new 
approaches to managing fisheries under the fishery management plans the department has 
adopted for various species, including catfish. 
 
Regulations Governing the Use of Finfish Trotline Gear by Commercial Licensees 
 
DNR regulations governing the use of finfish trotline gear by commercial licensees, under  
COMAR 08.02.25.06F, establish that finfish trotlines may not (1) be set in the  
Chesapeake Bay south of the Bay Bridge, including Pocomoke Sound and Tangier Sound, 
or (2) exceed 1,200 feet in length. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 446/ Page 3 
Apart from limitations applicable to “shortlines,” a type of finfish trotline that may only be 
used in the Atlantic Ocean, the regulations do not limit the number of hooks on a finfish 
trotline or the use of hooks that are not corrodible. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill establishes, in State law, pilot programs that DNR is 
already in the process of implementing; however, small business commercial harvesters 
and processors may meaningfully benefit from the bill to the extent the bill’s requirements  
(1) cause DNR to expand allowable harvesting practices and opportunities – whether 
within the pilot programs or to harvesters outside of the programs – to a greater extent or 
earlier than they otherwise would do in the absence of the bill and (2) as a result, increase 
harvest of blue catfish.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 186 (Senators Bailey and Mautz) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3