START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 452 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 452 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Outdoor Lighting - Guidance and Use of State Funds 
 
 
This bill alters an existing prohibition against State funds being used to install or replace a 
permanent outdoor luminaire that does not meet specified criteria on the grounds of a State 
building or facility by (1) including State parks and trails in the prohibition and 
(2) exempting lighting used to illuminate the field of play at a sports facility. It also 
specifies that, except for a luminaire installed or replaced by the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT), a luminaire installed or replaced using State funds must have a 
correlated light temperature that is less than or equal to 3,000 Kelvin, subject to existing 
waiver procedures. Finally, the bill requires (1) the Maryland Green Building Council 
(MGBC) to update or develop related guidance, as specified, and (2) MDOT to conduct a 
review of its highway lighting practices, as specified. The bill applies only prospectively 
and does not affect the purchase of any outdoor lighting fixtures for a project for which the 
design phase has been completed before the effective date of any published guidance 
required by the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State expenditures for outdoor 
lighting, given waiver procedures in current law and its prospective application. MDOT 
can conduct the review of highway lighting practices with existing budgeted resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 452/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The guidance updated or developed by MGBC must consider 
recommendations regarding light pollution and color temperature published by the 
American Medical Association. MDOT is not subject to any guidelines updated or 
developed by MGBC. 
 
By September 30, 2026, MDOT must review highway lighting practices and, where 
applicable, consider alterations to current State practices that are inconsistent with 
guidelines established in the most recent edition of the Federal Highway Administration’s 
Lighting Handbook.  
 
Current Law:  A “luminaire” is the complete lighting unit including the lamp, other 
components that produce light, and the assembly that holds the lamp. A “restricted uplight 
luminaire” is a lighting fixture that (1) allows no direct light emission above a horizontal 
plane through the fixture’s lowest light-emitting part, except for a 0.5% maximum 
incidental uplight from reflection off mounting hardware and (2) emits no more than 10% 
of the total direct light emission at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees. 
 
State funds may not be used to install or replace a permanent outdoor luminaire on the 
grounds of any State building or facility unless:   
 
 
the luminaire is designed to maximize energy conservation and minimize light 
pollution, glare, and light trespass; 
 
the illumination produced by the luminaire is the minimum necessary for the 
intended purpose of the lighting; and 
 
the luminaire is a restricted uplight luminaire if it has an output of more than 
1,800 lumens. 
 
The prohibition does not apply to luminaires that are:   
 
 
located on the grounds of a correctional facility; 
 
required by federal regulation; 
 
required for storm operation activities performed by MDOT; 
 
required to illuminate the Maryland or United States flag; 
 
used for sign illumination; or 
 
in a lighting plan where fewer than 25% of the luminaires are to be replaced. 
 
The Board of Public Works (BPW) or the board’s designee may waive the requirement that 
high-output luminaires be restricted uplight luminaires if the waiver is necessary for the 
lighting application. BPW must establish requirements for a waiver request, as specified. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 452/ Page 3 
In reviewing a waiver request, BPW or its designee must consider design safety, costs, and 
any other factors it deems appropriate. In regulations, BPW has delegated its waiver 
authority to the Department of General Services (DGS), MDOT, and the University System 
of Maryland. 
 
Maryland Green Building Council 
 
MGBC has 16 members, including 10 State agency heads and 6 members appointed by the 
Governor to represent environmental, business, and citizen interests. Among other 
responsibilities, MGBC must evaluate current high performance building technologies and 
provide recommendations concerning the most cost-effective green building technologies 
that the State might consider requiring in the construction of State facilities. The council is 
staffed by DGS and must report annually to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
recommendations for the implementation plan for a higher performance building program 
in the State and any progress made during the preceding year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3