START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 437 
Department of Legislative Services  
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 437 
(Delegate Crutchfield, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Visual Surveillance With Prurient Intent - Modifications 
 
 
This bill expands the prohibition on conducting or procuring another person to conduct 
visual surveillance with prurient intent of an individual by adding (1) a residence and 
(2) another place of private use or accommodation to the list of protected locations in the 
definition of a “private place.” The bill also alters the language of the existing prohibition 
to clarify that nonconsensual visual surveillance of the “private area of an individual” by 
use of a camera, as specified, is prohibited regardless of the location of the individual. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to 
the bill’s expanded application of an existing penalty provision. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s expanded application of an existing penalty provision. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not with prurient intent conduct or procure another person 
to conduct visual surveillance of (1) an individual in a “private place” without that 
individual’s consent or (2) the “private area of an individual” by use of a camera without 
the individual’s consent under circumstances in which a reasonable person would believe 
that the private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether the individual 
is in a public or private place. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 437/ Page 2 
“Private place” means a room (including a tanning room, dressing room, bedroom, or 
restroom) in which a person can reasonably be expected to fully or partially disrobe and 
has a reasonable expectation of privacy, and is located within one of the following: 
 
 
an office, business, or store; 
 
a recreational facility; 
 
a restaurant or tavern; 
 
a hotel, motel, or other lodging facility; 
 
a theater or sports arena; 
 
a school or other educational institution; 
 
a bank or other financial institution; 
 
any part of a family child care home used for the care and custody of a child; or 
 
another place of public use or accommodation. 
 
“Private area of an individual” means the naked or undergarment-clad genitals, pubic area, 
buttocks, or female breast of an individual. 
 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment 
for one year and/or a fine of $2,500. An individual who was under illegal visual 
surveillance has a civil cause of action against the violator for actual damages and 
reasonable attorney’s fees. These provisions do not affect any other legal or equitable right 
or remedy. Additionally, they do not affect the application of the State’s general prohibition 
against nonconsensual visual surveillance of an individual in a private place. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
monetary penalty provisions from cases heard in the District Court. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the 
bill’s incarceration penalty due to more people being committed to State correctional 
facilities for convictions in Baltimore City. The number of people convicted under the bill 
is expected to be minimal. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy (MSCCSP) advises that 
it received information on 7 individuals sentenced to 13 total counts under § 3-902 or 
§ 3 903 (camera surveillance) in the circuit courts during fiscal 2024. MSCCSP notes that, 
based on the data it has access to, it cannot determine how many of those individuals were 
sentenced under § 3-902 specifically. The Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services reports that while there were no sentenced inmates in the Division of Correction 
during fiscal 2024, the Division of Parole and Probation opened supervision cases for 
25 individuals in fiscal 2024 for violations of § 3-902. Information is not readily available 
on convictions under § 3-902 in the District Court. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 437/ Page 3 
Generally, persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to a local detention facility. The Baltimore Pretrial Complex, 
a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial detentions. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s monetary 
penalty provisions from cases heard in the circuit courts. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally due to more individuals being 
incarcerated in local correctional facilities under the bill. Counties pay the full cost of 
incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem 
operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately $140 to $350 
per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:SB 348 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
caw/aad    
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3