START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 443 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 443 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Baby Food Labeling - Statement Regarding Toxic Heavy Metal Testing - 
Terminology 
 
 
This bill alters baby food labeling requirements to replace the phrase “toxic heavy metal” 
with “toxic element” on a tested baby food product. If baby food has been tested for 
toxic heavy metal subject to the limits established by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), the product label must say, “for information about toxic element 
testing on this product, scan the QR code.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains exclusively to private-sector activities. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Baby food” means food packaged in a jar, pouch, tub, or box sold 
specifically for babies and children younger than age two. “Baby food” does not include 
infant formula. “Toxic heavy metal” means arsenic, cadmium, lead, or mercury. 
 
Rudy’s Law (Chapter 954 of 2024) prohibits a person, from selling, distributing, or offering 
for sale baby food that contains toxic heavy metals that exceed the limits established by 
the FDA. Each manufacturer of baby food must test a representative sample of each 
production aggregate of the manufacturer’s final baby food product for each  
toxic heavy metal. On request of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 443/ Page 2 
manufacturer of baby food must provide the laboratory test results to an authorized agent 
of the department. 
 
Each manufacturer of baby food must: 
 
 
make publicly available on their website for each baby food product sold, 
manufactured, delivered, held, or offered for sale in the State (1) the name and level 
of each toxic heavy metal present in the final baby food product; (2) sufficient 
information, such as the product name, universal product code, or lot or batch 
number, to enable consumers to identify the final baby food product; and (3) a link 
to the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance and information about 
the health effects of toxic heavy metals on children; and 
 
if the baby food is tested for a toxic heavy metal subject to an action level, regulatory 
limit, or tolerance established by the FDA under 21 CFR § 109, include on the 
baby food product label a (1) QR Code or other machine-readable code that allows 
consumers to access on the manufacturer’s website of the baby food product 
information page, the test results for the toxic heavy metals and a link to the 
webpage on the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance and 
information about the health effects of the toxic heavy metal on children and 
(2) specified statement regarding the QR Code. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business baby food manufacturers and distributors must 
comply with the revised labeling requirement. However, the bill aligns Maryland’s labeling 
policy with California’s, thereby allowing companies that ship nationally to use the same 
labelling for both Maryland and California (the only two states that require toxic element 
testing and the corresponding labeling of baby food). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2