START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 463 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 463 
(Delegates Edelson and Watson) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Motor Vehicle Administration - 3-Hour Roadway Safety Driving 
Education Program - Requirements 
 
 
This bill replaces an alcohol and drug education program administered by the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA) with a newly established and more broadly focused 
three-hour Roadway Safety Driving Education Program. The Roadway Safety Driving 
Education Program must provide instruction on (1) understanding signs, signals, and 
pavement markings; (2) dangerous driving behaviors; (3) work zone safety; (4) the hazards 
of driving while impaired or intoxicated; (5) the criminal penalties and administrative 
sanctions for alcohol- and drug-related motor vehicle violations; (6) the medical, 
biological, and psychological effects of the consumption of alcohol and drugs and their 
impact on the operation of a motor vehicle; (7) the Maryland driving record and points 
systems; and (8) any other roadway safety-related information that MVA determines would 
be beneficial to applicants for a driver’s license. MVA must adopt regulations establishing 
criteria for certifying a private entity to offer the three-hour program established by the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MVA may issue a driver’s license, without first issuing a learner’s 
instructional permit and without a waiting period, to any individual who (1) has been 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 463/ Page 2 
licensed regularly to drive in Maryland, in another state or country, or by the armed forces 
of the United States, if MVA is satisfied that the applicant’s experience in driving vehicles 
of the type that would be authorized by the license class applied for is sufficient to justify 
issuance of the license without further training or (2) has successfully completed the basic 
motorcycle safety course. MVA may examine the applicant’s driving record or issue a 
provisional license (if appropriate). An individual who never held a driver’s license issued 
by MVA (or by another state), but who otherwise may obtain a license without first 
obtaining a learner’s instructional permit, must successfully complete a three-hour alcohol 
and drug education program established by MVA.  
 
Alcohol and Drug Education Program 
 
MVA, in cooperation with the Behavioral Health Administration within the Maryland 
Department of Health, must establish an alcohol and drug education program to educate 
certain driver’s license applicants (i.e., applicants who are qualified to receive a driver’s 
license without first being issued a learner’s instructional permit, as noted above). The 
program must also be included as part of the driver education program. The program must 
provide three hours of instruction in:   
 
 
the hazards of driving while impaired or intoxicated;  
 
the criminal penalties and administrative sanctions for alcohol- and drug-related 
motor vehicle violations;  
 
the medical, biological, and psychological effects of the consumption of alcohol and 
drugs and their impact on the operation of a motor vehicle; and 
 
any other drug- and alcohol-related information that MVA determines would be 
beneficial to applicants for a driver’s license.  
 
MVA must adopt regulations establishing criteria for certifying a private entity to offer the 
alcohol and drug education program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 471 (Senator Rosapepe) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 463/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3