START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 508 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 508 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement Preferences - Blind Industries and Services of Maryland - 
Packaging and Repackaging 
 
 
This bill adds “packaged” and “repackaged” janitorial products to the list of janitorial 
products that a prime contractor on a maintenance contract with the State (or State aided 
or controlled entity) must purchase from Blind Industries and Services of Maryland 
(BISM). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a direct effect on State finances but may 
have a minimal operational effect on State procurement units. 
 
Local Effect:  This bill is not expected to materially affect local governmental finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  When the State or a State aided or controlled entity enters into a 
maintenance contract that includes a component of housekeeping or janitorial services, the 
contract must include a requirement that the contractor buy janitorial products from BISM 
if the products are available and BISM makes, manufactures, remanufactures, or assembles 
those products. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide janitorial supplies may have fewer 
opportunities to participate as subcontractors or suppliers on State maintenance contracts 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 508/ Page 2 
to the extent that the bill requires prime contractors to purchase those supplies from BISM 
instead. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 795 (Senator Mautz) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of General 
Services; Blind Industries and Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2