START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 546 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 546 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Digital Advertising Gross Revenues Tax - Assessments - Appeals and Corrections 
 
 
This bill establishes a specified appeals process for persons who are subject to the digital 
advertising gross revenues tax (DAGR) and receive a notice of assessment from the 
Comptroller. The bill authorizes the Comptroller or the Comptroller’s designee to issue an 
order to correct an erroneous assessment of the DAGR tax, subject to specified conditions. 
As a result, the bill makes the administration and appeals process of the DAGR tax the 
same as for other taxes collected by the Comptroller. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2026, and applies to assessments of the digital advertising gross revenues 
tax made after December 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $132,100 in FY 2026 for personnel 
expenditures at the Comptroller’s Office. Future year expenditure increases reflect 
annualization and inflation. Revenues are not directly affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
132,100 
229,400 
239,600 
250,200 
260,900 
Net Effect 
($132,100) 
($229,400) 
($239,600) 
($250,200) 
($260,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 546/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Digital Advertising Gross Revenues Tax 
 
Chapter 37 of 2021 imposed a tax on the annual gross revenues of a person derived from 
digital advertising services in the State. The part of the annual gross revenues of a person 
derived from digital advertising services in the State must be determined using an 
apportionment fraction based on the annual gross revenues of a person derived from digital 
advertising services in the State and the annual gross revenues of a person derived from 
digital advertising services in the United States. 
 
The DAGR tax is imposed at the following rates:   
 
 
2.5% of the assessable base for a person with global annual gross revenues of 
$100.0 million through $1.0 billion; 
 
5% of the assessable base for a person with global annual gross revenues of 
$1.0 billion through $5.0 billion; 
 
7.5% of the assessable base for a person with global annual gross revenues of 
$5.0 billion through $15.0 billion; and 
 
10% of the assessable base for a person with global annual gross revenues exceeding 
$15.0 billion. 
 
Revenues from the DAGR tax are distributed to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund, 
after the Comptroller’s costs to administer the tax are deducted. 
 
Chapter 669 of 2021 exempts a broadcast entity and news media entity from DAGR by 
establishing that digital advertising services do not include advertisement services on 
digital interfaces owned or operated by or operated on behalf of a broadcast entity or news 
media entity. 
 
A broadcast entity is an entity that is primarily engaged in the business of operating a 
broadcast television or radio station. A news media entity is an entity engaged primarily in 
the business of newsgathering, reporting, or publishing articles or commentary about news, 
current events, culture, or other matters of public interest. A news media entity does not 
include an entity that is primarily an aggregator or republisher of third-party content. 
 
Chapter 669 also prohibits a person who derives gross revenues from digital advertising 
services in the State from directly passing on the cost of the tax imposed to a customer who 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 546/ Page 3 
purchases the digital advertising services by means of a separate fee, surcharge, or 
line-item. 
 
Assessment and Appeals for Taxes Collected by the Comptroller 
 
Taxes administered by the Comptroller are subject to an appeals process. Within 30 days 
after the date on which a tax assessment notice is mailed, a person or governmental unit 
may submit to the tax collector:  an application for revision of the assessment; or if the 
assessment is paid, a claim for refund. If a person or governmental unit fails to submit an 
application for revision or claim for refund within the time allowed, the assessment 
becomes final. 
 
Upon receiving the application, the Comptroller (or designee) must promptly hold an 
informal hearing and act on the application. In addition, the Comptroller may assess any 
additional tax, penalty, and interest due. A notice of final determination must then be 
mailed to the person or governmental unit. 
 
Notwithstanding a person’s failure to file a timely application for revision or claim for 
refund of an assessment of the admissions and amusement tax, alcoholic beverage tax, 
boxing and wrestling tax, income tax, motor carrier tax, motor fuel tax, sales and use tax, 
or tobacco tax, the Comptroller (or designee) may issue an order decreasing or abating an 
assessment to correct an erroneous assessment. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase in 
fiscal 2026 for personnel costs to handle appeals of the DAGR tax. The Comptroller’s 
Office advises that the DAGR appeals resulting from the bill may involve multiple 
constitutional issues, legal determinations on what constitutes taxable digital advertising, 
and an extensive review of electronic files on consumer use of digital advertising in 
Maryland. Though the number of appeals would likely be small, the appeals will be  
labor-intensive and require more time than individual income tax appeals. The 
Comptroller’s Office indicates that the attorneys in the Hearing and Appeals Division 
handle approximately 3,000 appeals per year. There have been a considerable number of 
DAGR tax appeals filed in Maryland Tax Court since the law took effect in 2021. It is 
estimated that each attorney would handle approximately 10 to 12 DAGR appeals per year.  
 
As a result, general fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by $132,100 
in fiscal 2026. This estimate reflects a 180-day start-up delay due to the bill’s 
January 1, 2026 effective date, and the cost of hiring two senior tax attorneys to handle 
DAGR tax appeals. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 546/ Page 4 
Regular Positions 
2 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$117,963 
Other Operating Expenses 
     14,185 
Total FY 2026 General Fund Expenditures 
$132,148 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries and annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
To the extent that the volume of appeals is higher and/or the level of complexity in each 
case is greater than expected, additional resources can be requested through the annual 
budget process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1067 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 605 (Senator Zucker) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4