START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 533 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 533 
(Delegate Crutchfield) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Peace Orders and Protective Orders – Military Protection Orders 
 
 
This bill authorizes a judge to consider whether a military protection order (MPO) has been 
issued against a respondent for the same or similar conduct against the same petitioner (or 
petitioner’s employee, as applicable) when determining whether there are reasonable 
grounds to issue a temporary protective order or temporary peace order, as otherwise 
specified in statute. If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that an 
individual is in violation of a protective or peace order and is a service member in violation 
of an MPO entered into the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s National Crime Information 
Center Database, the law enforcement officer must notify the law enforcement agency that 
entered the MPO of the violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $99,900 in FY 2026 
only for one-time programming costs. No effect on revenues. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
99,900 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($99,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 533/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “military protection order” means a protection order issued in 
accordance with 10 U.S.C. § 1567 by a commanding officer against a person under the 
officer’s command in (1) any branch of the uniformed services of the United States; (2) the 
Maryland National Guard; or (3) the national guard of any other state. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Peace Orders 
 
Generally, under current law, an individual who does not meet specified relationship 
requirements under the domestic violence protective order statutes may file a petition for a 
peace order with the District Court or the District Court commissioner (for an interim 
order) that alleges the commission of specified acts against the petitioner by the respondent, 
if the act occurred within 30 days before the filing of the petition. Such acts include an act 
that causes serious bodily harm, an act that places the petitioner in fear of imminent serious 
bodily harm, harassment, stalking, trespass, malicious destruction of property, and visual 
surveillance. 
 
If a judge finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent has 
committed, and is likely to commit in the future, one of the specified acts against the 
petitioner, the court may issue a temporary peace order to protect the petitioner. After a 
final peace order hearing, if a judge finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the 
respondent has committed, and is likely to commit in the future, one of the specified acts 
against the petitioner, or if the respondent consents to the entry of a peace order, the court 
may issue a final peace order to protect the petitioner. The order must contain only the 
relief that is minimally necessary to protect the petitioner. Among other provisions, a final 
peace order may order the respondent to (1) refrain from committing or threatening to 
commit specified acts; (2) refrain from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing the 
petitioner; (3) refrain from entering the residence of the petitioner; or (4) remain away from 
the place of employment, school, or temporary residence of the petitioner. 
 
Protective Orders 
 
Only a “person eligible for relief” may file for a protective order under the Family Law 
Article. A “person eligible for relief” includes:   
 
 
the current or former spouse of the respondent; 
 
a cohabitant of the respondent; 
 
a person related to the respondent by blood, marriage, or adoption; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 533/ Page 3 
 
a parent, stepparent, child or stepchild of the respondent or the person eligible for 
relief who resides or resided with the respondent or person eligible for relief for at 
least 90 days within one year before the filing of the petition; 
 
a vulnerable adult; 
 
an individual who has a child in common with the respondent; 
 
an individual who has had a sexual relationship with the respondent within one year 
before filing of the petition; and 
 
an individual who alleges that the respondent committed (or attempted), within 
six months before the filing of the petition, rape or specified sexual offenses. 
 
A person eligible for relief may file a petition for a protective order, alleging that the 
respondent has committed an act of “abuse.” For the purpose of protective orders, “abuse” 
means (1) an act that causes serious bodily harm; (2) an act that places a person eligible for 
relief in fear of imminent serious bodily harm; (3) assault in any degree; (4) rape or sexual 
offense, as specified; (5) false imprisonment; (6) stalking; or (7) revenge porn. 
 
If a judge finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person eligible for relief 
has been abused, the judge may enter a temporary protective order to protect any person 
eligible for relief from abuse. In general, a judge may grant a final protective order if the 
judge finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred or if 
the respondent consents to the entry of the order. Among other relief, a final protective 
order may order the respondent to (1) refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse any 
person eligible for relief; (2) refrain from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing 
any person eligible for relief; (3) refrain from entering the residence of any person eligible 
for relief; (4) remain away from the place of employment, school, or temporary residence 
of a person eligible for relief or home of other family members; or (5) remain away from a 
child care provider of a person eligible for relief while the child is in the provider’s care. 
 
Violations of Peace Orders and Protective Orders 
 
A law enforcement officer must arrest – with or without a warrant – and take into custody 
an individual who the officer has probable cause to believe is in violation of an interim, 
temporary, or final peace/protective order in effect at the time of the violation. 
 
An individual who fails to comply with specified provisions of an interim, temporary, or 
final peace/protective order is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties 
of a $1,000 fine and/or 90 days imprisonment for a first offense and a $2,500 fine and/or 
one year imprisonment for a second or subsequent offense. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 533/ Page 4 
Military Protective Orders 
 
In general, an MPO is a written lawful order issued by a commander that orders a service 
member to avoid contact with those persons identified in the order. An MPO issued by a 
military commander must remain in effect until such time as the military commander 
terminates the order or issues a replacement order. Within seven days of the MPO being 
issued against a service member, the commander must notify the appropriate civilian 
authorities of the issuance of the MPO and the individuals involved. The commander must 
also notify the appropriate civilian authorities of any change made to or termination of the 
MPO. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 273 (Senator Jackson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Military Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4