START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 515 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 515 
(Delegates Rogers and Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Veterans' Organizations 
 
 
This bill authorizes a holder of a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license in 
Anne Arundel County that qualifies as a veterans’ organization to convert that license to a 
Class C (veterans’ organization) license. The bill reduces, from $400 to $300, the annual 
license fees for Class C (veterans’ organization) licenses and authorizes the 
Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners to issue application and 
administrative fee discounts to specified applicants. The bill also allows the holder of a 
Class C (veterans’ organization) license to operate on Sundays without obtaining a separate 
Sunday license. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues decrease by $2,400 annually beginning in 
FY 2026. Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The conversion to and issuance of a Class C (veterans’ organization) 
license is considered a license renewal rather than the issuance of a new license.  
 
The board may provide application and administrative fee discounts to an organization that 
qualifies as a veterans’ organization and (1) holds a Class C (veterans’ organization) 
license; (2) applies for an initial or renewal Class C (veterans’ organization) license; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 515/ Page 2 
(3) holds a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license that is converted to a Class C (veterans’ 
organization) license. 
 
Sunday sales 
 
In addition to sales Monday through Saturday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day, the 
holder of a Class C (veterans’ organization) license may sell beer, wine, and liquor on 
Sundays from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day without obtaining a Sunday license. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner. Class C licenses authorize the sale of alcohol to 
members and guests at a club, for on-site consumption only.  
 
Class C license holders in Anne Arundel County may sell beer, wine, and liquor Monday 
through Saturday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day. They may not sell beer, wine, or 
liquor after 2 a.m. on Sundays without a Sunday license. The board may issue a Sunday 
license to a Class C license holder, authorizing the sale of beer, wine, and liquor on Sunday 
according to the terms of that license. 
 
Class C (veterans’ organization) licenses can be issued by the board only to a local unit of 
a nationwide nonprofit organization or club that (1) is composed only of veterans of the 
United States Armed Forces; (2) has a charter from a national veterans’ organization; 
(3) has a membership of at least 100 individuals and dues of at least $5 per year 
per individual; and (4) operates for its members and meets in a clubhouse principally used 
by its members. 
 
The annual license fee for a Class C (veterans’ organization) license is $400. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The board advises they have not had any applications for a Class C 
(veterans’ organization) license in the last ten years and they anticipate eight existing 
Class C licenses would convert to Class C (veterans’ organization) licenses under the bill. 
These eight license holders each currently pay an annual license fee of $480 plus a 
$120 Sunday sales permit, totaling $600 annually. Under the bill, each of the license 
holders would pay a $300 annual license fee for a Class C (veterans’ organization) license 
which authorizes Sunday sales. Therefore, beginning fiscal 2026, Anne Arundel County 
license fee revenues are estimated to decrease by $2,400 annually. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 515/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 17 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3