START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 565 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 565 
(Delegate Hutchinson) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Pharmacy - Renewal Notices - Electronic Means 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Pharmacy to send renewal notices by email instead of 
by first-class mail, unless otherwise requested. At least one month before a pharmacy 
license, wholesale distributor permit, pharmacy technician registration, or pharmacy intern 
registration expires, and before March 1 of the expiration year of a pharmacy permit, the 
board must send a renewal notice to the last known email address of the licensee or permit 
or registration holder. If requested, the board must instead send a renewal notice by 
first-class mail to the individual’s last known address. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures decrease by an estimated $14,500 annually 
beginning in FY 2026 due to reduced printing and mailing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
(14,500) 
(14,500) 
(14,500) 
(14,500) 
(14,500) 
Net Effect 
$14,500 
$14,500 
$14,500 
$14,500 
$14,500 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: The State Board of Pharmacy regulates the practice of pharmacy by 
licensing pharmacists, registering pharmacy technicians, issuing permits to individuals to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 565/ Page 2 
establish or operate pharmacies in the State, setting pharmacy practice standards, and 
developing and enforcing laws and regulations to protect the public. 
 
Unless otherwise requested, the board must send a renewal notice by mail to the 
individual’s last known address prior to the expiration of a license, registration, or permit. 
If requested, the board must send a renewal notice by email at least two times within the 
month before the license, permit, or registration expires. If the email is undeliverable, the 
board must send a renewal notice by mail. The renewal notice must state (1) the date the 
license, permit, or registration expires; (2) the deadline by which the renewal application 
must be received for the renewal to be mailed prior to expiration; and (3) the amount of the 
renewal fee. 
 
Pharmacy Licenses 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by the board before practicing pharmacy in 
Maryland. An applicant for a license must (1) have graduated from a school of pharmacy 
approved by the board or accredited by the American Council on Pharmaceutical 
Education; (2) have completed the required professional experience program; (3) pass the 
exam; (4) submit an application; and (5) pay the application fee. A license expires on the 
date set by the board unless renewed for an additional term, which cannot be longer than 
two years. 
 
Pharmacy Permits 
 
An individual must have a pharmacy permit issued by the board before establishing or 
operating a pharmacy in the State. A separate permit is required for each pharmacy an 
individual establishes or operates. To apply for a permit, an individual must submit an 
application to the board and pay the application fee. A permit expires on the May 31 after 
its effective date unless renewed for a two-year term. 
 
Pharmacy Technician Registration 
 
Generally, an individual must be registered and approved by the board as a pharmacy 
technician before performing delegated pharmacy acts. Generally, an applicant must 
(1) submit a signed application to the board; (2) provide documentation of training program 
and examination completion; (3) submit a request for a State criminal history records 
check (CHRC); and (4) pay the application fee. A registration expires on the date set by 
the board unless renewed for an additional term, which cannot be longer than two years. 
 
Wholesale Distributor Permits 
 
A wholesale distributor must have a permit issued by the board before engaging in 
wholesale distribution in the State. To apply for a permit, an applicant must submit an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 565/ Page 3 
application to the board and pay the application fee. A permit expires on the May 31 after 
its effective date unless renewed for a two-year term. 
 
Pharmacy Intern Registration 
 
Generally, an individual must be registered and approved by the board as a registered 
pharmacy intern before practicing pharmacy under the direct supervision of a 
licensed pharmacist. Generally, an applicant must (1) submit a signed application to the 
board; (2) provide documentation of enrollment in a Doctor of Pharmacy program or 
graduation from an approved college of pharmacy; (3) submit a request for a CHRC; and 
(4) pay the application fee. A registration expires two years from the date of issue, unless 
renewed. A registered pharmacy intern may renew the registration one time if the intern 
(1) otherwise is entitled to be registered as a pharmacy intern; (2) submits a renewal 
application; and (3) pays a renewal fee. 
 
State Expenditures:  Given that email costs less than printing and sending notices via 
first-class mail, State Board of Pharmacy special fund expenditures decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2026, as the board will avoid the costs associated with printing and mailing renewal 
notices. The board reports that it renewed 14,386 licenses in fiscal 2024. Assuming that 
the board mails about 14,500 renewal notices each year and printing and postage together 
cost about $1.00 per item, special fund expenditures may decrease by approximately 
$14,500 annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 371 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - February 21, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3