START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 598 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 598 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Anne Arundel County - Property Tax Credit - Supermarkets 
 
 
This bill authorizes Anne Arundel County and municipalities in the county to grant a 
property tax credit for personal property owned by a supermarket that completes eligible 
construction and is located in a food desert retail incentive area. Anne Arundel County and 
municipalities must designate what constitutes a food desert retail incentive area for 
purposes of the tax credit. The property tax credit for a taxable year may not exceed the 
amount of property tax imposed on the personal property of a supermarket in that year. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County and municipal personal property tax revenues 
decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the extent the tax credit is granted. The amount of the 
decrease depends on the number of supermarkets that meet the qualifications established 
by the county, the value of personal property owned by these supermarkets, and the amount 
of the property tax credit provided. County and municipal expenditures are not significantly 
affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 598/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Anne Arundel County and municipalities in the county may establish 
limits on the cumulative amount of property tax credits granted, additional limitations on 
the amount of the tax credit, additional eligibility requirements for supermarkets to qualify 
for the tax credit, additional criteria for what constitutes eligible construction that may 
qualify a supermarket for the tax credit, and any other provisions necessary.  
 
Eligible construction is defined as construction of a new supermarket or any substantial 
renovation of an existing supermarket. A supermarket is a grocery store that has (1) all 
major food departments, including produce, meat, seafood, dairy, and canned and packaged 
goods; (2) more than 50% of total sales derived from food sales; and (3) more than 50% of 
total floor space dedicated to food sales.  
 
Current Law:  Several provisions establishing property tax credits for grocery stores have 
been passed by the General Assembly in recent years. These provisions affected 
Baltimore County, Prince George’s County, and Baltimore City, as well as a statewide 
provision for low-income areas.  
 
In each of the affected jurisdictions, eligible construction is generally defined as 
construction of a new grocery store or any substantial renovation of an existing grocery 
store. A grocery store is a store that has (1) all major food departments, including produce, 
meat, seafood, dairy, and canned and packaged goods; (2) more than 50% of total sales 
derived from food sales; and (3) more than 50% of total floor space dedicated to food sales.  
 
Baltimore County 
 
Chapter 338 of 2022 authorized Baltimore County to grant a property tax credit for 
personal property owned by a supermarket that completes eligible construction and is 
located in a food desert retail incentive area. Baltimore County must designate what 
constitutes a food desert retail incentive area for purposes of the tax credit. The property 
tax credit for a taxable year may not exceed the amount of property tax imposed on the 
personal property of a supermarket in that year.  
 
Baltimore County may establish limits on the cumulative amount of property tax credits 
granted, additional limitations on the amount of the tax credit, additional eligibility 
requirements for supermarkets to qualify for the tax credit, additional criteria for what 
constitutes eligible construction that may qualify a supermarket for the tax credit, and any 
other provisions necessary.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 598/ Page 3 
Prince George’s County 
 
Chapter 158 of 2019 authorized Prince George’s County to grant a property tax credit for 
personal property owned by a grocery store that completes eligible construction and is 
located in a healthy food priority area. Prince George’s County must designate what 
constitutes a healthy food priority area for purposes of the tax credit, based on specified 
factors. The property tax credit for a taxable year may not exceed the amount of property 
tax imposed on the personal property of a grocery store in that year.  
 
Prince George’s County may establish limits on the cumulative amount of property tax 
credits granted, additional limitations on the amount of the tax credit, additional eligibility 
requirements for grocery stores to qualify for the tax credit, additional criteria for what 
constitutes eligible construction that may qualify a grocery store for the tax credit, and any 
other provisions necessary. Prince George’s County enacted the tax credit in July 2020.  
 
Baltimore City 
 
Chapter 38 of 2015 authorized Baltimore City to grant a property tax credit for personal 
property owned by a supermarket that completes eligible construction and is located in a 
food desert retail incentive area. Baltimore City must designate what constitutes a food 
desert retail incentive area for purposes of the tax credit. The property tax credit for a 
taxable year may not exceed the amount of property tax imposed on the personal property 
of a supermarket in that year. Baltimore City enacted the tax credit in January 2016. 
 
Low-income Area 
 
Chapter 724 of 2010 authorized local governments to grant a property tax credit for real 
property that is used for a grocery store located in a low-income area. Local governments 
may provide for the amount and duration of the property tax credit, additional eligibility 
criteria, regulations and procedures for the application and uniform processing of requests 
for the tax credit, and any other provision necessary. A grocery store is defined as an 
establishment whose primary business is selling food at retail to the general public for off 
premises consumption and at least 20% of the gross receipts of which are derived from the 
retail sale of fresh produce, meats, and dairy products. A low-income area must be 
designated by each local government for the purposes of the property tax credit.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County and municipal personal property tax revenues 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent the tax credit is granted. The amount of the 
decrease depends on the number of supermarkets that meet the qualifications established 
by the county, the value of personal property owned by these supermarkets, and the amount 
of the property tax credit provided.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 598/ Page 4 
In fiscal 2025, the personal property tax rate in Anne Arundel County is $2.457 per $100 
of assessment. The county personal property tax rates in Annapolis and Highland Beach 
are $1.467 and $2.382 per $100 of assessment, respectively, and the municipal personal 
property tax rates are $1.94 and $1.00 per $100 of assessment, respectively.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  None.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 131 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; City of Annapolis; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4