START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 512 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 512 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Barbershop and Beauty Salon Beer and Wine License - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill increases, from 5.0 to 6.5 ounces, the amount of wine by the glass that can be 
served for on-premises consumption under a barbershop or beauty salon beer and wine 
license in Frederick County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Frederick County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Frederick County, barbershop beer and wine licenses and beauty salon 
beer and wine licenses authorize a license holder to provide up to 5.0 ounces of wine by 
the glass or 12.0 ounces of beer for on-premises consumption by a barbershop or beauty 
salon customer (1) when the customer is provided a service by someone who is practicing 
barbering in a barbershop or when the customer is provided a cosmetology service by 
someone who is practicing cosmetology in a beauty salon or (2) while the customer is 
attending a fund-raising event at the barbershop or beauty salon for which the 
Frederick County Department of Permits and Inspections, if required, has issued a permit. 
 
“Practice barbering” means to provide the following services to an individual for 
compensation:  (1) cutting, razor cutting, styling, relaxing, body waving, shampooing, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 512/ Page 2 
coloring the hair; (2) shaving or trimming the beard; (3) massaging the face; (4) designing, 
fitting, or cutting a hairpiece; or (5) performing any other similar procedure on the hair, 
beard, face, or hairpiece of an individual. “Practice barbering” does not include (1) the 
mere sale of wigs or hairpieces or (2) the services performed by an employee under the 
supervision of a master barber that is restricted to shampooing, removal of a hair solution, 
sterilization of equipment, or similar activities. “Practice cosmetology” means to engage 
in any of the following for compensation (1) providing hair services; (2) arching or dyeing 
eyebrows; (3) dyeing eyelashes; (4) providing esthetic services; or (5) providing nail 
technician services. 
 
The annual license fee for a barbershop or a beauty salon beer and wine license is $100. 
The licenses may not be transferred to another location, and the license holders may 
provide beer and wine for on-premises consumption during normal business hours but no 
later than 9:00 p.m. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 738 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2