START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 585 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 585 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Low-Income Housing Tax Credit - Valuation of Property 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to 
notify the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) that a property has been 
awarded the federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) within 30 days of closing 
so that SDAT can proceed with valuation of the property in accordance with current law. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s reporting requirement can be handled with DHCD’s 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Current Law:  In determining the value of commercial real property developed under 
§ 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, SDAT (1) must consider the impact of applicable rent 
restrictions, affordability requirements, or any other related restrictions required by § 42 of 
the Internal Revenue Code and any other federal, State, or local programs; (2) may not 
consider income tax credits under § 42 of the Internal Revenue Code as income attributable 
to the real property; and (3) may consider the replacement cost approach only if the value 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 585/ Page 2 
produced by the replacement cost approach is less than the value produced by the income 
approach for the property and it is reflective of the value of the real property. 
 
Federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit 
 
Many of the affordable housing projects financed in the State are financed through the use 
of LIHTC. LIHTC was established by the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The tax credit 
subsidizes the construction and rehabilitation of low-income rental housing and is intended 
to encourage the production of low-income residential rental housing. Instead of offering 
direct subsidies, LIHTC provides incentives by granting investors a dollar-for-dollar 
reduction in their federal tax liability in exchange for providing funds for the development 
of qualified, affordable rental housing. This allows rents for some of a project’s units to be 
set below market level, while the investors receive annual tax credit allotments over 
10 years. For at least 15 years after completion, a project must continue to meet LIHTC 
eligibility requirements, such as maintaining the units as affordable to the target population. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 598 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2