START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 593 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 593 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Libraries - Automated External Defibrillator Program (Raymono A. 
Russell Act) 
 
This bill requires each “library,” beginning January 1, 2026, to (1) place an automated 
external defibrillator (AED) in a prominent area, accessible to employees and library users; 
(2) comply with the Maryland Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program; 
and (3) maintain the functionality of the AED. By December 1, 2026, the Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) must submit a specified 
report to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the 
House Ways and Means Committee. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MIEMSS can ensure library compliance with the Maryland Public Access 
AED Program and complete the required report with existing budgeted resources. The 
Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) can implement the bill’s requirements with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase beginning in FY 2026, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Library” means each branch of a county library system or the Enoch Pratt 
Free Library. “Library” does not include a (1) school library established by a local school 
system; (2) a mobile library unit; or (3) a correctional facility library. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 593/ Page 2 
In addition to any other immunities available under statutory or common law, a library is 
not civilly liable for any act or omission in the provision of automated external 
defibrillation if the library has satisfied specified requirements. An individual is not civilly 
liable for any act or omission if (1) the individual is acting in good faith while rendering 
automated external defibrillation to another individual who is the victim or is reasonably 
believed to be a victim of sudden cardiac arrest; (2) the assistance or aid is provided in a 
reasonably prudent manner; and (3) the automated external defibrillation is provided 
without fee or other compensation. A library or individual is not civilly liable for failing to 
render automated external defibrillation to an individual who is a victim or is reasonably 
believed to be a victim of a sudden cardiac arrest, as specified. 
 
By December 1, 2026, MIEMSS must report on the libraries that registered AEDs in 
accordance with adopted regulations and the number of adverse cardiac events that 
required the use of an AED experienced in those libraries. 
 
Current Law:  “Automated external defibrillator” means a medical heart monitor and 
defibrillator device that (1) is cleared for market by the federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA); (2) recognizes the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or 
rapid ventricular tachycardia; (3) determines, without intervention by an operator, whether 
defibrillation should be performed, and on determining that defibrillation should be 
performed, automatically charges; and (4) either requires operator intervention to deliver 
the electrical impulse or automatically continues with delivery of the electrical impulse. 
 
State Library Network 
 
Since 1888, the State has provided funds to support public libraries throughout the State 
under what is now known as the State library network. The network consists of the 
Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library System in Baltimore City, three regional 
resource centers (Charlotte Hall, Hagerstown, and Salisbury), and metropolitan 
cooperative service programs. All these systems receive State funding for operating 
expenses. The Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library operates as the designated 
State Library Resource Center (SLRC). 
 
MSLA administers State and federal funding for Maryland’s libraries and provides 
strategic leadership, resources, and support for local, regional, and State libraries. MSLA 
oversees Maryland’s 24 public library systems, the Maryland State Library for the Blind 
and Print Disabled, SLRC, the three regional resource centers, and the Maryland Deaf 
Culture Digital Library. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 593/ Page 3 
Maryland Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program 
 
The Maryland Public Access AED Program permits an organization, business, association, 
or agency that meets specified requirements to make AEDs available to victims of sudden 
cardiac arrest. Chapter 764 of 2024 expanded the program to include an initiative to 
co-locate up to two doses of naloxone (an FDA-approved medication for the reversal of 
opioid overdose) with each AED placed in a public building. MIEMSS oversees the 
program, including approving entities to participate and issuing registrations. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.06.02.01), to be eligible for registration or 
renewal of registration, each facility must designate an AED coordinator who must: 
 
 
complete cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and AED training and subsequent 
refresher training, in accordance with specified requirements; 
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED program at the facility; 
and 
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted. 
 
Likewise, a facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed CPR and 
AED training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be placed in 
locations that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate the AED 
in the event of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility at which an AED is operated must have 
a telephone or communication service available at all times for the notification of a public 
safety answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning the AED 
program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
Chapters 304 and 305 of 2023 require each owner and operator of a grocery store or a 
specified restaurant, beginning January 1, 2025, to place an AED in a prominent area and 
maintain its functionality. A grocery store or restaurant that is excluded from the 
Maryland Public Access AED Program must still register with MIEMSS. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures for county library systems in many jurisdictions 
increase in fiscal 2026 to ensure that each library has an AED and appropriately trained 
library staff. Based on a brief survey of public library systems conducted by MSLA in 
which about two-thirds of the 27 library systems responded, some libraries (including 
county libraries) in the State have AEDs and appropriately trained staff. More specifically, 
at least 8 have AEDs and trained staff at all locations, at least 4 have AEDs at some 
branches with some trained staff, and at least 6 have no AEDs at any location.  
 
Additional Comments:  New AED units typically cost between $880 and $2,000, and 
certified pre-owned AEDs generally range from $500 to $880. The American Red Cross 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 593/ Page 4 
offers CPR and AED training courses that cost between $75 and $115 per person. It holds 
on-site AED training at several locations in Maryland, including Annapolis, Baltimore, 
Salisbury, Silver Spring, and Walkersville. Online classes are also offered at a cost of $37. 
 
Under the bill, MIEMSS must report on the libraries that registered AEDs in accordance 
with regulations adopted under § 23-102.2 of the Education Article as enacted by Section 1 
of the bill. However, as amended, the bill does not require adoption of regulations, rather 
libraries must comply with the Maryland Public Access AED Program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 1206 of 2023 and SB 294 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 369 (Senator Watson, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Library 
Agency; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4