START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 580 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 580 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Terminology and Obsolete References – Maryland State Firefighters Association 
and Related Terms 
 
 
This bill alters terminology throughout the Annotated Code of Maryland so that 
(1) references to the Maryland State Firemen’s Association are replaced with the 
Maryland State Firefighters Association, reflecting a recent name change; (2) references 
to the Disabled Firemen’s and Rescue Squadmen’s List are replaced with the 
Disabled Firefighter’s and Rescue Squad Person’s List; (3) references to “fireman” or 
“firemen” are replaced with “firefighter” or “firefighters;” and (4) references to 
“squadman” are replaced with “squad member.” The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s changes are technical in nature and do not affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Annotated Code of Maryland does not use gender-neutral 
language to refer to firemen and squadmen. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland State Firefighters Association is a private, 
not-for-profit entity whose mission is to serve, promote, advocate, and represent the interest 
of the volunteer fire, rescue, and emergency medical services of Maryland. On 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 580/ Page 2 
June 18, 2024, the association membership voted to change its name from the 
Maryland State Firemen’s Association to the Maryland State Firefighters Association. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 164 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Firefighters Association; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2