START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 527 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 527 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Transit Administration - Purple Line - Free Ridership and 
Promotional Materials and Services 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) to develop and implement 
a program to provide (1) for the first month after transit service on the Purple Line begins, 
ridership on Purple Line transit vehicles at no cost to individuals residing within a  
0.25-mile radius of the Purple Line track and (2) beginning October 1, 2025, and until 
three months after transit service on the Purple Line begins, promotional materials and 
services at no cost to small businesses located within a 0.25-mile radius of the Purple Line 
track. To implement the program, MTA must use internal resources it has available, 
including the websites it maintains and its printing and design services. The bill may not 
be construed to require MTA to procure private advertising or marketing services. MTA 
must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues decrease by $75,000 in FY 2028 
only due to foregone fare revenues. TTF expenditures likely increase from 
FY 2026 through 2028 to provide promotional materials and services at no cost to 
small businesses, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 527/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the 
Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in 
Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, 
commuter buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Except for the 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, MDOT and MTA are generally the 
agencies responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State, 
including the Purple Line. 
 
The Purple Line is a 16-mile light rail line that will connect Prince George’s and 
Montgomery counties, offering a direct link to other public transit services. The Purple 
Line is tentatively scheduled to begin operations in late calendar 2027 (fiscal 2028). More 
information about the Purple Line can be found on the project website: 
https://www.purplelinemd.com/. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill’s requirement to provide free service to individuals living within 
a 0.25-mile radius of the Purple Line track for the first month after transit service on the 
Purple Line begins decreases TTF revenues by an estimated $75,000 in fiscal 2028 only. 
This estimate is based on information provided by MTA regarding its anticipated use 
patterns for the transit line during its initial operations period. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MTA, beginning October 1, 2025, and until 
three months after transit service on the Purple Line begins, to provide promotional 
materials and services at no cost to small businesses located within a 0.25-mile radius of 
the Purple Line track. Accordingly, TTF expenditures likely increase from 
fiscal 2026 through 2028 for MTA to provide such materials and services; however, any 
increase in expenditures depends on the extent of the program established by MTA through 
regulation and cannot be predicted in advance. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses within a 0.25-mile radius of the Purple Line 
track likely benefit from free promotional materials and services provided by MTA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 527/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3