START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 562 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 562 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore County - Political Party Central Committee - Elections 
 
 
This bill reduces, from four to three, the number of members elected to the 
Baltimore County Republican Party Central Committee from each councilmanic district in 
Baltimore County. The bill also alters provisions that define the membership of the 
Baltimore County Democratic Party Central Committee based on legislative districts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect Baltimore County finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill reduces, from four to three, the number of members elected to the 
Baltimore County Republican Party Central Committee from each councilmanic district in 
the county. The bill also modifies existing provisions (see Current Law) defining the 
membership of the Baltimore County Democratic Party Central Committee based on 
legislative districts, so that the membership consists of: 
 
 
10 members, 2 from each district, elected from legislative districts 11A, 42A, 42B, 
43B, and 44A, each located wholly in the county; 
 
12 members, 4 from each district, elected from legislative districts 7A, 11B, and 
44B, each located wholly in the county; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 562/ Page 2 
 
18 members, 6 from each district, elected from legislative districts 6, 8, and 10, 
located wholly in the county. 
 
Current Law:  Each political party must have a State central committee that is the 
governing body of the political party and may be composed of the members of the central 
committees of the counties during their terms in office. A principal political party must 
elect the members of a county central committee at a primary election. Except as otherwise 
provided 
under 
county-specific 
provisions 
for 
certain 
counties 
(including 
Baltimore County), the central committee for a county must consist of the number of 
members determined by the party’s constitution. 
 
For the Baltimore County Republican Party Central Committee, statute establishes that the 
committee consists of four members elected from each councilmanic district in the county. 
 
For the Baltimore County Democratic Party Central Committee, statute establishes that the 
committee consists of: 
 
 
20 members, 5 from each district, elected from legislative districts 6, 8, 10, and 11, 
each located wholly within the county; 
 
4 members elected from legislative district 44B, located wholly in the county; 
 
4 members elected from the part of legislative district 7 that is located in the county; 
 
4 members elected from the part of legislative district 12 that is located in the 
county; and 
 
5 members, of which 2 must be from delegate district 42A and 3 must be from 
delegate district 42B, elected from legislative district 42, located wholly in the 
county. 
 
Statute also establishes that the number of Democratic Party Central Committee members 
to be elected from each legislative district, or portion of legislative district, in 
Baltimore County must be determined upon completion of each legislative districting. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 352 (Senator Salling, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 562/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3