START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 513 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 513 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Crimes Relating to Animals - Restrictions on Keeping Roosters 
 
 
This bill prohibits, beginning January 1, 2027, and with specified exceptions, a person who 
keeps roosters that are maintained individually from keeping a “rooster” 
movement-constrained through the use of an “enclosure” or tether. A violation of the bill 
is a civil offense; related penalties are established. The bill may be enforced by any State 
or local law enforcement officer or a local animal control authority for the jurisdiction 
where the violation occurs. The bill does not affect the authority of a county, municipality, 
or unit of local government to enact and enforce more stringent standards or requirements 
related to roosters or limit or supersede any other county, municipal, or State law, rule, or 
regulation that provides more stringent requirements regarding the keeping of roosters.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues due to the bill’s penalty 
provisions. Any State enforcement can be handled with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures for local animal control and law 
enforcement agencies may increase in some jurisdictions, but any such increase is 
anticipated to be minimal, as discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s prohibition does not apply to:   
 
 
commercial poultry producers; 
 
a public school or nonpublic school that receives State funds; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 513/ Page 2 
 
a government-operated animal shelter; 
 
an animal welfare organization; 
 
a member of a 4-H or Future Farmers of America (FFA) program if, on request of 
an animal control officer, an officer of a county humane society, or a police officer, 
the member provides in writing proof of membership in a 4-H or FFA program and 
authorization from the county in which the roosters are located that specifies (1) the 
reason for keeping roosters on a “property”; (2) the number of roosters that may be 
kept; (3) the breed of each rooster that may be kept; (4) the duration of time each 
rooster may be kept; and (5) the address of the property where each rooster may be 
kept; or 
 
a person if, on request of an animal control officer, an officer of a county humane 
society, or a police officer, the person provides in writing proof that the person kept 
more adult hens than roosters within the immediately preceding six-month period.  
 
A person who violates the bill is subject to (1) for a first offense, a warning; (2) for a 
second offense, a civil penalty of up to $500 per rooster; and (3) for a third or subsequent 
offense, a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per rooster.  
 
“Enclosure” means a structure used for confinement, including a wire cage or an item 
traditionally used for another purpose, such as a water tank or plastic barrel, that is used to 
provide long-term housing for one adult rooster and prevents interaction with other 
roosters. “Property” means a parcel of land or a combination of parcels of land operating 
as a single unit. “Rooster” means a male chicken that is at least six months old, has fully 
developed an adult plumage, or is capable of crowing.  
 
Current Law:  While there are provisions in the Agriculture Article that relate to the 
regulation of infectious and contagious poultry diseases and the regulation of poultry to 
protect animal health and the control of avian influenza, statute does not contain specific 
restrictions on keeping roosters. However, Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the Criminal Law Article, 
to which the bill’s provisions are added, contains several offenses concerning the improper 
treatment of animals, including cockfighting. 
 
Aggravated Cruelty to Animals – Cockfights 
 
In general, a person may not (1) use or allow the use of a fowl, cock, or other bird to fight 
with another animal; (2) possess, with the intent to unlawfully use, an implement of 
cockfighting; (3) arrange or conduct a fight in which a fowl, cock or other bird fights with 
another fowl, cock, or other bird; (4) possess, own, sell, transport, or train a fowl, cock, or 
other bird with the intent to use the fowl, cock, or other bird in a cockfight; or (5) knowingly 
allow premises under the person’s ownership, charge, or control to be used to conduct a 
fight in which a fowl, cock, or other bird fights with another fowl, cock, or other bird. A 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 513/ Page 3 
person who violates any of these prohibitions is guilty of the felony of aggravated cruelty 
to animals and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to three years and/or a 
maximum fine of $5,000. As a condition of sentencing, the court may (1) order a defendant 
convicted of violating these provisions to participate in and pay for psychological 
counseling and pay, in addition to any other fines and costs, all reasonable costs occurred 
in removing, housing, treating, or euthanizing an animal confiscated from the defendant 
and (2) prohibit a defendant from owning, possessing, or residing with an animal for a 
specified period of time. 
 
Attending a Cockfight 
 
A person may not knowingly attend as a spectator a deliberately conducted event that uses 
a fowl, cock, or other bird to fight with another fowl, cock, or other bird. A violator is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to one year 
and/or a maximum fine of $2,500. As a condition of sentencing, the court may order a 
defendant convicted of violating this provision to participate in and pay for psychological 
counseling. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill authorizes – but does not require – any local law 
enforcement officer or a local animal control authority to enforce the bill. To the extent 
local law enforcement agencies and local animal control agencies are involved with 
enforcement, local government expenditures may increase in some jurisdictions. The 
Maryland Association of Counties and the Maryland Municipal League both advise, 
however, that the impact on local expenditures is anticipated to be minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 375 (Senator Kramer) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 513/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4