START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 714

Chapter 714

(House Bill 553)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Maternal Health Self–Measured Blood
Pressure Monitoring

FOR the purpose of requiring, beginning on a certain date, the Maryland Medical
Assistance Program to provide coverage for self–measured blood pressure
monitoring for certain eligible Program recipients; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~
~~and~~ ~~implement~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~education~~ ~~campaign;~~ and generally relating to
self–measured blood pressure monitoring under the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–101(h), (j), and (l) and 15–103(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxiii) and (xxiv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxv) and 15–141.6
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–101.

(h) “Program” means the Maryland Medical Assistance Program.

(j) “Self–measured blood pressure monitoring” means the regular measurement
of blood pressure by the patient outside the clinical setting, either at home or elsewhere,
requiring the use of a home blood pressure measurement device by the patient.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 714 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(l) “Validated home blood pressure monitor” means a blood pressure
measurement device that has been validated for accuracy and is listed in the U.S. Blood
Pressure Validated Device Listing.

15–103.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall administer the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

(2) The Program:

(xxiii) Beginning on July 1, 2025, shall provide, subject to the
limitations of the State budget, and as permitted by federal law, coverage for biomarker
testing in accordance with § 15–859 of the Insurance Article; [and]

(xxiv) Beginning on January 1, 2025, shall provide coverage for
prostheses in accordance with § 15–844 of the Insurance Article; AND

(XXV) BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2026, SHALL PROVIDE,
SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS OF THE STATE BUDGET, AND AS PERMITTED BY
FEDERAL LAW, COVERAGE FOR SELF–MEASURED BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING
FOR ELIGIBLE PROGRAM RECIPIENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–141.6 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

15–141.6.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “ELIGIBLE PROGRAM, “ELIGIBLE PROGRAM RECIPIENT” MEANS
A PROGRAM RECIPIENT WHO:

~~(I)~~ (1) IS PREGNANT;

(II) (2) IS POSTPARTUM; OR

(III) (3) HAS BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH:

1. (I) CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE;

~~2.~~ (II) DIABETES;

3. (III) HEART DISEASE; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 714

4. (IV) A CARDIOMETABOLIC DISEASE.

(3) “HEALTH CARE PROVIDER” MEANS:

(I) A PERSON WHO IS LICENSED, CERTIFIED, OR OTHERWISE
AUTHORIZED UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE TO PROVIDE HEALTH
CARE IN THE ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS OR PRACTICE OF A PROFESSION, OR
IN AN APPROVED EDUCATION OR TRAINING PROGRAM; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY HEALTH WORKER CERTIFIED UNDER TITLE
13, SUBTITLE 37 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR SELF–MEASURED
BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORING FOR ALL ELIGIBLE PROGRAM RECIPIENTS,
INCLUDING:

(1) THE PROVISION OF VALIDATED HOME BLOOD PRESSURE
MONITORS; AND

(2) REIMBURSEMENT OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDER AND OTHER STAFF
TIME USED FOR PATIENT TRAINING, TRANSMISSION OF BLOOD PRESSURE DATA,
INTERPRETATION OF BLOOD PRESSURE READINGS AND REPORTING, REMOTE
PATIENT MONITORING, AND THE DELIVERY OF CO–INTERVENTIONS, INCLUDING
EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS OR CLASSES.

(C) THE PROGRAM SHALL DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT AN EDUCATION
CAMPAIGN TO INFORM ELIGIBLE PROGRAM RECIPIENTS AND HEALTH CARE
~~PROVIDERS~~ ~~ABOUT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~USAGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~BLOOD~~ ~~PRESSURE~~ ~~MONITORING~~
~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AVAILABILITY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~SETUP~~ ~~AND~~
~~TROUBLESHOOTING.~~

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2027, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE AND
THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT
~~INCLUDES:~~

(1) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF ELIGIBLE PROGRAM RECIPIENTS WHO
~~RECEIVED~~ ~~BLOOD~~ ~~PRESSURE~~ ~~MONITORS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12–MONTH PERIOD;

(2) THE OUTCOMES ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF THE HOME BLOOD
PRESSURE MONITORS UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 714 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) ANY COST SAVINGS ACHIEVED BY THE PROGRAM DURING THE
~~IMMEDIATELY~~ ~~PRECEDING~~ ~~FISCAL~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~ASSOCIATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~USE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOME~~
BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORS DISTRIBUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4