START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 502 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 502 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Office of Disability Employment Advancement and Policy and Maryland as a 
Model Employer Initiative - Established 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes the Office of Disability Employment Advancement 
and Policy (ODEAP) in the Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD) to, among other 
things, implement the Maryland as a Model Employer Initiative. Beginning July 1, 2026, 
ODEAP is responsible for implementation and oversight of the initiative. By December 1 
of that year and annually thereafter, ODEAP must submit an annual report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on the progress and outcomes of the initiative and 
recommendations developed by the initiative for continued improvement of State 
government employment practices for people with disabilities. Beginning in fiscal 2027, 
the Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $250,000 for 
ODEAP. The Secretary of Disabilities may adopt regulations to implement the bill. The 
bill may not be construed to establish an entitlement program. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. Beginning in FY 2027, general fund expenditures 
increase by at least $250,000 annually to establish ODEAP on a modest level, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 502/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of ODEAP, as it relates to the employment, training, and 
career-readiness of individuals with disabilities, includes (1) the development and 
implementation of strategies in the State Disabilities Plan; (2) performing specified duties 
necessary to support statewide policies and standards; (3) collecting information and data 
from units of State government, as specified; and (4) implementing the initiative. 
 
The purpose of the initiative must include: 
 
 
promoting the recruitment, hiring, retention, and career advancement of people with 
disabilities across State government; 
 
conducting and coordinating outreach to job seekers with disabilities and State 
government to encourage participation in the initiative; 
 
developing and delivering trainings to State agencies and units addressing best 
practices, resources, and relevant federal and State laws pertaining to the 
employment of people with disabilities; 
 
assisting State government agencies and units to attract qualified job seekers with 
disabilities to available positions; 
 
promoting access to and acquisition of assistive technology for new State employees 
with disabilities; 
 
evaluating State employment practices and policies and making recommendations 
regarding ways to reduce barriers for job seekers and employees with disabilities; 
 
collecting from each unit of State government, as part of unit plans required to 
implement the State Disabilities Plan, performance goals related to hiring and 
retention efforts for employees with disabilities and any data deemed necessary by 
the Secretary to demonstrate performance outcomes; and 
 
reporting on the initiative’s outcomes, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  MDOD must oversee and administer constituent services and ombudsmen 
programs, the Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program, the Office of Personal 
Assistance Services (including the Attendant Care Program), Telecommunications Access 
of Maryland, and Telecommunications Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information 
for Disabled Individuals. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 502/ Page 3 
Unless the disclosure of information is otherwise prohibited, each unit of State government 
must provide to the Secretary of Disabilities (1) at the request of the Secretary, information 
regarding current programs and services for individuals with disabilities and  
(2) information regarding new or proposed programs and services for individuals with 
disabilities. 
 
State Disabilities Plan 
 
The State Disabilities Plan must be revised at least once every four years. The Secretary 
must review the plan and may approve or amend the plan as deemed necessary. The 
Secretary must submit an analysis of the State’s progress in implementing the plan and 
related performance objectives to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1 
each year. The State Disabilities Plan must assess the provision of and resources for support 
services for individuals with disabilities, and provide for the coordination of support 
services that: 
 
 
ensure compliance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and other 
relevant federal and State provisions intended to protect the civil rights of 
individuals with disabilities; 
 
are necessary for individuals with disabilities to achieve maximum participation in 
the mainstream of the community in the most integrated setting possible; and 
 
address, on a statewide basis, the improvement of (1) the capacity of communities 
to support individuals with disabilities with personal attendant care and other 
self-directed long-term care options; (2) the availability of accessible, integrated, 
and affordable housing options; (3) reliable transportation options; (4) employment 
and training options, as specified; (5) somatic and behavioral health options;  
(6) accessible and universally designed technology; (7) support services for 
children, youth, and their families to enable them to achieve successful learning;  
(8) family support services, including respite care; and (9) crime control, public 
safety, and correctional services that appropriately take into account the needs and 
rights of individuals with disabilities. 
 
By July 1 each year, each unit of State government must develop a unit plan to implement 
the State Disabilities Plan that contains an implementation schedule and measurable 
strategic performance objectives. The Secretary may request amendments to a unit plan if 
the Secretary determines that the unit plan does not comply with the State Disabilities Plan. 
By July 1 each year, each unit of State government must also provide MDOD with a 
specified evaluation of the unit’s performance in accordance with the unit’s developed 
plan. The evaluation must assess the unit’s performance against the strategic performance 
objectives and identify and measure consumer satisfaction, gaps in services, the number of 
individuals waiting for services, and the progress made on achieving performance 
objectives. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 502/ Page 4 
The 2020-2023 State Disabilities Plan highlighted goals related to developing 
self-direction, financial well-being, and health and wellness for people living with 
disabilities, and maximizing resources and accessible communication among State 
agencies. 
 
Discrimination in Employment 
 
Under § 20-602 of the State Government Article, it is State policy to assure that all persons 
have equal opportunity in employment and in all labor management-union relations. As 
such, State law generally prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, 
color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, genetic information, or disability (unrelated in nature and extent so as to 
reasonably preclude the performance of the employment). 
 
Subject to limited exceptions, on any of these bases or because of an individual’s refusal 
to submit to or make available the results of a genetic test, an employer may not (1) fail or 
refuse to hire, discharge, or otherwise discriminate against any individual with respect to 
the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions or privileges or (2) limit, segregate, or 
classify its employees or applicants for employment in any way that deprives or tends to 
deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect the 
individual’s status as an employee. An employer is also prohibited from failing or refusing 
to make a reasonable accommodation for the known disability of an otherwise qualified 
employee or an applicant for employment; however, State law does not require an 
employer to reasonably accommodate a disability if the accommodation would cause 
undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s business. Furthermore, an employer may 
not (1) engage in the harassment (including sexual harassment) of an employee or  
(2) discriminate or retaliate against an employee or applicant because the 
employee/applicant has opposed any practice prohibited by State law relevant to 
employment discrimination or made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing related to such laws. Additional prohibitions – 
including those specific to interns, employment agencies, and labor organizations – are also 
specified in statute. 
 
In general, the above prohibitions are applicable to employers that have 15 or more 
employees (based on the number of employees working in each of 20 or more  
calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar year). Provisions relating to harassment 
allegations apply to employers with 1 or more employees. Statute also specifically prohibits 
units, officers, or employees of the State, a county, or a municipal corporation from 
engaging in these discriminatory acts. 
 
Background:  MDOD advises that ODEAP is intended to improve MDOD’s operations 
by creating better support for the department’s programs, policy coordination, research, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 502/ Page 5 
and grants management related to improving employment opportunities and outcomes for 
people with disabilities within the State. The bill also significantly increases the scope of 
MDOD’s employment policy and work through the creation of the State as a  
Model Employer Initiative – designed to align Maryland with the national model. The 
initiative is intended to implement strategies to improve hiring and retention of workers 
with disabilities within the State workforce so that the State may serve as a model for 
private-sector employers. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly does not 
include funding for the establishment of ODEAP. MDOD advises that ODEAP will be 
established July 1, 2026, when the office is required to assume responsibility for the 
implementation and oversight of the Maryland as a Model Employer Initiative. Therefore, 
this analysis assumes that there is no effect in fiscal 2026. 
 
Additionally, the bill specifies that, beginning fiscal 2027, the Governor may include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $250,000 for ODEAP. This analysis assumes that 
discretionary funds are provided annually beginning in fiscal 2027. Accordingly, this 
analysis assumes that general fund expenditures increase by at least $250,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027 for ODEAP. 
 
Under a modest implementation strategy with $250,000 in funding, MDOD advises that 
existing staff can oversee ODEAP; even so, additional staff are necessary to begin to 
implement the requirements of the bill. Thus, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
two program managers to support marketing, outreach, and recruitment efforts, as well as 
to provide on-site job coaching across units of State government. This analysis assumes 
that staff begin on July 1, 2026, when ODEAP is expected to be established. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, contractual 
technology services for data collection and analysis, and limited assistive technology 
purchases, as discussed below. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$160,223 
Contractual Services 
50,000 
Assistive Technology Purchases 
19,487 
Operating Expenses 
    20,290 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$250,000 
 
As shown above, MDOD advises that general fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$19,500 in fiscal 2027 to promote access to and acquisition of assistive technology for new 
State employees with disabilities, as required by the bill. Additionally, general fund 
expenditures increase by approximately $50,000 in fiscal 2027 for contractual services to 
collect data from units of State government, as required by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 502/ Page 6 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
DLS advises that more fulsome implementation of the bill, actualizing the Maryland as a 
Model Employer Initiative, necessitates additional funding – likely an additional 
$1.0 million annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 433 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 22, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 502/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Office of Disability Employment Advancement and Policy and Maryland 
as a Model Employer Initiative - Established 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 502 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X _ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A. 

END OF PAGE 7