START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 509 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 509 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Inventory of Cemeteries and Burial Sites Workgroup - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Maryland Inventory of Cemeteries and Burial Sites Workgroup, 
staffed by the Maryland Historical Trust (MHT). By December 1, 2025, the workgroup 
must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $42,200 in FY 2026 only. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
42,200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($42,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must: 
 
 
identify and review the various definitions of the terms “cemetery,” “burial group,” 
“burial site,” and any related terms in the Maryland Annotated Code and 
recommend a single definition for each term; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 509/ Page 2 
 
identify and evaluate current cemetery documentation practices used by county 
governments and municipal cultural resource management and historic preservation 
programs, nonprofit preservation organizations, and private entities; 
 
identify and evaluate cemetery inventory systems implemented in other states to 
determine best practices for and challenges to designing, implementing, and 
maintaining a cemetery inventory system in the State; 
 
evaluate existing cemetery inventories maintained by county governments, historic 
preservation programs, and genealogical organizations to determine the best 
methods for integrating existing information into a State cemetery inventory system; 
 
identify and recommend a set of categories for data collection and maintenance and 
system functions, including a public search function, for a State cemetery inventory 
system; 
 
recommend the appropriate entity to collect data for and maintain a State cemetery 
inventory system; 
 
determine the cost of designing, implementing, and maintaining a State cemetery 
inventory system and recommend a source of funding to implement a State cemetery 
inventory system beginning in fiscal 2027; and 
 
evaluate the feasibility and cost of establishing a grant program to provide financial 
assistance to governmental entities and nonprofit genealogical and historical 
organizations to expedite identification of cemeteries and recommend the funding 
amount and source for a grant program beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Current Law:  MHT is established in State law as a body corporate and an instrumentality 
of the State, and is given various authority and duties in statute, including to (1) carry out 
programs and activities to protect, preserve, and encourage the preservation of historic 
properties; (2) administer programs of financial and technical assistance for historic 
preservation projects; and (3) make recommendations on the certification and eligibility of 
historic properties for tax incentives and other programs of public assistance. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $42,178 in fiscal 2026 only. 
This estimate reflects the cost of MHT hiring one contractual staff from July through  
December 2025. MHT indicates that the work associated with staffing the workgroup 
cannot be absorbed by existing staff. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$35,085 
Operating Expenses 
    7,093 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$42,178 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 509/ Page 3 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Any legal research/analysis associated with the workgroup’s responsibilities is expected to 
be handled with existing budgeted resources of the Office of the Attorney General. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 354 (Senator Salling, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State Archives; Office of the 
Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3