START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 566 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 566 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Dorchester County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Fees 
 
 
This bill increases licensing fees for specified alcoholic beverages licenses in 
Dorchester County and authorizes the Dorchester County Board of License Commissioners 
to charge specified application and transfer fees. The bill also lowers the license fee for 
Class C beer licenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Dorchester County license fee revenues increase by at least $10,250 in 
FY 2026. Dorchester County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful impact on small business restaurants, bars, 
and other alcoholic beverages license holders due to increased fees under the bill. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill alters specified alcoholic beverages licensing fees 
in Dorchester County, as detailed in Exhibit 1. 
 
Under current law, Dorchester County does not have formal application or transfer fees for 
alcoholic beverages licenses. The bill authorizes the board to charge an application fee for 
a new license in the amount of (1) $150 for an application for a Class A, Class B, Class C, 
or Class D beer and wine license; and (2) $200 for an application for a Class A, Class B, 
Class C, or Class D beer, wine, and liquor license. The application fee is nonrefundable 
whether the license is issued or denied and does not apply to the renewal or transfer of a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 566/ Page 2 
license for the same premises. Additionally, the bill authorizes a transfer fee of 
$50 per license transfer. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Dorchester County Alcoholic Beverages License Fees 
Current and Proposed Fees 
 
License Type 
Current 
Proposed 
Difference 
Class A Licenses 
Class A beer 
$200.00 
$250.00 
$50.00 
Class A beer and wine 
250.00 
350.00 
100.00 
Class B Licenses 
Class B beer and wine 
$300.00 
$350.00 
$50.00 
Class B beer, wine, and liquor 
1,000.00 
1,250.00 
250.00 
Class B caterer 
150.00 
200.00 
50.00 
Class C Licenses 
Class C beer 
$250.00 
$150.00 
($100.00) 
Class C beer and wine 
150.00 
250.00 
100.00 
Class C beer (per diem) 
15.00 
25.00 
10.00 
Class C beer and wine (per diem) 
15.00 
25.00 
10.00 
Class C beer, wine, and liquor (per diem) 
25.00 
35.00 
10.00 
Class D Licenses 
Class D beer and wine 
$275.00 
$350.00 
$75.00 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Revenues:  In fiscal 2024, at least 66 businesses in Dorchester County held a license 
that will have increased fees under this bill. If every one of those businesses is to renew 
their license for fiscal 2026 and every year thereafter, the county will see an increase of at 
least $10,250 in increased license fee revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a potential meaningful impact on small business 
restaurants, bars, and other alcoholic beverages license holders due to increased fees 
specified under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 566/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:SB 869 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Alcohol, 
Tobacco, 
and 
Cannabis 
Commission; 
Dorchester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
rh/tso    
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3