START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 569 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 569 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Dorchester County - Alcoholic Beverages - Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting 
License 
 
 
This bill renames the beer and wine tasting license as the beer, wine, and liquor tasting 
license in Dorchester County and authorizes the license holder to provide up to 0.5 ounces 
from each offering of liquor and up to 1.5 ounces from all offerings of liquor in one day. 
The bill also clarifies that a license holder may only offer tastings of alcoholic beverages 
they are authorized to sell under their Class A license. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Dorchester County can handle any additional enforcement activity with 
existing resources. Dorchester County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Dorchester County’s beer and wine tasting license authorizes a license 
holder to allow consumption of beer or wine for tasting as long as the consumer is not 
charged for the beer or wine, and it is consumed on the premises of the license holder. A 
licensee that holds only a Class A beer license may only hold tastings of beer, and not wine. 
An establishment with a beer and wine tasting license may allow individuals to consume 
up to three ounces of beer from each offering and up to eight ounces from all offerings of 
beer in one day, and up to one ounce of wine from each offering and up to four ounces 
from all offerings of wine in one day. The licensee must notify the Dorchester County 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 569/ Page 2 
Board of License Commissioners in writing at least seven days before an event at which 
the license is to be used. 
 
The board may issue the license without a public hearing, but if an initial license application 
is denied, the board must hold a public hearing on request of the applicant before making 
a determination about the license application. The license fee is $150 for up to 15 tastings 
per year and $250 for up to 30 tastings per year, and renewal of the license may be made 
when the holder’s Class A license is renewed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 839 (Dorchester County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Dorchester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2