START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 500 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 500 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Procurement Reform Act of 2025 
 
 
This Administration bill makes changes to State procurement law related to, among other 
things, governance and oversight, small and minority business preference programs, 
payment practices, and master contracting. It also establishes new procurement programs 
or requirements for vendors related to good labor practices, use of interns and registered 
apprentices, and diversity plans. Finally, it makes clarifying, conforming, and technical 
changes to State procurement law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $840,800 in FY 2026 for legal and 
information technology (IT) procurement staffing; out-year expenditures reflect 
annualization and inflation. Other agencies indicate they can implement the bill’s 
requirements with existing budget resources. State procurement costs (all funds) may 
further increase due to increased legal liabilities, adjudication expenses, and reduced 
competition for State contracts, as discussed below. The bill’s penalty provisions are not 
expected to materially affect special fund revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
840,800 
1,020,700 
1,065,600 
1,112,800 
1,160,600 
Net Effect 
($840,800) 
($1,020,700) 
($1,065,600) 
($1,112,800) 
($1,160,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 500/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Broadly, the bill does the following: 
 
 
expands the responsibilities of the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) and the 
Special Secretary for the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; 
 
delegates authority over transportation-related services and supplies, including 
IT supplies and services, to the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT); 
 
establishes a technical procurement team in the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) to assist units in procuring cost-effective and cost-efficient 
IT supplies and services; 
 
requires that all contracts valued at $1.0 million or less (instead of those valued 
between $50,000 and $500,000) be reserved for small businesses under the 
Small Business Reserve (SBR) program; 
 
requires specified contracts that are not public work contracts to use interns and 
registered apprentices; 
 
establishes a “good labor practices” evaluation factor for contracts awarded using 
the competitive sealed proposal procurement method; 
 
requires specified bidders and offerors to submit workforce diversity plans and/or 
supplier diversity plans before they are awarded a contract; 
 
repeals notification requirements when a bidder or offeror becomes aware that a 
minority business enterprise (MBE) included in an MBE schedule is no longer 
available; 
 
authorizes procurement units to modify the MBE participation goal and 
Veteran-owned Small Business Enterprise (VSBE) participation goal on a contract 
before or after contract execution, as specified; 
 
alters the circumstances under which a bidder or offeror may correct a deficiency in 
their MBE participation schedule, and the procedures for making the correction, and 
adds conforming provisions for contracts with a VSBE goal; 
 
requires the State to pay vendors awarded a contract under the SBR program within 
15 days (instead of 30 days); 
 
creates a VSBE Preference Program for procurements by the Department of 
Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) and the Military Department; 
 
revises requirements and procedures for task orders issued under master contracts; 
 
authorizes primary procurement units to limit or revoke a unit’s ability to conduct 
small procurements if the unit does not adhere to small procurement regulations; 
 
requires bidders or offerors to give oral presentations for specified procurements; 
 
adjusts and standardizes various contract value thresholds under State procurement 
law to conform to the small procurement threshold; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 500/ Page 3 
 
allows mandated nondiscrimination clauses in State contracts to be “substantially 
similar” to language specified in statute; 
 
clarifies that a pay-for-success procurement is a contract type but not a source 
selection method;  
 
requires the Procurement Advisor to the Board of Public Works (BPW) to conduct 
a study of the economic impacts of instituting an in-state preference for 
Maryland vendors for all State procurements, and submit a report of its findings and 
recommendations to BPW and General Assembly by December 1, 2025; and 
 
makes additional clarifying and conforming changes to State procurement law. 
 
As appropriate, these changes are discussed in greater detail below. 
 
Delegation and Reorganization of Procurement Responsibilities 
 
Chapter 590 of 2017 created the CPO position within the Department of General Services 
(DGS) and designated CPO as the head of all procurement activity for the 
Executive Branch (except for procurement activity by other primary procurement units). 
 
The bill explicitly authorizes the Secretary of General Services to delegate any power or 
duty in State procurement law to CPO, and expands CPO’s responsibilities to include 
(1) approving a unit’s use of intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreements; 
(2) serving on the Pricing and Selection Committee for Preferred Providers (instead of the 
Secretary of General Services); (3) approving the use of noncompetitive negotiations for 
specified procurements (instead of the Department of Budget and Management); and 
(4) participating in the setting of the statewide MBE participation goal and related 
activities. 
 
The bill requires DoIT to establish a technical procurement team that includes individuals 
with expertise in technology procurement and agile procurement. The technical 
procurement team, in collaboration with DGS, must develop materials that encourage 
cost-effective and cost-efficient IT services spending, including procurement templates, 
procurement contracts, and other procurement materials. The technical procurement team 
may also assist a unit of State government, including DGS, to procure IT services, 
including (1) drafting requests for proposals; (2) reviewing bids and selecting vendors; and 
(3) developing IT service contracts in a manner that encourages competition and full 
participation by vendors. 
 
Under current law, there is an Employment Works Program in DGS. The Secretary of 
General Services must designate Maryland Works, Inc., or another appropriate 
coordinating entity, to facilitate the distribution of procurement contracts for supplies and 
services among community service providers and individuals with disability owned 
businesses. The bill moves this program to the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 500/ Page 4 
Women Business Affairs (GOSBA), and requires the Special Secretary to designate 
Maryland Works, Inc. or another appropriate entity to facilitate distribution of the 
procurement contracts. 
 
Current law requires BPW to establish various regulations and procedures, including: 
 
 
specifying criteria that a business must meet to qualify as a small business; 
 
establishing various procedures related to supporting small businesses and MBEs; 
and 
 
establishing procedures, in coordination with the Department of Commerce, to 
compile and maintain a comprehensive bidder’s list of small businesses and to 
locate potential MBE sources for construction related services, supplies, and 
services. 
 
The bill transfers these responsibilities from BPW to the Special Secretary for the Office of 
Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs. 
 
Under current law, MDOT and the Maryland Transportation Authority may, without the 
approval of any other primary procurement unit, engage in the procurement of 
(1) construction 
and 
construction-related 
services 
related 
to 
transportation; 
(2) architectural or engineering services related to transportation; (3) supplies and services 
for aeronautics related activities but excluding insurance and supplies funded by 
general obligation (GO) bonds; and (4) rolling stock and other property specific to transit 
system operations. The bill further authorizes these two agencies to engage in the 
procurement of supplies and services for transportation-related activities, including 
specified IT supplies and services, but excluding insurance, supplies funded by State 
GO bonds, and banking and financial services under the authority of the State Treasurer. 
 
Small Business Reserve Program 
 
Under current law, there is a statewide goal for units to award at least 15% of the total value 
of their contracts to small businesses. A procurement with a total dollar value between 
$50,000 and $500,000 must be designated only for small businesses under SBR. This 
requirement does not apply to (1) procurements with preferred providers; (2) procurements 
involving federal funds (to the extent the inclusion conflicts with federal law or grant 
provisions); (3) the procurement of human, social, cultural, or educational services; or 
(4) term and master contracts that are granted an exemption. A procurement can be exempt 
from these provisions if GOSBA certifies that it is not practicable to do so, along with any 
waiver for MBE participation goals. The bill requires that all procurements valued at 
$1,000,000 or less must be designated for SBR, subject to the same exceptions. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 500/ Page 5 
Internship and Registered Apprenticeship Program 
 
The bill establishes a new requirement that specified contractors use interns and registered 
apprentices. It defines a “covered procurement” as a procurement contract that (1) meets 
criteria required to be established in regulations by CPO, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Labor and, for specified IT contracts, the Secretary of Information Technology and (2) is 
not a public work contract. Contractors awarded a covered procurement must use a 
registered apprenticeship program, and those awarded a contract with a value of at least 
$1,000,000 must use an eligible internship program. In consultation with the Secretary of 
Labor and, for specified IT contracts, the Secretary of Information Technology, CPO may 
adopt (1) regulations to improve the recruitment or skills of employees of vendors or 
(2) any regulations to implement these requirements, including establishing waiver 
processes. 
 
A contractor that submits a bid or proposal for a covered procurement must provide a unit 
with written verification of (1) the number of apprentices or interns that will be used 
throughout the contract term, including potential renewal options; (2) the work to be 
performed by apprentices or interns in their respective programs; and (3) the duration of 
the apprenticeship or internship. This verification must be provided before a contractor can 
be awarded a contract for a covered procurement. The Secretary of Labor (1) is responsible 
for compliance with these requirements; (2) must establish criteria to help units ensure 
compliance by their contractors; and (3) may file suit to enforce these requirements. 
 
A contractor that fails to use apprentices or interns under a covered procurement is subject 
to a fine to be determined according to criteria established by the Secretary of Labor. 
Penalties collected are payable to the State Apprenticeship Training Fund. 
 
Good Labor Practices Evaluation Factor 
 
The bill establishes a good labor practices evaluation factor for contracts awarded using the 
competitive sealed proposal procurement method. To qualify for application of the good 
labor practices evaluation factor, a business must attest by affidavit that, on any contract 
on which it performs work, the business will, among other requirements (1) directly employ 
all employees as W-2 employees, except those exempt under labor and employment law; 
(2) pay all employees by check or electronic means, as specified, (3) comply with specified 
statutory wage and payment requirements; (4) successfully complete a comprehensive 
consultation visit by the Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Program, within a 
reasonable time, following the start of work under the contract; (5) be jointly and severally 
liable as an employer for any violation of a subcontractor of State prevailing wage and 
living wage laws in connection with the subcontractor’s performance or work under the 
contract; and (6) provide proof that the business has secured a payment bond sufficient to 
ensure payment of wages to all employees performing work under the contract. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 500/ Page 6 
A procurement officer who receives a proposal for a competitive sealed proposal 
procurement that is submitted with the affidavit attesting to meeting all criteria must 
evaluate the proposal with the good labor practices evaluation factor. The good labor 
practices evaluation factor must be included in the technical evaluation factors for 
competitive sealed proposals. The evaluation factor must be (1) if a point system is used 
for evaluation of proposals, 10% of the total allocable technical points or (2) if a point 
system is not used for evaluation of proposals, ranked in the relative order of importance. 
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must maintain an active list of businesses that 
have submitted an affidavit of good labor practices for the previous 12 months, post that 
list on the Maryland Department of Labor’s (MD Labor) website, and send it to all 
procurement authorities at least once every 6 months and upon request. If the 
Commissioner finds that a business is not following good labor practices, the 
Commissioner must remove the business from the list and the business becomes ineligible 
for the good labor practices evaluation factor for a period of 12 months following the 
determination. CPO, in consultation with the commissioner, is authorized to adopt 
regulations to implement the evaluation factor. The bill includes penalties for businesses 
that knowingly and intentionally misrepresent a business, submit fraudulent materials for 
purposes of qualifying for the good labor practices evaluation factor, or do anything to 
secure or maintain qualification that is fraudulent or false. 
 
Diversity Plans 
 
Under the bill, awardees on contracts valued at more than $250,000 may be required to 
submit a supplier diversity plan to the procurement officer, while awardees with contracts 
greater than $500,000 may be required to submit a workforce diversity plan. GOSBA, in 
consultation with the Office of State Procurement (OSP), must adopt regulations to 
implement these provisions that include guidance for units as well as suggested content for 
the plans. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
For an overview of the State’s MBE program, please see the Appendix – Minority 
Business Enterprise Program. The bill makes numerous changes related to 
MBE participation goals established for individual contracts and the MBE participation 
schedules, which include the names of MBEs that will participate in the contract and their 
expected level of participation. 
 
Under current law, units establish an MBE participation goal for each contract based on 
numerous factors, including the availability of MBEs to perform the work. The bill allows 
a unit to consider modifying the minority business participation goal on a contract at any 
time prior to contract execution or after contract execution, when determined to be in the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 500/ Page 7 
best interest of the State. Before a unit may consider modifying an MBE contract 
participation goal, it must (1) make a determination that there has been a change in the 
factors that were considered when first establishing the MBE goal for a contract; (2) use 
the factors to determine the percentage modification to the MBE participation goal; and 
(3) obtain the agreement of the contractor, including any reasonable price considerations. 
 
Under current law, bidders or offerors must submit an MBE participation schedule with 
their bid or offer; if they are awarded the contract, the participation schedule becomes part 
of the contract. If, following contract award but before the execution of a contract with an 
expected degree of MBE participation, an MBE identified in the MBE participation 
schedule becomes or will become unavailable to perform the work required under the 
contract, the bidder must notify the unit within 72 hours of making that determination and 
must also submit a written request with the unit to amend the MBE participation schedule. 
The request to amend the MBE schedule must indicate the bidder or offeror’s efforts to 
substitute another certified MBE to perform the work that the unavailable or ineligible 
MBE would have performed. The schedule cannot be amended unless the bidder or offeror 
provides a satisfactory explanation of the reason for inclusion of the unavailable or 
ineligible firm on the schedule and the amendment is approved by the unit’s procurement 
officer after consulting with the unit’s MBE liaison. 
 
The bill repeals the provisions related to altering an MBE participation schedule described 
above. Instead, it requires that if a unit’s procurement officer, in consultation with the unit’s 
MBE liaison, identifies a deficiency in the MBE participation schedule after bid or proposal 
submission but before contract execution, the officer must notify the bidder or offeror and 
allow them a reasonable period of time to submit an amended schedule that corrects the 
deficiency. 
 
Current law states that after execution of a contract with an expected degree of 
MBE participation, an MBE schedule cannot be amended unless the request is approved 
by the head of the unit and the contract is amended. The bill allows an MBE participation 
schedule to be amended after execution of the contract to modify MBE participation if (1) it 
is in the best interest of the State; (2) it is approved by the head of the unit; and (3) the 
contract is amended. 
 
Prompt Payments 
 
Current law establishes that it is the policy of the State to make a payment under a 
procurement contract within 30 days (1) of the day on which a payment becomes due under 
a contract or (2) if later, after the day on which the agency receives an invoice. Interest at 
the rate of 9% per year begins accruing on the 31st day after a payment becomes due and 
remains unpaid or, if later, the day on which the unit receives an invoice. However, interest 
is payable only if the amount remains unpaid after 37 days and the unit receives an invoice 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 500/ Page 8 
for the accrued interest. The bill requires the State to make a payment within 30 days after 
the day on which the payment becomes due and the unit receives a proper invoice. 
Moreover, for contracts awarded under SBR, the bill requires the State to pay vendors 
within 15 days after the day on which the payment becomes due and the unit receives a 
proper invoice. Interest accrues on late payments in accordance with current law. 
 
Veteran-owned Small Business Enterprise Program 
 
Under current law, GOSBA must adopt regulations that establish an overall percentage 
goal for the value of contract awards to VSBEs. Each State agency must structure its 
procurement procedures to try to achieve the percentage goal of the total dollar value of 
procurement contracts to be made to VSBEs established by GOSBA. GOSBA has set the 
current goal at 3% in regulation. 
 
The bill creates a Veteran-owned Small Business Reserve Program modeled after SBR. 
Procurements in the reserve program are limited to responses from businesses that qualify 
as VSBEs. The bill further requires any procurement by DVMF, the Military Department, 
or units acting on their behalf of goods, supplies, services, maintenance, construction, 
construction related services, architectural services, and engineering services must be 
eligible for designation for the VSBE Reserve Program. GOSBA must establish standards 
and guidelines for participation in the veteran-owned Small Business Reserve Program 
every five years, as specified. These provisions do not apply to procurements to benefit 
disadvantaged individuals or procurements involving expenditures of federal dollars, to the 
extent that requirements conflict with federal law or grant provisions. The bill also 
establishes conditions for changing the VSBE participation goal on a contract and 
amending a VSBE participation schedule that mirror those described for the MBE program 
above. 
 
Master Contracting 
 
Under current law, designated procurement units may adopt master contracting, a 
streamlined procurement method that provides for the qualification of bidders and offerors 
for the procurement of services, supplies, or commodities. To become a master contractor, 
vendors must first respond to an agency’s solicitation for qualified contractors. Once the 
vendor has been approved as a qualified vendor, agencies may then issue competitive task 
orders to which only qualified vendors may respond. The agency selects the qualified 
vendor that best meets the criteria established in the task order. 
 
If the unit expects that the total costs of services, supplies, or commodities will be 
$100,000 or less, the unit must issue a solicitation for a task order to at least six qualified 
master contractors or all contractors, whichever is less, in the appropriate category. If the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 500/ Page 9 
unit expects the total cost will exceed $100,000, the unit must issue a solicitation to all 
master contractors in the appropriate category. 
 
The bill amends these requirements so that task orders expected to be $100,000 or less must 
be issue to three qualified master contractors on a rotating basis for master contracts 
designated by the CPO (or all contractors if there are only two) in the appropriate category; 
task orders between $100,000 and $500,000 must be issued to six qualified master 
contractors on a rotating basis for master contracts designated by the CPO (or less, as 
specified); and task orders above $500,000 must be issued to all master contractors. 
However, none of these requirements apply to a task order designated as SBR. 
 
Oral Presentations 
 
The bill adds that for competitive sealed proposals and task orders solicited under a master 
contract, an oral presentation by the offeror is required prior to contract award when (1) a 
contract for architectural and engineering services is expected to exceed $2,000,000; (2) a 
contract for construction and construction related services is expected to exceed 
$10,000,000; or (3) a contract for any other procurement, including IT and professional 
services, is expected to exceed $5,000,000. An oral presentation is not required if the 
procurement officer makes a written determination that oral presentations are unlikely to 
aid in the evaluation process. 
 
Small Procurements 
 
Chapter 161 of 2023 raised the maximum dollar value threshold for most “small 
procurements” from $50,000 to $100,000 and made conforming changes to other 
specialized small procurement thresholds. Procurement regulations further divide small 
procurements into three categories: 
 
 
Category I – $5,000 or less:  Either oral or written solicitations, or both, allowed; 
posting on eMaryland Marketplace (eMM) not required; single bid or offer 
acceptable; and awarded based on the judgment of procurement officer. 
 
Category II – more than $5,000 and up to $50,000:  Either oral or written 
solicitations, or both, allowed; at least two bids or offers; posting on eMM not 
required; and awarded based on most favorable bid price, evaluated bid price, or 
most advantageous offer. 
 
Category III – more than $50,000 and up to $100,000 (or up to $200,000 for 
specified construction or maintenance projects):  Written solicitation only; must be 
posted on eMM; at least two bids or offers; and awarded based on most favorable 
bid price, evaluated bid price, or most advantageous offer. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 500/ Page 10 
Under the bill, if a primary procurement unit determines that a unit does not adhere to the 
established small procurement regulations, the primary procurement unit may limit or 
revoke the unit’s ability to conduct small procurements. 
 
Background:  The last significant reform of the State procurement system in recent years 
was enacted through Chapters 438, 588, 589, and 590 of 2017. Chapter 590 restructured 
procurement governance to increase centralization of procurement activities and enhance 
efficiency. It established OSP within DGS and created the position of CPO to oversee a 
more unified procurement system in the Executive Branch. 
 
Chapter 438 clarified conditions under which an MBE may be removed from a contract 
and altered the calculation of MBE participation in State procurement for selected MBEs. 
The legislation also expanded SBR to apply to all State agencies, raised the program’s goal 
from 10% to 15% of the value of agency procurements, and altered the method of 
measuring whether agencies reached the goal. Chapters 582 and 583 of 2024 later raised 
the SBR goal from 15% to 20%. 
 
Chapters 588 and 589 altered the process for the procurement of architectural and 
engineering contracts valued at more than $200,000, allowed for expanded use of 
competitive proposals in State procurement, expanded authority for master contracting, and 
raised the small procurement threshold (from $25,000 to $50,000 for nonconstruction 
contracts). 
 
State Expenditures:  Most agencies, including BPW, DGS, GOSBA, and MD Labor, 
advise that they can implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. However, 
DLS believes that new programs and responsibilities assigned to GOSBA by the bill, 
including management of the Employment Works Program and the VSBE Reserve 
Program, may not be readily absorbed with existing resources. These additional duties may 
require additional staffing or that existing staff be diverted from critical functions within 
the office. Furthermore, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) advises that it requires 
additional staff to manage increased workloads due to the bill, and DoIT requires additional 
staff for the technical procurement team established by the bill. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
The bill includes provisions that may require further input from OAG to advise agencies 
on implementing the bill’s requirements. Also, the new programs supporting internship and 
registered apprenticeships, as well as certification of good labor practice businesses, 
contain enforcement and penalty provisions that may increase OAG’s workload.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $112,629 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost for OAG to hire 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 500/ Page 11 
one assistant Attorney General to manage the increased workload resulting from the bill 
and to enforce new contract requirements. The costs include a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$105,260 
Operating Expenses 
      7,369 
Total FY 2026 OAG Expenditures 
$112,629 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Department of Information Technology 
 
The bill requires the establishment of a technical procurement team that collaborates with 
DGS to (1) develop materials and best practices for procurement of IT equipment and 
services and (2) assist other procurement units in procuring IT equipment and services. The 
team must include individuals with expertise in technology procurement and agile 
procurement. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $728,219 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost for DoIT to hire 
one technical procurement director and five technical procurement team program managers 
to serve on the technical procurement team. The costs include salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$684,006 
Operating Expenses 
44,213 
Total FY 2026 DoIT Expenditures 
$728,219 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Operational and Other Effects 
 
The bill creates some operational efficiencies by streamlining and centralizing procurement 
processes, but other provisions may create challenges for State agencies. By gaining the 
ability to procure transportation-related services and supplies without DGS oversight, 
MDOT advises that the length of such procurements may decrease by as much as 
three months. Similarly, giving vendors the flexibility to amend/cure MBE participation 
schedules may reduce disruptions to the procurement process. Conversely, the bill’s shorter 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 500/ Page 12 
timeline for payments to small businesses likely is challenging for agencies, as current 
payment processes are labor intensive; however, the rate at which interest accrues on 
unpaid invoices remains unchanged, which mitigates much of the effect of the shorter 
payment timeframe for State agencies. Additionally, the bill’s provisions allowing a bidder 
or offeror, in some cases, to take corrective actions for MBE or VSBE participation 
schedule deficiencies may lengthen the time of procurement and allow bidders or offerors 
to submit deficient bids or proposals. 
 
Finally, other provisions may disrupt the procurement process and/or limit the number of 
vendors willing to participate in State procurement. Added requirements for diversity plans 
and the evaluation factor for good labor practices may discourage some vendors who do 
not meet the criteria for the factor from submitting bids or proposals. A requirement to use 
registered apprentices on nonpublic work contracts may further limit participation and 
disrupt contract performance. The recent interim report of the State’s Apprenticeship 
2030 Commission notes that more than 60% of the State’s approximately 11,000 registered 
apprentices are in the construction industry (which is not affected by the requirement), and 
that there are only about 400 registered apprenticeship sponsors in the State. To the extent 
that registered apprentices are not available for “covered procurements,” participation in 
State procurement may further suffer, as research has shown that reduced competition for 
contracts increases contract costs. However, the bill authorizes CPO to promulgate 
regulations necessary to carry out the program, including developing a waiver process. The 
ability to have internship and apprenticeship requirements waived could alleviate some of 
the potential impacts on vendors’ participation in State procurement. 
 
A reliable estimate of any increase in expenditures from these factors is not feasible for 
multiple reasons. For instance, until CPO specifies what constitutes a “covered 
procurement,” any assessment of the availability of apprentices for those contracts is not 
feasible. Similarly, until the waiver procedures are developed and implemented, it is 
unknown how many vendors receive waivers from the apprenticeship and internship 
requirements. Until GOSBA determines what must be included in diversity plans, an 
assessment of their effect on procurement participation is also not feasible. As a result, the 
extent to which the bill discourages participation in State procurement, and any resulting 
increase in contract costs, cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 426 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 500/ Page 13 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Governor’s Office of 
Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Department of Aging; Contract Appeals, State Board of; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal 
League; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s 
Office; Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Community College; 
Maryland State Library Agency; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. 
Mary’s 
College 
of 
Maryland; 
Maryland 
Department 
of 
Agriculture; 
Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Board of Public Works; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Maryland State Board of 
Elections; Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - April 3, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 500/ Page 14 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2025. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total + 2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 500/ Page 15 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average 
annual wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for 
comparable nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 
33% lower than for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in 
the use of MBEs by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform 
work in designated categories of work. For instance, African American-owned 
construction businesses were paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they 
made up 10.3% of the construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority 
women-owned construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract 
dollars but made up 13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these 
differences were large and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; Chapters 137 and 138 of 2023, 
which reauthorized the program for the tenth time since its inception, also extended the due 
date for the new disparity study to September 2024 to inform the subsequent 
reauthorization process. However, the study was not completed, and MDOT advises that it 
will request another extension. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major 
Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during fiscal 2023 and 2024; 
as the exhibit shows, rates can vary considerably from year to year. 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 500/ Page 16 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Aging 
1.2% 
11.2% 
Agriculture 
3.2% 
6.2% 
Budget and Management 
32.9% 
3.0% 
Commerce 
53.8% 
77.5% 
Education 
11.5% 
21.9% 
Environment 
37.9% 
17.5% 
Executive Department 
4.6% 
2.2% 
General Services 
19.5% 
21.4% 
Health 
8.4% 
12.8% 
Higher Education Commission 
3.0% 
20.9% 
Housing and Community Development 
48.5% 
40.4% 
Human Services 
10.5% 
38.9% 
Information Technology 
14.4% 
23.7% 
Juvenile Services 
6.5% 
15.5% 
Labor 
18.6% 
3.7% 
Military 
22.3% 
27.5% 
Natural Resources 
10.2% 
5.9% 
Planning 
0.0% 
3.9% 
State Police 
20.9% 
12.7% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
6.2% 
28.5% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.1% 
20.4% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
20.2% 
25.1% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
48.5% 
21.0% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
13.1% 
16.4% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
21.7% 
27.0% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
12.0% 
n/a 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.4% 
19.8% 
Statewide Total1 
17.9% 
22.0% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
MBE:  Minority Business Enterprise 
n/a:  not available 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 500/ Page 17 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An “economically disadvantaged 
individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2025 is $2,136,382. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 500/ Page 18 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Procurement Reform Act of 2025 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0500 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 18