START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 517 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 517 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation and Finance 
 
Workgroup on the Reorganization of the Maryland Transit Administration 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on the Reorganization of the Maryland Transit 
Administration (MTA) to (1) study the potential for reorganizing the Maryland Department 
of Transportation (MDOT) and MTA and (2) make related recommendations. The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) and MDOT must provide staff for the 
workgroup. By December 1, 2026, the workgroup must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly, and MDOT must, in 
consultation with DLS, submit to the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate 
draft legislation to effectuate the workgroup’s recommendations. The bill also expresses 
the intent of the General Assembly that the fiscal 2027 budget for the Office of the 
Secretary of Transportation include an appropriation of $150,000 for consulting services 
to support the efforts of the workgroup. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by an estimated 
$324,000 in both FY 2026 and 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
324,000 
324,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($324,000) 
($324,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations and finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 517/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must study the potential for reorganizing MDOT and 
MTA, including (1) options allowing MTA to continue providing local Baltimore City 
transit services, including light rail, subway, and bus services and the creation of a new 
unit or reorganization of the Office of the Secretary to provide statewide transit services; 
(2) the current contractual obligations and agreements of MTA and the necessary steps to 
transfer the obligations and agreements in the event of a reorganization of MDOT and 
MTA; and (3) the governance changes to MTA necessary to ensure that Baltimore City has 
the appropriate oversight and input into local Baltimore City transit service. The workgroup 
must make recommendations regarding the potential for the reorganization of MDOT and 
MTA.  
 
To the extent practicable, the workgroup must (1) analyze alternative reorganization plans 
and weigh the costs and benefits of each alternative; (2) provide cost estimates for any 
reorganization plan; and (3) analyze the impact of any potential reorganization plan on 
federal funding and regulatory compliance.  
 
Any reorganization plan considered by the workgroup may not reduce funding for local 
Baltimore City transit services.  
 
Workgroup members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within MDOT, and it operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 
50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro 
subway, commuter buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the 
District of Columbia transit system, MDOT and MTA are generally the agencies 
responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  In the execution of its duties, MDOT and MTA often engage expert 
consultants to handle research, evaluations, studies, and staffing duties. To meet the bill’s 
requirements, MTA anticipates the need for consultants. Accordingly, TTF expenditures 
increase by $324,000 in both fiscal 2026 and 2027. This estimate, which is based on 
information provided by MTA, assumes the following in consultant costs, split evenly 
between fiscal 2026 and 2027:   
 
 
an estimated $240,000 for expert legal counsel to review existing contracts, leases, 
easements, agreements, and regulations that may be affected by the potential 
reorganization of MDOT and MTA; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 517/ Page 3 
 
an estimated $288,000 to perform in-depth analyses of the MTA and MDOT 
budgets, including analyses of potential cost savings and/or new costs resulting from 
the potential reorganization; and 
 
an estimated $120,000 to analyze potential issues with federal agencies and 
federal funding. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. DLS can provide staff for the workgroup 
using existing budgeted resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes language that restricts $150,000 of the TTF appropriation to the Secretary’s Office 
within MDOT contingent upon the enactment of this bill. Specifically, $150,000 of the 
TTF appropriation made for the purpose of departmental administration may not be 
expended until MDOT submits a report to the budget committees on a reorganization plan 
through which MTA would continue providing local Baltimore City transit services, 
including light rail, subway, and bus services, and the Office of the Secretary or a new unit 
of MDOT would provide statewide transit services. The budget language establishes 
requirements for the report that are similar to – but not identical to – the charge of the 
workgroup established by this bill. The budget language further requires the report to be 
submitted by December 1, 2025, one year earlier than the date by which the workgroup 
must report its findings and recommendations and MDOT, in consultation with DLS, must 
submit draft legislation to effectuate the workgroup’s recommendations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 401 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 517/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4