START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 528 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 528 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore County - Vehicle Laws - Private Roadways in Residential 
Communities 
 
 
This bill specifically prohibits a person from violating any provision of the 
Maryland Vehicle Law while driving on a private roadway located within the Queen Anne 
Village community in Owings Mills from October 1, 2025, through July 1, 2028. During 
this period, a police officer in Baltimore County may enforce the provisions of the 
Maryland Vehicle Law on any private roadway in the Queen Anne Village community that 
is used for vehicular travel by residents of the community. By September 1, 2028, the 
Baltimore County Police Department (BCPD) must report to the Baltimore County 
Delegation of the General Assembly on implementation of the bill and whether it has 
improved compliance with the Maryland Vehicle Law in the Queen Anne Village 
community. The bill terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County can likely conduct enforcement with existing resources, 
as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a driver is only subject to the Maryland Vehicle Law when 
driving a vehicle on a State “highway” (as defined under § 11-127 of the Transportation 
Article). However, a person is still subject to the Maryland Vehicle Law while driving 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 528/ Page 2 
(1) on any private property that is used by the public in general; (2) in Calvert County only, 
on a private road located within a residential subdivision or community, or (3) in any place 
other than a highway that is specifically provided for under State law.  
 
A police officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of the Maryland Vehicle Law, or 
applicable local traffic laws or regulations, on any highway in the State. Additionally, a 
police officer is authorized, in Calvert County only, to enforce the Maryland Vehicle Law 
on a private roadway located within a residential subdivision or community that is used for 
vehicular travel by residents. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  BCPD advises that it needs to hire a few additional police officers to 
enforce the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the 
enforcement provisions of the bill are authorizing in nature. Thus, BCPD is not required 
to conduct additional enforcement. Furthermore, due to the bill’s limited application to 
private roadways in a single residential community for a limited period of time, this 
analysis assumes that BCPD incorporates any enforcement it chooses to undertake into its 
existing traffic enforcement operations using existing officers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 915 (Baltimore County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2