START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 504 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 504 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Administration) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Excellence in Maryland Public Schools Act 
 
 
This Administration bill reduces annual State funding for the Coordinated Community 
Supports Partnership (CCSP) Fund, reduces per-pupil State funding and local share of 
certain major education aid, alters and delays the onset and phase-in of local education 
agencies (LEAs) required expenditures for teacher collaborative time, and provides 
mandate relief under certain State revenue circumstances. A funding requirement for a 
career counseling program is extended and certain digital tools requirements are 
temporarily altered. The bill establishes various teacher development and recruitment grant 
programs and a related fund, alters the Grow Your Own Educators grant program, 
establishes a national teacher recruitment campaign, alters community schools 
requirements, alters and establishes certain responsibilities for various State agencies, and 
otherwise modifies aspects of the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint). The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures in support of public schools decrease by $29.5 million in 
FY 2026, and by $156.1 million by FY 2030. Special fund revenues increase by $602,700 
in FY 2026 and by $2.8 million in FY 2027. This bill decreases mandated 
appropriations beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0.6 
$2.8 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
($91.7) 
($147.8) 
($154.1) 
($156.1) 
SF Expenditure 
($29.5) 
$32.9 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$30.1 
$61.6 
$147.8 
$154.1 
$156.1  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 504/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  LEA revenues and corresponding expenditures increase substantially in 
FY 2026 and decrease substantially beginning in FY 2027. Required local implementation 
of collaborative learning is delayed and reduced, thereby providing local school systems 
with additional fiscal flexibility. Mandated local school system distributions of revenues 
for local workforce development boards (LWDBs) are extended; LWDBs that are local 
governments may benefit. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Coordinated Community Supports Partnership Fund 
 
The bill reduces the amount that the Governor must provide annually for the CCSP Fund 
to $40.0 million in fiscal 2025, $70.0 million in fiscal 2026, and $100.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Major Aid Formulas 
 
The target per pupil foundation amount (PPFA), a key component of the foundation 
formula and the Comparable Wage Index (CWI), is decreased versus current law to 
specified amounts for each year from fiscal 2027 to 2035; after fiscal 2035, the PPFA is 
increased by an inflation factor set in current law (resulting in lesser PPFAs compared to 
current law in future years). However, the bill holds per-pupil funding under the 
compensatory education, English learner, and special education formula grants constant 
with current law, by specifying per pupil amounts for these programs in statute through 
fiscal 2033 and increasing the respective per pupil amounts by inflation beginning in 
fiscal 2034. Thus, funding for these programs is no longer expressed as a percentage weight 
of the PPFA base. The bill similarly, though by differing mechanisms, holds minimum 
required funding constant with current law amounts for the SEED School, the Maryland 
School for the Blind (MSB) and the Maryland School for the Deaf, all of which is tied to 
growth in the PPFA under current law. Exhibit 1 compares the PPFA under current law to 
the PPFA under the bill.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 504/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Per Pupil Foundation Amount 
Fiscal 2026-2035 
 
Fiscal 
Current 
Under the Bill 
Difference 
% Diff. 
2026 
$9,226 
$9,226 
$0 
0.0% 
2027 
9,732 
9,561 
-171 
-1.8% 
2028 
10,138 
9,789 
-349 
-3.4% 
2029 
10,564 
10,200 
-364 
-3.4% 
2030 
11,004 
10,625 
-379 
-3.4% 
2031 
11,442 
11,047 
-395 
-3.5% 
2032 
11,898 
11,483 
-415 
-3.5% 
2033 
12,365 
11,931 
-434 
-3.5% 
2034 
12,635 
12,381 
-254 
-2.0% 
2035 
12,910 
12,843 
-67 
-0.5% 
 
Note:  For current law, fiscal 2034 and 2035 reflects inflation. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grant Program 
 
An LEA may request flexibility in distributing concentration of poverty grant (CPG) 
program funds through an appeals process established by the Maryland State Department 
of Education (MSDE), as opposed to the Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB) 
under current law.  
 
The bill expands existing funding distribution flexibility to additional LEAs. If an LEA has 
at least 10 eligible schools, or if at least 35% of a local school system’s schools are eligible 
schools, the local board of education (local board) may, on behalf of eligible schools, 
expend no more than 50% of program funds if a specified plan is developed and submitted 
to MSDE. This provision does not apply to a public charter school unless it chooses to 
participate in the plan. Each local board that spends funds in this way must provide each 
eligible school with an itemized list of services provided, the amount of funds spent on 
each service, and the amount of funds spent on central administrative support.  
 
A local board may spend program funds on behalf of an eligible school on program costs 
that directly benefit the school, including to (1) provide central support for effective 
program funds management; (2) contract with outside providers that support at least 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 504/ Page 4 
2 eligible schools; (3) coordinate spending on behalf of eligible schools; and (4) handle 
any other administrative cost as defined by MSDE regulations. Similar current law 
provisions that apply to LEAs with at least 40 eligible schools are repealed under the bill.  
 
By December 1, 2028, MSDE must conduct a statewide evaluation of the CPG program, 
summarize its findings in a report that it must transmit to AIB, submit to the  
General Assembly, and make publicly available. It is the intent of the General Assembly 
that MSDE consult with specified institutions of higher education before conducting this 
evaluation and before establishing certain requirements for community school 
implementation plans.  
 
Community Schools 
 
The State Director of Community Schools within MSDE must be within the Office of 
Community Schools and Expanded Learning Time (OCSELT). OCSELT may hire staff to 
support the State Director in providing guidance and direction to LEAs and community 
school coordinators. The definition of wraparound services to be provided by a community 
school is revised to include (1) offering evidence-based in-school and in-person tutoring, 
provided during the school day and (2) improving chronic absenteeism. The evaluation 
form used for an annual evaluation is to be used by LEAs, instead of by community school 
coordinators, and the requirement to submit the evaluation to AIB is repealed. MSDE may 
establish requirements for school and countywide implementation plans.  
 
A community school implementation plan must include measurable goals that will be 
measured at least once every two years. A community school coordinator must review the 
implementation plan at least once every two years, rather than at least every three years, 
and determine progress on the measurable goals. If MSDE determines that a community 
school has not expended funds in accordance with an approved implementation plan, 
MSDE may direct a local board to expend a reasonable percentage of per pupil CPG funds.  
 
Study of Funding for Special Education in the State 
 
By January 1, 2026, MSDE, in consultation with AIB, must contract with an independent 
entity to conduct a study of funding for special education in the State. The study must 
review and make recommendations on specified elements of special education costs and 
funding. The entity conducting the study must seek input from specified entities. The 
Governor must include sufficient funds in the State budget for the appropriate fiscal years 
for MSDE to cover the costs of the study. By December 15, 2026, MSDE must report the 
findings and recommendations of the study to the General Assembly.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 504/ Page 5 
Local Education Agency Expenditures for Collaborative Time 
 
The bill delays the phase-in of the “collaborative time per-pupil amount” that is multiplied 
by the enrollment count within an LEA to determine the amount that must be distributed 
to and expended by schools in each county, in accordance with each local board’s 
collaborative time implementation plan approved by AIB. Exhibit 2 shows the change in 
the collaborative time per-pupil amount that applies for all LEAs.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Required LEA Collaborative Time Per Pupil Expenditure 
 
Fiscal 
Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Difference 
% Diff. 
2026 
$163 
$0 
($163) 
-100% 
2027 
334 
0 
(334) 
-100% 
2028 
512 
0 
(512) 
-100% 
2029 
698 
334 
(364) 
-52% 
2030 
891 
512 
(379) 
-43% 
2031 
1,093 
698 
(395) 
-36% 
2032 
1,306 
891 
(415) 
-32% 
2033 
1,527 
1,093 
(434) 
-28% 
2034 
1,560 
1,306 
(254) 
-16% 
2035 
1,594 
1,527 
(67) 
-4% 
 
LEA:  local education agency 
 
Note:  For current law, fiscal 2034 and 2035 reflects inflation. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Career Ladder 
 
The bill delays, from July 1, 2025, to July 1, 2028, the date by which a multi-year phase-in 
of specified minimum percentages of working time that teachers at each level or tier of the 
career ladder must devote to classroom teaching is complete. That phase-in is reduced from 
eight years to seven years.   
 
Academic Excellence Program and Fund 
 
The Academic Excellence Program is established in MSDE. The program is intended to 
address critical academic needs in schools and ensure that Maryland students have 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 504/ Page 6 
equitable access to high-quality instruction and targeted academic support. Under the 
program, instructional coaches (coaches) and coordinators of professional learning 
(coordinators) must provide educators in selected schools with (1) coaching to improve 
instruction and the integration of evidence-based practices into the classroom and 
(2) access to high-quality, job-embedded, and targeted professional learning opportunities. 
Regional program managers oversee and coordinate this activity. In fiscal 2026 and 2027, 
the program must focus on early literacy instruction and support of elementary school 
educators. In subsequent years, the program must expand its focus, with emphasis on 
foundational mathematics instruction.  
 
MSDE must enter into a cooperative agreement with a local board that elects to participate 
in the program. The bill provides for selection of schools and educators, based on need of 
support and likely benefit from the program, as well as MSDE-developed criteria for 
selection of coaches by regional program managers, and requires MSDE to establish a 
training plan for coaches.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2028, MSDE must employ coordinators to (1) provide professional 
development to educators and administrators by establishing learning modules and using 
appropriate tools and platforms and (2) collaborate with administrators to collect data 
needed to create a professional learning plan that aligns with the needs of a school. 
 
An Academic Excellence Fund, administered by MSDE, is established to be used only for 
grants to local boards, institutions of higher education, nonprofit organizations, or other 
entities for (1) contracts with vendors to provide services; (2) training and workshops; 
(3) program implementation; (4) program administrative costs; (5) program evaluation and 
reporting; and (6) other costs approved by MSDE. Interest earnings of the fund are credited 
to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF). The BMFF may not be used to fund 
the Academic Excellence Program. MSDE must annually collect specified data about the 
use of the fund and may adopt policies, procedures, and regulations to carry out provisions 
related to the program and fund.  
 
Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program 
 
The bill makes several substantial alterations to the Grow Your Own Educators Grant 
Program, established by Chapters 227 and 228 of 2024. An institution of higher education 
is not required to have a teacher preparation program approved by MSDE to be part of a 
collaborative, and specified alternative models may take the place of an institution of 
higher education in a collaborative. The term “noncertified education support professional” 
is redefined, specifying that it entails a public school employee who is not (1) a certificated 
employee designated as part of certain bargaining units; (2) a managerial employee; or 
(3) a confidential employee. There is no longer a maximum distribution of funds to support 
teacher candidates who are provisional teachers. The bill clarifies that the program purpose 
is to support collaboratives that offer teacher licensure programs with on-the-job 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 504/ Page 7 
experiential learning for eligible individuals, not to directly support the individuals. The 
service obligation pledged by program participants is modified to indicate separate 
obligations to the LEA and to the State.  
 
To be eligible for the program, a teacher candidate must be employed as a noncertified 
education support professional or provisional teacher by a participating LEA in a 
school-based position; have a high school diploma or its equivalent; and commit to pursue 
a teacher licensure pathway approved by MSDE. Collaborative program plan requirements 
are enhanced to include: 
 
 
identification of the collaborative members and respective roles; 
 
school-based positions that allow a teacher candidate to systematically develop 
teaching skills through experiential learning and ultimately demonstrate teaching 
competencies; 
 
a mentor teacher employed by the LEA and assigned for the entirety of the program 
to a teacher candidate; 
 
a systematic program of experiential learning that results in higher education credits, 
if required; and 
 
designation of an LEA program administrator with specified program 
responsibilities. 
 
The bill requires a collaborative to have a designated program administrator, instead of 
designation of an individual to assist teacher candidates. Estimates of program participation 
are to be based on appropriate data. A collaborative’s recruitment outreach plan (1) no 
longer must include estimated expenses by category or identification of at least one source 
of long-term funding but (2) must identify a sustainability plan for the program.  
 
MSDE must consult with a national nonprofit with a record of success in other states of 
increasing the number of licensed teachers, by specified means. This entity supports MSDE 
in the design, implementation, and evaluation of the program and may work directly with 
collaboratives to support the development and implementation of grow-your-own teacher 
preparation programs.  
 
Grants are for local school employees to complete a “pathway to teacher licensure,” not a 
teacher preparation program. The bill specifies that grants are competitive and that in 
awarding grants, MSDE must prioritize collaboratives that negotiate a lower tuition cost 
for teacher candidates. Teacher candidate compensation and benefits may not be reduced 
by the LEA. The bill specifies conditions under which a teacher candidate may serve as a 
daily substitute teacher. The requirement that MSDE publish to its website certain program 
data that it must collect is repealed. Instead, beginning in 2026, MSDE must annually on 
July 1, report on this data to the General Assembly.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 504/ Page 8 
Maryland Teacher Relocation Incentive Grant 
 
The purpose of this grant, administered by MSDE, is to provide up to $2,000 to incentivize 
an out-of-state licensed teacher to move to the State to address the State’s teacher 
workforce shortage and reduce the number of conditionally licensed teachers in the 
classroom. By October 1, 2025, initial grants must be awarded; grants may not be awarded 
after June 30, 2029. A local board may submit a proposal to MSDE to receive a grant for 
the candidate. The bill specifies candidate eligibility standards and elements that an 
application must include. By December 30, 2029, MSDE must submit a specified report to 
the Governor and the General Assembly on the implementation of the grant awards.  
 
National Teacher Recruitment Campaign 
 
MSDE may establish a national teacher recruitment campaign to bring licensed and 
prospective teachers to the State to reduce the number of conditionally licensed teachers 
and meet the State’s teacher workforce needs to implement collaborative time; such a 
campaign must end by July 1, 2029. Beginning July 1, 2025, MSDE must consult with a 
national nonprofit that has experience in guiding other state education agencies in targeted, 
State-based recruitment campaigns. The nonprofit must support MSDE in the design, 
implementation, and evaluation of the campaign and must provide one-to-one mentoring 
and support services to prospective candidates at no cost to a candidate. The campaign 
must include public service announcement advertising, digital marketing, and direct 
outreach to encourage candidates to teach in Maryland.  
 
Maryland School Leadership Academy 
 
School principals, assistant principals, school-based or local board leaders interested in 
becoming effective school principals or assistant principals, and others designated by 
MSDE or the local board may complete the 12-month Maryland school leadership 
academy. The academy must be (1) cohort-based to encourage collaboration and shared 
learning; (2) job-embedded to the extent practicable; (3) tailored to participants using 
self-diagnostics and school-level diagnostics; (4) evidence-based per federal Every Student 
Succeeds Act guidelines; (5) provided through both in-person and virtual sessions; and 
(6) structured to include training on best practices and strategies used by highly effective 
school leaders, enabling school leaders to implement components of the Blueprint.  
 
Career Counseling Program for Middle and High School Students 
 
Local board required distributions of funds to LWDBs, which currently terminate after 
fiscal 2026, are extended through fiscal 2028, increasing annually on a per pupil basis. 
Accordingly, LWDB annual reports to AIB on the use and impact of funds on providing 
career counseling are also extended for two additional years. By January 1, 2027, AIB must 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 504/ Page 9 
report, as specified, to the Governor and the General Assembly on the effectiveness of the 
Career Counseling Program for Middle and High School Students.  
 
Digital Tools for Education 
 
For school years 2025-2026 through 2027-2028, current law requirements for the 
procurement and use of digital tools to assure equivalent access to technology for students 
with disabilities do not apply to digital tools that use artificial intelligence, as defined under 
the State Finance and Procurement Article, to support student learning.  
 
State and Local Funding Mandate Relief Contingent on State Revenue Downturns 
 
The bill imposes a State funding freeze for education aid programs if the combined revenue 
projection by the Board of Revenue Estimates (BRE) in December is below the 
March estimate by at least 3.75%. This calculation includes the BRE estimates for both the 
general fund and the BMFF. This provision begins with December 1, 2024, and each 
December 1 thereafter, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter. If this trigger 
provision is activated, the following must occur and be provided for by the Governor in the 
annual budget bill for that fiscal year: 
 
 
no annual increase in per pupil major education aid; and 
 
no additional funding under Title 5, Subtitle 2 of the Education Article. 
 
The bill repeals a similar provision under Chapter 36 of 2021 as amended by Chapter 55 
of 2021, that is triggered by a decrease of 7.5% or more.  
 
Other Provisions 
 
For fiscal 2026, MSDE must provide technical assistance to LEAs to develop replicable 
innovative models for teacher collaboration that improve teacher retention and student 
learning. In each annual budget bill, the Governor must include, without revision, 
appropriations for AIB as jointly certified by the presiding officers of the 
General Assembly and the Governor. The bill specifies that counties are authorized to 
exceed county charter limitations on local property taxes for the purpose of payments by a 
county on behalf of the local board to the Teachers’ Pension System and Teachers’ 
Retirement System (TPS/TRS). The bill specifies by program what policies, regulations, 
processes, procedures, and/or guidance that MSDE must or may establish, adopt, or 
provide. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 504/ Page 10 
Current Law:  
 
Coordinated Community Supports Partnership Fund and Program 
 
Chapter 36 (the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) established the 
Maryland Consortium on Community Supports in the Maryland Community Health 
Resources Commission, in part to develop coordinated community supports partnerships 
to meet student behavioral health needs and administer the CCSP grant program and fund. 
Chapter 36 phased in mandated annual budget appropriations for the fund at $25.0 million 
increments, beginning in fiscal 2022 and culminating at $125.0 million annually beginning 
in fiscal 2026. Chapter 713 of 2022 increased mandated funding levels for the CCSP Fund 
to $85.0 million in fiscal 2024, $110.0 million in fiscal 2025, and $130.0 million in 
fiscal 2026 and annually thereafter. 
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and Education Funding Formulas 
 
Blueprint legislation, including Chapter 771 of 2019; Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021; and 
Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs and updated education funding formulas, to 
among other provisions provide additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty, including community schools and wraparound services, and 
increased support for students learning English and students with disabilities. 
 
The majority of direct State aid to public schools (excluding teachers’ retirement) is 
determined by enrollment-based funding formulas generally found in Title 5, Subtitle 2 of 
the Education Article. This includes the foundation formula, which makes use of an 
“enrollment count,” the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment 
and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. Collectively, the formulas 
account for a uniform base cost per pupil that is necessary to provide general education 
services to students in every LEA and address the additional costs associated with 
educating three student populations:  special education students; students eligible for free 
and reduced-price meals; and students who are English learners. Chapter 36 established 
additional major education aid programs. 
 
Most State education aid formulas also include wealth equalization across counties, 
compensating for differences in local wealth by providing less aid per pupil to the  
more wealthy counties and more aid per pupil to the less wealthy counties. Although on 
the whole most State aid formulas are designed to have the State pay roughly  
one-half of program costs, the State’s share for the less wealthy counties is higher than 
50%, and the State’s share for more wealthy counties is lower than 50%. 
 
“Major education aid” is the sum of the State and local shares of funding under the 
foundation and CWI programs; the compensatory education, special education, and 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 504/ Page 11 
English learner programs; and several other formula aid programs, which combined 
account for the great majority of State aid and local funding for public schools. 
 
Comparable Wage Index 
 
The CWI provides additional funds to LEAs with above-average costs but does not 
decrease funding for LEAs with below-average costs. CWI adjustment values are fixed in 
statute and range from 0.055 in Charles County to 0.166 in Montgomery County. The 
formula multiplies the adjustment value by the foundation program for a given county, 
which is the PPFA multiplied by the enrollment count for the county. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The guaranteed tax base (GTB) program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions 
to maintain or increase local education tax effort, i.e., local education appropriation as a 
percent of local tax base. The program provides additional State education aid to counties 
that have less than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and provide local 
education funding above the minimum local share required by the Foundation Program. 
The program uses local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for 
each eligible LEA. 
 
SEED School, Maryland School for the Blind, and Maryland School for the Deaf Funding 
 
A public residential education boarding program for at-risk youth was established in 
Maryland in 2006. The program accepts students from across the State via a lottery system 
and is operated by the SEED School of Maryland, at a location in Baltimore City. Minimum 
funding per student for the SEED School is the prior year funding amount altered by the 
annual change in the PPFA. 
 
MSB receives a State appropriation equal to or greater than the sum of: 
 
 
75% of the prior year appropriation multiplied by the product of (1) the sum of the 
weighted enrollment growth plus one and (2) the sum of the growth in the target 
PPFA plus one; and  
 
25% of the prior year appropriation multiplied by the sum of the weighted 
enrollment growth plus one. 
 
“Weighted enrollment growth” is the product of 0.2 times the percentage change in the 
four-year average annual FTE enrollment from the third through sixth prior school years 
to the second and fifth prior school years. The “four-year average annual FTE enrollment” 
is the addition of (1) the average number of students enrolled annually in grades preK-12 
at MSB during four consecutive school years; (2) one-half the average number of children 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 504/ Page 12 
served annually by the MSB Early Intervention Program; and (3) one-half the average 
number of children served annually by the MSB Outreach Program. 
 
The funding formula for MSD also uses growth in the PPFA, along with enrollment growth 
that is adjusted with a four-year enrollment average in order to soften enrollment increases 
and decreases. The enrollment count for the school includes grades preK-12 students and 
children served through the school’s Early Intervention Program. The adjusted formula 
enrollment only includes 50% of the children in the Early Intervention Program. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grant Program 
 
Blueprint legislation provides additional support for schools serving high concentrations 
of students living in poverty through the CPG program. CPGs have two components, a 
personnel grant and a per-pupil grant. 
 
Personnel Grants are provided to employ a community school coordinator with specified 
qualifications and provide full-time coverage by at least one health care practitioner. A 
county that provides health coverage or community school services with funds other than 
the personnel grant must continue to provide those services through fiscal 2030. If the 
personnel grant provided to an eligible school exceeds the costs to employ those positions 
and provide health coverage, the eligible school may use excess funds to provide 
wraparound services and complete the community school needs assessment. The personnel 
grant is a State-funded categorical amount that increases with inflation.  
 
Per-pupil Grants are provided for each qualifying school following the completion of a 
community school needs assessment, and each eligible school must use the per-pupil grant 
to provide wraparound services and other programs and services as identified in the school 
needs assessment. CPG funds must generally be distributed by the local board to each 
eligible school. However, if the LEA has at least 40 eligible schools, the local board may 
expend up to 50% of CPG personnel and per-pupil grants on behalf of eligible schools in 
accordance with a plan developed in consultation with eligible schools that ensures that 
each eligible school receives the required positions/coverage and services. Per-pupil grants 
are only wealth equalized for districts that receive the minimum State funding (40%) under 
the compensatory education formula; for all other districts, the State pays the full amount. 
The local funding percentage is based on the compensatory education wealth equalization 
formula.  
 
Community Schools, Needs Assessment, Evaluation Forms, and Implementation Plans 
 
“Community school” means a public school that establishes a set of strategic partnerships 
between the school and other community resources that leverage shared accountability, 
collaborative leadership, capacity building, and authentic family and community 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 504/ Page 13 
engagement, using a student-centered framework to promote inclusive student 
achievement, positive learning conditions, and the well-being of students, families, 
educators, and the community through a variety of engaging practices including the 
provision of wraparound services. The State Director of Community Schools in MSDE 
must coordinate professional development for community school coordinators at each 
community school. 
 
The State Director of Community Schools must, in consultation with LEAs and members 
of the community schools’ leadership team, create a common needs assessment tool that 
each community school coordinator must use to complete the community school needs 
assessment. The State Director must also develop an evaluation form that each community 
school coordinator must use to complete an annual evaluation submitted to MSDE and 
AIB. A community school coordinator is responsible for (1) establishing a community 
school; (2) completing a needs assessment of the students in the school for appropriate 
wraparound services; (3) developing an implementation plan based on the assessment of 
needs for the community; and (4) coordinating support programs that address out-of-school 
learning barriers for students and families. “Wraparound services” provided by a 
community school, according to its implementation plan, may involve extended learning 
time and an extended school year as well as any of a wide range of specified services, 
supports and practices.  
 
Local Education Agency Expenditures for Collaborative Time 
 
The “collaborative time per-pupil amount” is multiplied by the enrollment count within an 
LEA to determine the amount that must be distributed to and expended by schools in each 
county, in accordance with each local board’s collaborative time implementation plan 
approved by AIB. 
 
Career Ladder 
 
By July 1, 2024, each local board must implement a specified career ladder. The State 
Board of Education approves the eight-year phase-in, commencing July 1, 2025, of the 
minimum percentage of worktime that teachers funded through the career ladder program 
must be devoted to classroom teaching time, as specified by each local board in its career 
ladder.  
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
The BMFF was created by Chapter 771 as the successor to the Commission on Innovation 
and Excellence in Education Fund. The BMFF is intended to assist in providing adequate 
funding for early childhood education and primary and secondary education to provide a 
world-class education to students in Maryland. 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 504/ Page 14 
Teacher Certification and Development 
 
An individual must have a certificate issued by the State Superintendent to be employed in 
the State as a county superintendent, assistant superintendent, supervisor, principal, or 
teacher. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2025, for initial teacher certification, graduates from approved or 
alternative teacher preparation programs must:   
 
 
meet one of the following criteria:  (1) pass a nationally recognized, portfolio-based 
assessment of teaching ability; or (2) complete an LEA’s rigorous teacher induction 
program, lasting either three years or the duration a teacher can hold a conditional 
certificate, whichever is less; and  
 
meet one additional qualification from the following:  (1) pass a basic literacy skills 
assessment approved by MSDE; (2) hold a degree from a regionally accredited 
institution with a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.0 or its equivalent; or (3) provide 
satisfactory documentation of effective evaluations from an LEA for three years.  
 
Additionally, teachers graduating from out-of-state institutions or holding licenses from 
other states must either pass a teaching ability examination within 18 months of LEA 
employment or hold an active national board certification.  
 
A teacher who graduates from an institution of higher education in another state or who 
holds a professional license or certificate from another state may also complete a 
comprehensive induction program as an alternative pathway to certification.  
 
LEAs, individually or together, may develop rigorous comprehensive induction programs. 
Before establishing a comprehensive induction program, one or more LEA must submit a 
plan for the program to MSDE and AIB. A program must include a portfolio component 
that aligns with the Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium standards. This 
component can count toward teacher preparation program coursework requirements. 
Completing a program exempts candidates from needing to pass a nationally recognized 
portfolio-based assessment of teaching ability.  
 
Chapter 627 of 2023 established the Teacher Development and Retention Program as a 
six-year pilot program and made significant changes to the existing Teaching Fellows for 
Maryland Scholarship Program. Both programs provide financial support to candidates for 
teacher certification and require that participants fulfill a service obligation in a 
public school following certification. 
 
All 50 states currently participate in the National Association of State Directors of Teacher 
Education and Certification Interstate Agreement for Educator Licensure. The agreement 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 504/ Page 15 
is a collection of individual agreements outlining which other states’ educator certificates 
will be accepted by the state. However, the interstate agreement is not a collection of 
two-way agreements of reciprocal acceptance. Participating jurisdictions may choose to 
have additional requirements for educators who are coming from another jurisdiction.  
 
MSDE must establish, in collaboration with AIB, a school leadership training program for 
the State Superintendent, county superintendents, senior instruction-related staff, members 
of AIB, members of the State Board, members of local boards, and school principals.  
 
Grow Your Own Educators 
 
Chapters 227 and 228 established the Grow Your Own Educators Program to provide 
support to eligible provisional teachers and noncertified education support professionals 
interested in teaching who pledge to fulfill a service obligation. Administered by MSDE, 
the program provides grants to LEAs in collaboratives for certain teacher candidates’ 
expenses and program administration costs. Collaboratives (consisting of LEAs, employee 
organizations representing those employees, and institutions of higher education with 
approved teacher preparation programs) may apply for grants by submitting plans to 
MSDE. 
 
To be eligible for the program, a teacher candidate applicant must (1) be employed as a 
noncertified education support professional or provisional teacher by a participating LEA 
on the effective date of the program and (2) meet the educational requirements determined 
by the collaborative. A “provisional teacher” means an individual employed by an LEA 
through a provisional contract as a conditional teacher. At most, one-quarter of the funds 
used to support teaching candidate applicants may be used to support teaching candidates 
who are provisional teachers. 
 
To apply for a grant, a collaborative must develop and submit to MSDE a plan with certain 
specified elements relating to content areas covered by the proposed programs, partner 
institutions of higher education, the number and type of applicants considered, and 
outreach and recruitment. 
 
Career Counseling Program for Middle and High School Students 
 
Chapter 36 established the Career Counseling Program for Middle and High School 
Students to provide each middle and high school student with individualized career 
counseling services. Each local board of education must enter into a local career counseling 
agreement with an LWDB, the community college that serves the county, and, if 
appropriate, an American Job Center. Counseling provided must help each student choose 
one or more post-college and career readiness pathways as established by the Blueprint. 
The Career and Technical Education Committee of the Governor’s Workforce 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 504/ Page 16 
Development Board must conduct an evaluation of each local career counseling agreement 
for best practices and disseminate its findings to all local boards of education, LWDBs, 
community colleges, and, if appropriate, American Job Centers. Although the program has 
no termination date, the dedicated funding mechanism described below terminates after  
fiscal 2026. Dedicated funding for career counseling in middle and high schools is provided 
through the PPFA. 
 
Each local board of education must, in fiscal 2024 through 2026, distribute funds to support 
the Career Counseling Program for Middle and High School Students to LWDBs. The 
amount each local board of education must set aside is calculated as $62 per student in 
fiscal 2024, which must grow by the State aid inflation adjustment in fiscal 2025 and 2026. 
By June 30 of each year the program is authorized, each LWDB must report to AIB on the 
use of funds and the impact of providing career counseling. 
 
Accessibility of Digital Tools for Education and Artificial Intelligence 
 
For the purpose of acquisition and use of technology in education throughout the State, the 
State Superintendent and the Secretary of Disabilities must jointly ensure that 
specifications used in all grants and procurement contracts for digital tools, as defined, 
require equivalent access, as defined, for students with disabilities, including blindness. 
Accordingly, all grants and procurement contracts for digital tools must require compliance 
with federal Section 508 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1978. Solicitations must 
notify vendors of this requirement and, beginning September 1, 2023, require an 
accessibility conformance report. Local school systems must evaluate digital tools for 
compliance using accessibility or blindness specialists. Contracts must include 
indemnification provisions for noncompliance. By October 1, 2024, local school systems 
must prioritize digital tools that meet equivalent access standards and provide the greatest 
functionality for students with disabilities. If no compliant product is available or if 
compliance would impose an undue burden or alter instruction, MSDE must be notified 
and consult with specified agencies. Vendors have 18 months to resolve compliance 
failures or face civil penalties. 
 
If students without disabilities receive digital tools not made accessible to students with 
disabilities, alternative instruction must be provided in alignment with the student’s 
individualized education program or 504 Plan. All public- or student-facing online content 
must comply with current Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. Local school systems 
must report annually to MSDE on the accessibility of digital tools; MSDE must publish 
this information, monitor compliance under COMAR 13A.06.05, and report annually to 
the Governor and General Assembly. 
 
Under § 3.5-801 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, “artificial intelligence” 
means a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 504/ Page 17 
make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments; 
(2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and virtual environments and 
abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner; and 
(3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or action. 
 
State and Local Funding Mandate Relief Contingent on State Revenue Downturns 
 
If the December general fund estimate in the December BRE report is more than 
7.5% below the March general fund estimate in the March report of that year, per pupil 
increases in major education aid required under current law and any additional funding 
increases required under current law must be limited to the rate of inflation. 
 
County Authority to Exceed Tax Limitations 
 
Counties may exceed county charter limitations on local property taxes for the purpose of 
funding the approved budget of the local board. If a local property tax rate is set above the 
limit, the county governing body may not reduce funding provided to the local board from 
any other local source and must appropriate to the local board all of the revenues generated 
from any increase beyond the existing limit. Any use of this authority must be reported 
annually to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
Background:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes BMFF 
special funds amounting to $19.4 million for the Grow Your Own Educators program; 
$3.0 million for the Maryland School Leadership Academy; $2.0 million for community 
school partnerships with institutions of higher education including regional training hubs; 
$1.0 million for teacher relocation stipends; $674,000 for a national teacher recruitment 
campaign; $2.0 million for MSDE to administer community schools programs and partner 
with an external evaluation partner; and $1.4 million for MSDE teacher pipeline 
administrative costs. The fiscal 2026 budget includes no funding for the Academic 
Excellence Program. 
 
The General Assembly reduced funding for the CCSP Fund to $40.0 million in the 
fiscal 2025 budget. The fiscal 2026 budget includes $70.0 million in BMFF funds for 
CCSP in fiscal 2026 contingent on legislation to reduce mandated funding by 
$60.0 million.  
 
State Revenues:  The bill specifies that interest earned by the Academic Excellence Fund 
established under the bill accrues to BMFF. This provision is assumed to be budget neutral 
and, therefore, will have no substantial overall impact on State revenues. The bill relieves 
the BMFF of substantial expenditures in fiscal 2026 and fiscal 2027. This results in greater 
average BMFF fund balances during those years, and consequently BMFF interest earnings 
increase by approximately $602,700 in fiscal 2026 and $2.8 million in fiscal 2027.  
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 504/ Page 18 
State Expenditures:  The projected fiscal 2026 to 2030 impact of the bill, by program, is 
detailed in Exhibit 3. Savings related to annual reductions in funding of the CCSP Fund 
and aid funding linked to the reduced PPFA, and resulting reduced State expenditures, are 
only partially offset under the bill, including enhancements to the Grow Your Own 
Educators Program. Exhibit 3 includes MSDE administrative costs. 
 
 
Exhibit 3 
Estimated Changes in State Expenditures under the Bill 
Fiscal 2026-2030  
($ in Millions) 
 
Program 
FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 FY 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foundation 
$0.0 
-$73.6 
-$150.4 
-$157.1 
-$163.4 
Comparable Wage Index 
0.0 
-2.8 
-5.7 
-5.8 
-5.9 
Education Effort Adjustment 
0.0 
-0.6 
-9.8 
-7.1 
-1.6 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
0.0 
1.8 
2.8 
2.3 
2.6 
Grow Your Own Educators 
19.4 
19.4 
19.4 
19.4 
12.9 
State Aid Subtotal 
$19.4 
-$55.8 
-$143.7 
-$148.3 
-$155.4 
Coordinated Community Supports 
-$60.0 
-$30.0 
-$30.0 
-$30.0 
-$30.0 
Leadership Academy 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
8.0 
Academic Excellence  
0.0 
19.3 
21.2 
21.2 
21.2 
Relocation Incentive  
1.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Out-of-state Recruitment 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
0.0 
0.0 
Community School Partnership  
2.0 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Teacher Pipeline Administrative Costs  
1.4 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Additional Administrative Costs  
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Other Subtotal 
-$49.0 
-$3.0 
-$4.0 
-$5.8 
-$0.8 
Total Change 
-$29.5 
-$58.8 
-$147.8 
-$154.1 
-$156.1 
 
Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
As shown in Exhibit 4, BMFF special fund revenues are projected to be sufficient to cover 
mandated annual increases in expenditures for the Blueprint through fiscal 2026. Thus, 
reductions to required Blueprint expenditures under the bill in fiscal 2026, approximately 
$29.5 million, result in equivalent reductions in BMFF expenditures in fiscal 2026. 
However, current projections indicate that revenues in the BMFF, including prior-year fund 
balances, will be less than the amount required to cover current law increases to annual 
expenditures under the Blueprint beginning in fiscal 2027. In fiscal 2027, reflecting the 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 504/ Page 19 
greater available BMFF balance from fiscal 2026 BMFF savings, BMFF expenditures 
increase by about $32.9 million, while general fund savings net to about $112.8 million. 
State Blueprint savings in fiscal 2028 through 2030, totaling about $171.8 million, 
$177.6 million, and $180.0 million in each respective year, amount entirely to general fund 
expenditure decreases.  
 
 
Exhibit 4 
Net Results of Revenue and Expenditure Changes under the Bill 
Fiscal 2026-2030 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Blueprint Revenues 
$0.6 
$2.8 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
Blueprint Expenditures 
-29.5 
32.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
General Fund Expenditure Impact 
due to BMFF changes  
0.0 
-112.8 
-171.8 
-177.6 
-180.0 
GTB and Academic Excellence 
General Fund Expenditures 
0.0 
21.1 
24.0 
23.6 
23.9 
Net General Fund Expenditures 
0.0 
-91.7 
-147.8 
-154.1 
-156.1 
Total Expenditures 
-29.5 
-58.8 
-147.8 
-154.1 
-156.1 
Net Total Results 
$30.1 
$61.6 
$147.8 
$154.1 
$156.1 
 
BMFF:  Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
GTB:  Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
General fund expenditures are also affected by changes not related to the Blueprint: 
Academic Excellence Program expenditures, which may not be made from the BMFF, as 
well as increases to GTB expenditures related to changes in the PPFA. These general fund 
changes are detailed in Exhibit 3.   
 
Because the fiscal 2026 budget includes BMFF funding for numerous provisions under the 
bill (the reconstituted Grow Your Own Educators program; the Maryland School 
Leadership Academy; the Maryland Teacher Relocation Incentive Grant Program; a 
national teacher recruitment campaign; an MSDE CPG evaluation and a study of special 
education funding) consistent with the purpose of the BMFF, this analysis assumes that 
BMFF funds (to the extent BMFF revenues are available) are used to fund these programs 
and initiatives in subsequent years. This analysis assumes that though a national teacher 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 504/ Page 20 
relocation campaign and teacher relocation incentive grants are authorized through the end 
of fiscal 2029, funding for both ends after fiscal 2028.  
 
Though the Grow Your Own Educators program was established under Chapters 227 and 
228, this analysis covers the full costs assumed to apply to the reconstituted program, rather 
than attempting to net-out the costs under the bill as compared to current law, for which a 
significant record of costs does not exist. Thus, the net reduction in overall State costs 
under the bill (amounting to nearly $550 million over the fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2030 period) 
may be somewhat understated. This analysis further assumes that State funding under the 
Academic Excellence Program covers LEA costs for employing coaches, for those LEAs 
that choose to participate in the program, and that State program costs increase by 
approximately 10% beginning in fiscal 2028, given that coordinators are employed by 
MSDE beginning in that year. This analysis assumes that dedicated State funding for the 
Academic Excellence Program commences in fiscal 2027.  
 
Administrative Costs – Maryland State Department of Education 
 
Alterations to education funding formulas (e.g., the foundation program) under the bill do 
not alter State administrative costs. However, modification of the Grow Your Own 
Educators program, as well as commencement of several initiatives, and other requirements 
under the bill increase MSDE staffing costs. BMFF expenditures increase by $319,818 in 
fiscal 2026, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the effective date for the bill’s 
cost-driving provisions. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager and 
two program coordinators to administer ongoing teacher pipeline work, including 
administration of the Grow Your Own Educators and teacher recruitment and relocation 
activities. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$297,712 
Operating Expenses 
$22,106 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$319,818 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. These costs, as well as 
substantial contractual costs not estimated here, are included in the overall description of 
net changes under the bill shown in Exhibit 3. These overall costs are assumed to include 
teacher pipeline and OCSELT community schools administrative costs and MSDE costs 
associated with the required study of special education funding and MSDE’s evaluation of 
CPG. Further, it is assumed that some of the administrative cost funds included in the 
fiscal 2026 budget will be spent in years beyond fiscal 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 504/ Page 21 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County government expenditures decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
due to the lower per-pupil funding amounts under the bill, which reduces local share, and 
thus for some counties decreases minimum required effort. Exhibit 5 shows the anticipated 
decreases in county government funding for public schools under the bill. Though the bill 
authorizes counties to exceed county charter limitations on local property taxes for the 
purpose of payments by a county on behalf of the local board to TPS/TRS, the bill does 
not require such payments.  
 
 
Exhibit 5 
Estimated Change in Local Appropriations under the Bill 
Fiscal 2026-2030  
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Allegany  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0  
Anne Arundel  
0  
0  
0  
0  
(7,518) 
Baltimore City 
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Baltimore  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Calvert  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Caroline  
0  
(365) 
(589) 
(522) 
(589) 
Carroll  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Cecil 
0  
(1,012) 
(2,068) 
(2,161) 
(2,260) 
Charles 
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Dorchester  
0  
(296) 
(578) 
(571) 
(601) 
Frederick  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Garrett 
0  
(369) 
(783) 
(828) 
(872) 
Harford  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Howard  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Kent  
0  
(206) 
(421) 
(437) 
(454) 
Montgomery  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Prince George’s  
0  
(9,353) 
(19,082) 
(19,849) 
(20,631) 
Queen Anne’s  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
St. Mary’s  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Somerset 
0  
(182) 
(315) 
(295) 
(325) 
Talbot 
0  
(517) 
(1,054) 
(1,106) 
(1,182) 
Washington  
0  
(1,506) 
(2,870) 
(2,842) 
(2,997) 
Wicomico  
0  
(1,011) 
(1,633) 
(1,443) 
(1,630) 
Worcester   
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Total 
$0  
($14,817) 
($29,395) 
($30,055) 
($39,058) 
 
Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
HB 504/ Page 22 
State aid through the Grow Your Own Educators Program amounts to $19.4 million in 
fiscal 2026. Beginning in fiscal 2027, net LEA revenues and expenditures decrease due to 
the decreased State aid and decreased county government funding linked to reduced PPFA 
levels under the bill. Many LEAs presently employ instructional coaches, though not 
necessarily in a manner prescribed by the Academic Excellence Program. To the degree 
that LEAs choose to participate in the Academic Excellence Program and that funding for 
instructional coaches and related costs exceeds current levels of expenditures for coaching 
positions, LEA expenditures increase. Exhibit 6 shows the estimated change in State aid 
received by public schools by county. Exhibit 7 shows the combined impact of both State 
aid and county appropriations changes by county for fiscal 2026 through 2030. 
 
In addition, as shown in Exhibit 2, the bill delays the local implementation of collaborative 
learning by three years and reduces per pupil required expenditures for collaborative time 
in subsequent years, which will provide local school systems with additional flexibility by 
removing statewide required expenditures amounting to approximately $139.6 million, 
$285.5 million, $437.5 million, $311.0 million, and $323.8 million respectively for 
fiscal years 2026 through 2030.   
 
However, mandated local school system distributions to LWDBs are extended to include 
fiscal 2027 and 2028, reducing local school system flexibility in those years by 
approximately $55.5 million and $56.9 million respectively. Thus, LWDBs benefit to the 
extent local school systems would otherwise opt out of distributions to LWDBs in those 
years. The Maryland Department of Labor advises that, in some jurisdictions, LWDBs are 
units of local government.  
 
This analysis assumes that local government (including local school system) expenditures 
are not substantially altered by provisions temporarily exempting certain digital tools from 
certain procurement and use requirements.  
 
Additional Comments:  As of April 1, 2024, MSDE has introduced new licenses and 
licensing requirements for educators, replacing the prior certification system. Although 
current law and the bill refer to “teacher certification,” such language is assumed to apply 
to current teacher licensure standards adopted by MSDE. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
    
HB 504/ Page 23 
 
Exhibit 6 
Estimated Change in State Aid to Public Schools under the Bill 
Fiscal 2026-2030  
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Allegany  
$0  
($786) 
($1,609) 
($1,685) 
($1,759) 
Anne Arundel  
0  
(6,057) 
(12,213) 
(12,395) 
(12,394) 
Baltimore City 
0  
(8,137) 
(25,077) 
(22,987) 
(18,073) 
Baltimore  
0  
(9,893) 
(20,560) 
(22,024) 
(23,417) 
Calvert  
0  
(1,365) 
(2,756) 
(2,891) 
(3,026) 
Caroline  
0  
(548) 
(1,294) 
(1,465) 
(1,500) 
Carroll  
0  
(2,349) 
(4,767) 
(4,925) 
(5,092) 
Cecil 
0  
(1,407) 
(2,918) 
(3,089) 
(3,268) 
Charles 
0  
(2,827) 
(5,766) 
(5,911) 
(6,072) 
Dorchester  
0  
(436) 
(941) 
(1,035) 
(1,098) 
Frederick  
0  
(4,428) 
(8,764) 
(8,881) 
(8,817) 
Garrett 
0  
(151) 
(268) 
(274) 
(281) 
Harford  
0  
(3,577) 
(7,401) 
(7,783) 
(8,130) 
Howard  
0  
(4,521) 
(9,212) 
(9,438) 
(9,639) 
Kent  
0  
(41) 
(77) 
(84) 
(89) 
Montgomery  
0  
(8,966) 
(18,690) 
(19,575) 
(20,177) 
Prince George’s  
0  
(13,326) 
(27,096) 
(28,344) 
(30,146) 
Queen Anne’s  
0  
(427) 
(859) 
(895) 
(918) 
St. Mary’s  
0  
(1,683) 
(3,439) 
(3,668) 
(3,755) 
Somerset 
0  
(269) 
(599) 
(658) 
(663) 
Talbot 
0  
(107) 
(219) 
(230) 
(218) 
Washington  
0  
(2,220) 
(4,699) 
(5,081) 
(5,263) 
Wicomico  
0  
(1,516) 
(3,588) 
(4,083) 
(4,119) 
Worcester   
0  
(165) 
(337) 
(352) 
(367) 
Unallocated 
19,434  
19,434 
19,434 
19,434 
12,922 
Total 
$19,434  
($55,767) 
($143,714) 
($148,318) 
($155,358) 
 
Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
    
HB 504/ Page 24 
 
Exhibit 7 
Estimated Change in State Aid and Local Appropriations under the Bill 
Fiscal 2026-2030  
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Allegany  
$0  
($786) 
($1,609) 
($1,685) 
($1,759) 
Anne Arundel  
0  
(6,057) 
(12,213) 
(12,395) 
(19,912) 
Baltimore City 
0  
(8,137) 
(25,077) 
(22,987) 
(18,073) 
Baltimore  
0  
(9,893) 
(20,560) 
(22,024) 
(23,417) 
Calvert  
0  
(1,365) 
(2,756) 
(2,891) 
(3,026) 
Caroline  
0  
(914) 
(1,883) 
(1,987) 
(2,089) 
Carroll  
0  
(2,349) 
(4,767) 
(4,925) 
(5,092) 
Cecil 
0  
(2,420) 
(4,986) 
(5,250) 
(5,528) 
Charles 
0  
(2,827) 
(5,766) 
(5,911) 
(6,072) 
Dorchester  
0  
(731) 
(1,519) 
(1,606) 
(1,699) 
Frederick  
0  
(4,428) 
(8,764) 
(8,881) 
(8,817) 
Garrett 
0  
(520) 
(1,051) 
(1,102) 
(1,153) 
Harford  
0  
(3,577) 
(7,401) 
(7,783) 
(8,130) 
Howard  
0  
(4,521) 
(9,212) 
(9,438) 
(9,639) 
Kent  
0  
(247) 
(498) 
(521) 
(543) 
Montgomery  
0  
(8,966) 
(18,690) 
(19,575) 
(20,177) 
Prince George’s  
0  
(22,679) 
(46,178) 
(48,192) 
(50,776) 
Queen Anne’s  
0  
(427) 
(859) 
(895) 
(918) 
St. Mary’s  
0  
(1,683) 
(3,439) 
(3,668) 
(3,755) 
Somerset 
0  
(451) 
(914) 
(953) 
(988) 
Talbot 
0  
(624) 
(1,273) 
(1,337) 
(1,399) 
Washington  
0  
(3,726) 
(7,569) 
(7,923) 
(8,260) 
Wicomico  
0  
(2,527) 
(5,221) 
(5,526) 
(5,748) 
Worcester   
0  
(165) 
(337) 
(352) 
(367) 
Unallocated 
19,434  
19,434  
19,434  
19,434  
12,922  
Total 
$19,434  
($70,585) 
($173,109) 
($178,373) 
($194,416) 
 
Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
    
HB 504/ Page 25 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 429 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Council of State 
Governments; Baltimore County Public Schools; Accountability and Implementation 
Board; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - March 28, 2025 
Enrolled - May 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 8, 2025 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
    
HB 504/ Page 26 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Excellence in Maryland Public Schools Act 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 504 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
_____  WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 

END OF PAGE 26