START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 584 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 584 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Transfers Between Systems - Workgroup 
 
 
This bill requires the State Retirement Agency (SRA) to convene and staff a workgroup of 
stakeholders to study the requirements and processes for transfers of member service 
between State and local retirement and pension systems and to make recommendations to 
improve the process of transfers. By December 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. SRA can convene and staff the workgroup with existing budgeted 
resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must: 
 
 
review federal and State requirements pertaining to transfers of service credit 
between systems; 
 
review Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article for statutory 
inconsistencies and duplicative or ambiguous provisions; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 584/ Page 2 
 
examine any other issues related to transfers of member service between State and 
local retirement and pension systems; and 
 
recommend legislative changes, as appropriate. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 457 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2