START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 586 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 586 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Election Judges - Compensation 
 
 
This bill establishes that a local board of elections must pay an election judge for each 
training the election judge completes only after the election judge actually serves an 
Election Day or early voting day. In addition, for service as an election judge, the bill 
authorizes a public school student to either (1) earn hours toward the service-learning 
requirement for graduation under State Board of Education regulations or (2) receive the 
applicable election judge compensation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Election Judge Training Program and Compensation 
 
The State Board of Elections (SBE) is required to develop (and oversee the implementation 
of), in consultation with the local boards of elections, a program of instruction of election 
judges. Each local board must conduct election judge training based on the program 
developed by SBE, and each election judge, unless appointed under emergency 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 586/ Page 2 
circumstances, must participate in the program. A local board must pay an election judge 
at least $50 for each training the election judge completes. 
 
The compensation for each election judge who is not a returning election judge must be at 
least $250 per day for each Election Day and each early voting day actually served. For 
each election judge who is a returning election judge, the compensation for each 
Election Day and each early voting day actually served must be at least $100 more per day 
than the compensation provided to an election judge who is not a returning election judge. 
“Returning election judge” means an election judge who has served a term of office for the 
immediately preceding statewide election. 
 
Student Service-learning Requirement 
 
Pursuant to State Board of Education regulations, in order to graduate, students must 
complete (1) 75 hours of student service that includes preparation, action, and reflection 
components and that, at the discretion of the local school board system, may begin during 
the middle grades or (2) a locally designed program in student service that has been 
approved by the State Superintendent of Schools. (Maryland State Department of 
Education guidelines for student service-learning indicate that any activity that 
compensates a student with money, goods, or services may not be counted toward the 
service-learning graduation requirement.) 
 
Under the Election Law Article, a minor who is at least age 16 and who is a registered voter 
may be appointed and serve as an election judge. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 534 (Senators Kagan and Gallion) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 586/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 22, 2025 
Enrolled - April 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 15, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3