START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 564 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 564 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Dorchester County - Alcoholic Beverages - Venue Beer, Wine, and Liquor 
License 
 
 
This bill establishes a venue beer, wine, and liquor license in Dorchester County and 
authorizes the Dorchester County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to 
a nonprofit or for-profit retail business that hosts weddings, banquets, parties, meetings, 
and similar events at a venue that (1) is at least 2,000 square feet in size; (2) can 
accommodate at least 100 individuals; and (3) has adequate bathroom facilities. The license 
authorizes a holder to sell or serve beer, wine, and liquor at retail, for on-premises 
consumption during an event in which food is also provided. The hours of sale are 
Monday through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 1:45 a.m. the following day and on 
Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. The annual fee for the license is $1,500, and the 
license cannot be transferred to another location. The bill also authorizes the board to issue 
a venue beer, wine, and liquor license to an establishment within 300 feet of a place of 
worship or school if the board receives written consent for the issuance of the license from 
each place of worship or school. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Dorchester County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent 
that venue beer, wine, and liquor licenses are issued under the bill. Dorchester County can 
handle any additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potentially meaningful for a nonprofit or 
retail business that is able to sell beer, wine, and liquor at their venues under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 564/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners that issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner and may authorize the sale of alcohol for 
on-premises consumption. For example, Class A licenses generally only allow the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption, and Class B licenses are generally 
issued to restaurants and allow the sale of alcoholic beverages with food. 
 
Each local jurisdiction has its own regulatory processes and requirements in place for who 
can apply for and obtain a license and how many licenses, in total, may be issued for use 
in the jurisdiction. 
 
In Dorchester County, the board is prohibited from issuing a new license for an 
establishment that is within 300 feet in a direct line of a place of worship or a public or 
nonpublic kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school except for (1) a license for a 
premises that was licensed on October 1, 1996; (2) a class B beer, wine, and liquor license 
for a premises in Cambridge, Secretary, or Hurlock; or (3) a temporary license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 802 (Dorchester County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Dorchester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2