START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 577 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 577 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation - Enforcement for Miscellaneous State Business Licenses - 
Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Comptroller’s Office to study the process by which its Field 
Enforcement Bureau enforces miscellaneous business licenses under Title 17 of the 
Business Regulation Article. The Comptroller’s Office must consult with certain 
stakeholders and, by December 1, 2025, submit a report of its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office can conduct the study and prepare the report with 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The report must include the following elements: 
 
 
a review of the process by which the Field Enforcement Bureau of the Comptroller’s 
Office enforces the miscellaneous State business licenses; 
 
a review and recommendation as to whether civil citations could be used rather than 
(or in conjunction with) criminal citations to enforce the miscellaneous State 
business licenses; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 577/ Page 2 
 
recommendations on how to ensure that the Field Enforcement Bureau can, for the 
purposes of license enforcement, properly identify and contact the owner, operator, 
or responsible party for a miscellaneous State business license; 
 
recommendations on how to ensure citations related to miscellaneous State business 
license enforcement are only issued to the business owner, operator, or responsible 
party; and 
 
recommendations on how the Field Enforcement Bureau can effectively issue 
citations related to miscellaneous State business license enforcement when the 
business owner does not reside in the State. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Miscellaneous Business Licenses 
 
Title 17 of the Business Regulation Article applies to 15 categories of miscellaneous 
business licenses, including construction licenses, junk dealer or scrap metal processor 
licenses, restaurant licenses, traders’ licenses, and vending machine licenses. 
 
General Duties and Powers of the Comptroller and Related Penalties 
 
To enforce provisions of State law governing certain business licenses, the Comptroller 
may make investigations and hold hearings on any relevant matter, at any time or place in 
the State, and, in connection with an investigation or hearing, may (1) administer oaths; 
(2) examine witnesses; (3) receive evidence; and (4) issue subpoenas for the attendance of 
witnesses to testify or to produce evidence. 
 
Except as otherwise specified, a person who violates provisions of State law related to 
doing business without a license (and failure to display a license) is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $300 or imprisonment of up 
to 30 days. Each agent or officer of a corporation convicted of violating these provisions 
who actually engaged in the unlicensed business is individually subject to the penalties 
provided by law. This does not affect any other penalty specifically provided by law for a 
violation of a license law. 
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that, under the provisions described 
above, when a business engages in unlicensed activity, each agent or officer is individually 
subject to the applicable penalties, which can include a misdemeanor and a $300 fine. The 
Comptroller’s Office further advises this provision can lead to enforcement actions on 
individuals who have nothing to do with the licensing or operation of the business – but 
are nevertheless potentially subject to penalties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 577/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 664 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3