START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 514 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 514 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - State Board of Chiropractic Examiners - Revisions 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes to the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners and the 
law governing chiropractic licensure, including (1) altering board member appointment 
methods; (2) expanding disciplinary grounds and granting the board authority to conduct 
certain examinations of licensees and inspections; (3) revising licensure qualifications, 
including changes to educational requirements and board-administered examinations; and 
(4) replacing the extern license with a “preceptorship” and authorizing the board to issue 
temporary licenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled within existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. There is no material impact on the Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services’ Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
(CJIS-CR) associated with criminal history records checks (CHRC) for temporary licenses. 
Potential minimal general fund revenue increase to the extent additional individuals are 
issued a civil fine in addition to or in lieu of disciplinary action. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The State Board of Chiropractic Examiners is responsible 
for ensuring that chiropractors and chiropractic assistants are properly educated, trained, 
and licensed and comply with laws and regulations pertaining to their respective scope of 
practice, including continuing education requirements. The board also conducts 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 514/ Page 2 
investigations and disciplinary hearings relating to any violations of applicable laws and 
regulations. The board comprises seven volunteer members:  five licensed chiropractors; 
and two consumer members. 
 
Board Member Appointment Methods and Requirements:  Under current law, the Governor 
must appoint the chiropractor members of the board, with the advice of the Secretary of 
Health, and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from a list of qualified individuals 
submitted to the Governor by the Maryland Chiropractic Association (MCA). The names 
on the list must be five times the number of vacancies, and the list must include the name 
of the incumbent member unless the incumbent declines renomination. Each chiropractor 
member of the board must be a resident of the State, a licensed chiropractor of integrity 
and ability who is in active practice, a graduate of a resident course in chiropractic, and an 
individual who has practiced chiropractic in the State for at least five consecutive years. 
 
Under the bill, the list of names submitted by MCA must be three times the number of 
vacancies. In addition to the list of qualified individuals submitted by MCA, the Governor 
may appoint the chiropractor members from among the individuals who provide a 
statement of nomination signed by at least 20 chiropractors licensed in the State. The bill 
also removes the requirement that a chiropractor member be a graduate of a resident course 
in chiropractic. 
 
Disciplinary Actions and Investigative Procedures 
 
Disciplinary Grounds:  Under current law, the board may deny a license to any applicant, 
reprimand any licensee, place any license on probation with or without conditions, or 
suspend or revoke a license, or any combination thereof if the applicant or licensee violates 
specified disciplinary grounds. 
 
The bill adds three additional disciplinary grounds under which the board may take action 
against an applicant or licensee:  (1) actions inconsistent with generally accepted 
professional standards in practice of chiropractic; (2) failure to cooperate with a lawful 
investigation conducted by the board; and (3) except in an emergency life-threatening 
situation where it is not feasible or practicable, failure to comply with the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) guidelines on standard precautions. 
 
Disciplinary Actions and Civil Penalties:  Under current law, if after a hearing the board 
finds that there are grounds to suspend or revoke a license, the board may suspend or revoke 
the license and/or impose a penalty of up to $5,000 for each violation. The board must pay 
any penalty collected to the State general fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 514/ Page 3 
The bill specifies that, if after a hearing the board finds there are grounds to reprimand any 
license or place any licensee on probation, the board may also take those actions and/or 
impose the $5,000 civil penalty. 
 
Investigations and Inspections:  The bill authorizes the board to conduct an unannounced 
inspection of the office of a chiropractor (except for offices in a hospital, related institution, 
freestanding medical facility, or freestanding birthing center) against whom a complaint 
has been filed with the board regarding a violation of CDC guidelines on standard 
precautions and related guidelines in regulations adopted by the board to determine 
noncompliance with the guidelines at that office. 
 
Examination by a Health Care Professional:  Under the bill, if the board has reason to 
believe and objective evidence that an applicant or licensee may cause harm to individuals 
affected by the applicant’s or licensee’s practice of chiropractic, the board must require the 
applicant or licensee to submit to an appropriate examination by a health care provider 
designated by the board. In return for the privilege to practice chiropractic in the State, 
each applicant or licensee is deemed to have consented to such an examination and waived 
any claim of privilege as to the testimony or examination reports of the examining health 
care professional. Failure or refusal to submit to an examination is prima facie evidence of 
the applicant’s or licensee’s inability to practice chiropractic competently unless the board 
finds that the failure or refusal was beyond the control of the licensee. The board must pay 
the cost of any such examinations. 
 
Chiropractic Colleges, Schools, and Programs of Study 
 
Under current law, the board must approve schools of chiropractic. The board may inspect 
any school to determine whether it meets the standards required by law and approve a 
school in another state upon a specified recommendation. 
 
The bill repeals these provisions. The bill also broadly repeals the terms chiropractic 
schools or colleges and instead specifies that completion/graduation from chiropractic 
programs of study is required to meet licensure requirements. 
 
Educational Requirements 
 
Under current law, to qualify for a license (both with and without the right to practice 
physical therapy), an individual must (1) hold a bachelor’s degree from a college or 
university approved by an accrediting agency of the U.S. Department of Education (ED) 
and have satisfactorily completed college courses required by the board and (2) be a 
graduate of a school of chiropractic approved by the board. Alternatively, an individual 
must be (1) licensed in another state for at least two years and (2) a graduate of a school of 
chiropractic that has been approved by the Council on Chiropractic Education (CCE) 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 514/ Page 4 
within four years after the applicant graduated from that school and that the board 
determines had standards comparable to an approved school at the time the applicant 
graduated. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement (and certain exemptions to the requirement) to hold a 
bachelor’s degree and satisfactorily complete college courses required by the board. 
Instead, an individual must be a graduate of a chiropractic program of study that was, at 
the time of the applicant’s graduation, accredited by CCE, an equivalent entity recognized 
by ED or another entity that accredits programs offering instruction in chiropractic, or an 
equivalent foreign agency that accredits programs offering instruction in chiropractic. 
Alternatively, an individual must be (1) licensed in another state for at least two years and 
(2) a graduate of a chiropractic program of study that has been accredited by CCE, an 
equivalent entity recognized by ED or another entity that accredits programs offering 
instruction in chiropractic, or an equivalent foreign agency that accredits programs offering 
instruction in chiropractic within four years after the applicant graduates and that the board 
determines had standards comparable to an accredited chiropractic program of study at the 
time the applicant graduated. 
 
Externs and Preceptorships 
 
Under current law, an extern license authorizes an individual to practice chiropractic under 
the direct supervision of a board-approved licensed chiropractor. 
 
The bill repeals the extern license and instead adopts language allowing a “preceptorship,” 
which means an organized system of clinical experience that allows a student enrolled in a 
chiropractic program of study to be paired with a clinical preceptor for the purpose of 
attaining specific learning objectives. The bill also exempts a student of chiropractic 
engaged in a preceptorship, from licensure requirements provided the preceptorship occurs 
under the direct supervision of a board-approved licensed chiropractor as part of a specified 
educational program. The board must adopt regulations governing preceptorships. 
 
Temporary Licenses 
 
The bill authorizes the board to issue a temporary license (in place of the former extern 
license). Qualified applicants must (1) submit an application provided by the board; 
(2) have graduated from an accredited chiropractic program of study; (3) have begun the 
process of applying for a license to practice chiropractic, but not met requirements to 
qualify for a license; (4) have been licensed in another State for at least two years or 
graduated from an accredited chiropractic program of study within 6 months preceding the 
application; (5) have submitted written, verified evidence of a CHRC; (6) agree to practice 
under the direct supervision of a board-approved supervisor who is a licensed chiropractor 
while the temporary license is in effect; and (7) pay the temporary license fee set by the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 514/ Page 5 
board. A temporary license expires 6 months after the date of issue and may be extended 
every 90 days provided the total length of renewal does not exceed 12 months from the 
date of initial issuance. 
 
Chiropractic Examinations 
 
Under current law, the board must develop examination criteria, including the process for 
grading, and notify each qualified applicant of the time and place of examination, including 
publishing the time and place of each examination in a newspaper of general circulation at 
least 30 days before the examination. The exam must include a written practical or oral 
section on clinical subjects as specified. Applicants qualify for a license to practice 
chiropractic only if the applicant answers at least 60% of the questions in each subsection 
other than on physical therapy and 75% of all questions on the examination other than those 
on physical therapy. To receive a license to practice chiropractic with the right to practice 
physical therapy, the applicant must answer 60% of the questions in each subsection and 
75% of all questions on the exam. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that notice of examinations be published in the newspaper, 
as well as specifications for exam content and grading procedures. Instead, the bill specifies 
that the exam must include the general regulations of the State on the practice of 
chiropractic and the laws and regulations on infection control. Applicants qualify for a 
license to practice chiropractic only if the applicant answers at least 75% of all questions. 
Each applicant must pay an examination fee set by the board, which entitles the applicant 
to take the examination twice. In addition to the board-administered examination, an 
applicant must pass all applicable sections of the national examination administered by the 
National Board of Chiropractic Examiners or its successor entity, an equivalent national 
chiropractic testing entity approved by the board, or an equivalent foreign chiropractic 
testing entity approved by the board. 
 
Inactive Status 
 
Under current law, the board must place a licensee on inactive status if the licensee submits 
an application and pays the inactive status fee. A licensee may reactivate a license at any 
time if the licensee pays the reinstatement fee and complies with continuing education 
requirements in effect for the renewal period in which the licensee seeks to reactivate the 
license. 
 
Under the bill, the ability to reactivate at any time is repealed. A licensee must also comply 
with cardiopulmonary resuscitation requirements to reactivate a license. The reinstatement 
fee is renamed the reactivation fee. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 514/ Page 6 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Impact on the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners 
 
Examination by a Health Care Provider:  The bill requires the board to pay the cost of any 
examination by a health care provider when the board has reason to believe and objective 
evidence that an applicant or licensee may cause harm. The cost of an examination depends 
on the health care provider designated by the board for each investigation. However, the 
overall impact to the board is assumed to be minimal as the number of such examinations 
is likely minimal. The board advises that existing resources are sufficient to cover any 
examination costs. 
 
Board-administered Examination:  The board can alter board-administered examination 
content to include the general laws and regulations of the State on the practice of 
chiropractic and the laws and regulations on infection control without meaningful 
additional expenditures. Board special fund expenditures decrease minimally from repeal 
of the requirement to publish the time and location of exams in the newspaper. Provisions 
requiring that board-administered examination fees cover only two attempts at a board 
examination have no meaningful impact on board revenues as the board advises the change 
codifies current practice. 
 
Temporary Licenses:  This analysis assumes no change in board revenues as a result of 
repealing the extern license and establishing a temporary license provided (1) the board 
sets temporary license fees at a rate similar to the rate for extern licenses and (2) a similar 
number of individuals apply for and pay temporary license fees as currently pay extern 
license fees. 
 
Impact on the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services  
 
CJIS-CR collects, manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history records 
information for criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) 
purposes. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) charges a fee of $12.00 for a national 
check. CJIS-CR collects the fee from the applicant and reimburses the FBI. CJIS-CR 
submits requests for national criminal records to the FBI electronically. Each individual 
who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a CHRC is required to pay $50 for a State and national 
CHRC, including a $20 fingerprinting fee, a $12 FBI fee, an $18 fee to CJIS-CR. 
 
The bill requires applicants for a temporary license from the board to obtain a CHRC. Thus, 
CJIS CR revenues increase for fees collected from applicants. Such revenues are 
anticipated to offsets any costs to complete the CHRC. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 514/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 52 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7