START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 573 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 573 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Dental Examiners - Expanded Function Dental Assistants - 
Education and Reinstatement 
 
 
This bill expands the authorized courses of study an applicant may complete to qualify for 
an expanded function dental assistant (EFDA) certificate. A course of study for initial 
certification must include at least 35 hours of instruction consisting of both online and 
in-person instruction. The State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) must adopt regulations 
(1) requiring continuing education, including clinical hands-on training, for EFDAs to be 
offered by State-based dental professional societies affiliated with national dental 
organizations and other specified entities and (2) specifying the required number of hours 
for in-person instruction, online instruction, and clinical hands-on training. BDE must 
reinstate an EFDA certificate that is expired only if the holder (1) has completed the 
continuing education requirements set by BDE; (2) has submitted a renewal application to 
BDE before the deadline set by the board; and (3) pays a renewal fee set by BDE. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  BDE may approve a course of study for an applicant to qualify as an 
EFDA if it is part of (1) a dental assisting course or program offered by the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 573/ Page 2 
Dale Foundation, an affiliate of the Dental Assisting National Board (DANB), or any 
successor entity or (2) an orthodontic dental assisting course or program offered by the 
Trapezio Orthodontic Assistant Training Solutions, or any successor entity. 
 
Current Law:  An “expanded function dental assistant” means a licensed dental assistant 
who is certified by BDE to perform specific intraoral procedures. An EFDA may perform 
a procedure if a licensed dentist (1) gives specific instructions to perform the procedure 
and (2) directly supervises the procedure. 
 
Qualifications to Obtain Expanded Function Dental Assistant Certification  
 
To qualify for certification as an EFDA, an applicant must (1) be of good moral character; 
(2) be at least 18 years old; (3) have graduated high school or attained a high school 
equivalency; (4) have successfully completed a board-approved course of study related to 
the intraoral procedure for which the applicant has applied for a certificate; (5) have the 
appropriate certification from DANB; (6) have passed any examination provided for in 
regulations adopted by BDE; and (7) submit to a State criminal history records check. The 
applicant must submit an application as required by BDE and pay an application fee. 
 
An applicant who qualifies for a certificate is entitled to be examined as required by BDE. 
BDE must notify each qualified applicant of the time and place of the examination. BDE 
must determine the subjects, scope, form, and the passing score for examinations. An 
applicant must pay an examination fee to BDE. The fee must be an amount that does not 
exceed the costs of administering the examination. 
 
Each certificate must include the (1) name of the certified individual; (2) date the 
certification was issued; (3) intraoral procedures that the individual is qualified to perform; 
(4) serial number; (5) signatures of the BDE president and secretary; and (6) seal of BDE. 
The board must replace a lost or destroyed certificate if the certified dental assistant pays 
a fee set by the board that approximated the actual cost of replacing the certificate. 
 
Approved Course of Study 
 
BDE may not approve a course of study for an applicant to qualify as an EFDA unless it is 
part of (1) a U.S. Department of Labor Job Corps Dental Assisting program; (2) a dental 
assisting program located within an institution of postsecondary education that is 
accredited by an accrediting institution recognized by the U.S. Department of Education 
(ED); (3) a dental assisting program that is located within a high school and is recognized 
by an accrediting body recognized ED or the high school accrediting body of a State; or 
(4) a dental assisting program that is accredited by the Council on Dental Accreditation or 
a successor organization. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 573/ Page 3 
Certificate Renewal and Reinstatement 
 
An EFDA certificate expires on the date set by BDE, unless renewed for an additional term. 
At least one month before a certificate expires, BDE must send a renewal notice stating the 
date the current certificate expires, the date by which the renewal application must be 
received by BDE, and the amount of the renewal fee. The certificate and any renewal must 
be kept in the office where the dental assistant is employed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 792 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3