START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 553 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 553 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Maternal Health Self-Measured Blood 
Pressure Monitoring 
 
 
This bill requires Medicaid, beginning January 1, 2026, to provide coverage for 
self-measured blood pressure monitoring to recipients who (1) are pregnant; (2) are 
postpartum; or (3) have been diagnosed with chronic kidney disease, diabetes, heart 
disease, or a cardiometabolic disease. Coverage must include (1) the provision of validated 
home blood pressure monitors and (2) reimbursement of health care provider and other 
staff time, specifically for patient training, transmission of blood pressure data, 
interpretation of blood pressure readings and reporting, remote patient monitoring, and the 
delivery of co-interventions, including educational materials or classes. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As Medicaid currently covers self-measured blood pressure monitoring, 
there is no meaningful fiscal impact to apply such coverage to specified diagnoses. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Health care providers at local health departments may receive 
reimbursement for services, as specified under the bill. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 669 and 670 of 2022 require Medicaid to provide coverage for 
self-measured blood pressure monitoring for all Medicaid recipients diagnosed with 
uncontrolled high blood pressure. Coverage must include (1) the provision of validated 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 553/ Page 2 
home blood pressure monitors and (2) reimbursement of health care provider and other 
staff time used for patient training, transmission of blood pressure data, interpretation of 
blood pressure readings and reporting, and the delivery of co-interventions, including 
educational materials or classes, behavioral change management, and medication 
management. 
 
“Self-measured blood pressure monitoring” means the regular management of blood 
pressure by the patient outside the clinical setting, either at home or elsewhere, requiring 
the use of a home blood pressure measurement device by the patient. “Validated home 
blood pressure monitor” means a blood pressure measurement device that has been 
validated for accuracy and is listed in the U.S. Blood Pressure Validated Device Listing.  
 
MDH advises that it covers blood pressure monitoring in the home, including provision of 
validated home blood pressure monitors and reimbursement for patient training, data 
transmission, interpretation of readings and reporting, and co-intervention deliveries. 
Coverage is available to any Medicaid participant who qualifies based on medical necessity 
and is capable of using the equipment regardless of diagnosis. No prior authorization is 
required. 
 
Participants may receive up to 60 days of monitoring per episode of care, and up to 
four episodes of care per year. MDH reimburses providers at a rate of $125 per member 
per month to cover equipment installation in the patient’s home, patient education on how 
to use the device, and ongoing monitoring of the data collected. The cost of the equipment 
is covered separately under MDH’s durable medical equipment benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 94 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 553/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3