START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 506 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 506 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Chesapeake Bay Legacy Act 
 
 
This Administration bill makes changes to State law relating to (1) a Maryland Leaders in 
Environmentally Engaged Farming (LEEF) Program; (2) regenerative practices and 
traditions, and healthy soils; (3) finfish harvested and processed by ike jime; (4) water 
quality monitoring; (5) fishery management plans; (6) aquaculture leases; (7) the 
Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership; (8) water quality trading; and (9) stream and 
floodplain restoration project requirements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and the 
LEEF Program terminates June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures and revenues are affected, as summarized in the table 
below, and discussed and shown in more detail in the Analysis section (including detail of 
indeterminate special fund revenues in FY 2026 through 2030 not fully reflected in the 
table below). The FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $500,000 
in general funds for the LEEF Program, contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross 
file. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$500,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
GF Expenditure 
$500,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
SF Expenditure 
$500,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
Net Effect 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may increase, as discussed below. Local 
expenditures are not directly affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 506/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill makes the following summarized changes related to the water 
quality and resources of the Chesapeake Bay:   
 
(1) 
LEEF Program (pp. 3-7 of the bill) – The bill establishes the LEEF Program to 
incentivize farmers’ adoption of (1) environmental (including bay- and 
climate-related) conservation practices and (2) practices that demonstrate 
engagement with Maryland communities (“community best practices”). The 
program is intended, in part, to encourage adoption of multiple practices across a 
farming operation or multiple farming operations and provides certification, 
according to tiers of recognition, for program participants. The program is 
administered by the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), in coordination 
with other specified agencies, and is supported by a LEEF Program Fund. The 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year 
thereafter (through fiscal 2030), an appropriation of at least $900,000 to the fund. 
The LEEF Program Fund may only be used to support actions associated with 
fulfilling the program’s purpose and to cover MDA’s costs to administer the 
program; however, not more than 20% of the fund may be used for the department’s 
administrative costs each fiscal year. 
 
(2) 
Regenerative Practices and Traditions – and – Healthy Soils (pp. 8-9, 22-23) 
– The bill includes “regenerative practices and traditions” under the definition of 
“healthy soils” under the Maryland Healthy Soils Program. “Regenerative practices 
and traditions” are a form of land management and stewardship approaches and 
practices that (1) draws on traditions and innovations from African, Indigenous, and 
original land stewards; (2) promotes culturally important food and climate justice 
programs and initiatives; and (3) enhances the land and ecosystem. The bill also 
authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to lease department-owned 
or -managed land to a person implementing practices that support healthy soils and 
regenerative practices and traditions. The lease term may be for a minimum of 
10 years. 
 
(3) 
Direct Sale of Finfish Harvested and Processed by ike jime (pp. 9-10) – The bill 
establishes that a person who has a tidal fish license or commercial Chesapeake 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 506/ Page 3 
Channa license does not need to be licensed as a food establishment in order to 
harvest and process finfish on a vessel, by ike jime, for direct sale to restaurants. 
 
(4) 
Water Quality Monitoring Program (pp. 10-11) – The bill establishes a 
Water Quality Monitoring Program within DNR to (1) provide for a consistent 
statewide approach for improving water quality monitoring data, consistent with the 
most up-to-date scientific knowledge and technologies; (2) conduct long-term and 
targeted short-term monitoring and assessments to develop an understanding of and 
guide programs; (3) integrate monitoring data into planning processes to inform 
policy choices about the effectiveness of management actions; and (4) provide the 
general public with readily available monitoring data to guide recreational and other 
passive uses. DNR may assess and incorporate water quality monitoring data that 
meets the quality assurance and use goals of the State data sets into the program. 
 
(5) 
Fishery Management Plan Requirements (pp. 11-20) – The bill makes changes 
to provisions governing fishery management plans, the most significant of which 
reduces the number of specifically identified species for which DNR must prepare 
a fishery management plan and allows the department to (1) manage species in 
accordance with interstate/regional fishery management plans (of the Atlantic States 
Marine Fisheries Commission or a federal Regional Fishery Management Council), 
if applicable, and (2) prepare a Maryland-specific supplement to those plans if more 
restrictive measures are necessary to conserve the fishery. The bill retains DNR’s 
ability to prepare fishery management plans for any species necessary, including the 
remaining specifically identified species for which DNR is required to prepare a 
plan and other species for which there is not an interstate/regional plan. The bill also 
(1) requires changes in environmental/climate factors to be taken into account in the 
department’s plans (to the extent possible); (2) ensures that commercial and 
recreational fishing participants, including individuals licensed to guide fishing 
parties and charter boat captains, are each accounted for in meeting specified fishery 
management plan requirements; (3) changes a requirement that conservation and 
management measures implementing a fishery management plan be adopted by 
regulation to instead be an authorization for the measures to be adopted by 
regulation; and (4) modifies a hearing requirement (affecting Worcester County) for 
plans affecting the coastal bays. 
 
(6) 
Aquaculture Lease Issuance and Reporting (pp. 20-22) – The bill makes changes 
to procedures and requirements applicable to the issuance of an aquaculture lease, 
most notably:  (1) clarifying/establishing timing of when a public informational 
meeting on, and/or a protest of, a lease application may be requested/submitted; 
(2) allowing DNR to require mediation before transmitting a protest to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings; (3) authorizing DNR, in consultation with the 
Aquaculture Coordinating Council, to charge a lease applicant reasonable 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 506/ Page 4 
advertising and survey fees; and (4) modifying an annual reporting deadline (from 
January 1 to January 31), to give a leaseholder additional time to report on the use 
of the lease during the prior year. 
 
(7) 
Whole 
Watershed 
Restoration 
Partnership 
Permit 
Coordination 
(pp. 23-29) – The bill adds requirements under the Whole Watershed Restoration 
Partnership (established by Chapters 558 and 559 of 2024), specifically:  (1) that 
the State management team and project sponsor meet as soon as possible after a 
project is approved, inviting all relevant State and federal agencies, to develop a 
plan for permitting the project; (2) that the permit tracking dashboard that the 
Secretary of Natural Resources must establish (under Chapters 558 and 559) include 
the plan for permitting the project (with any confidential information redacted); and 
(3) that a project sponsor provide quarterly updates to the State management team 
with information necessary for the permit tracking dashboard, including the status 
of all State and federal permits. 
 
(8) 
Water Quality Trading Credits for Oyster Restoration Projects (p. 29) – The 
bill requires that the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), by 
December 31, 2025, (1) authorize oyster restoration projects funded in whole or in 
part by federal, State, or local governments to be eligible to generate water quality 
trading credits and (2) develop a process for certifying water quality trading credits 
generated by oyster restoration projects. 
 
(9) 
Applicability of Stream and Floodplain Restoration Project Requirements 
(p. 29) – The bill establishes that requirements established under Chapters 558 and 
559 for stream and floodplain restoration projects (which, under Chapters 558 and 
559, do not take effect until July 1, 2025) do not apply to permit or license 
applications submitted to MDE before July 1, 2025. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The following provide relevant current law and background 
corresponding to the provisions above:   
 
(1) 
MDA Funding for Conservation Practices – For context regarding MDA funding 
for resource and environmental conservation practices, the fiscal 2026 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly allocates $20.7 million (accounting for a 
$2.0 million contingent reduction fulfilled by the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2025, House Bill 352, as passed by the General Assembly) directly 
to the department’s conservation grants program. The conservation grants program 
is responsible for management and distribution of grants to Maryland farmers to 
implement best management practices that address resource concerns and promote 
environmental sustainability. In addition to the $20.7 million directly allocated to 
the program, the program is also expected to receive $14.9 million in fiscal 2026 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 506/ Page 5 
from funding allocated to DNR under the fiscal 2026 budget. The $20.7 million 
directly allocated to MDA includes $500,000 in general funds for the LEEF 
Program, contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file. 
 
(2) 
Maryland Healthy Soils Program and DNR Agricultural Leases – MDA’s 
Maryland Healthy Soils Program provides incentives, including research, 
education, technical assistance, and financial assistance, to farmers to implement 
farm management practices that contribute to healthy soils. The Governor is 
required to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of at least $500,000 
for the program (which is included in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly). DNR leases property through its Land and Property 
Management Program, pursuant to authorization under State law for real property 
of the State to be leased for consideration the Board of Public Works (BPW) decides 
is adequate. A BPW advisory on DNR-managed property leases authorizes DNR to 
lease agricultural land and outbuildings for a term of five years or less. The bill’s 
authorization of specified leases is not expected to materially affect the overall 
amount of land leased by DNR. 
 
(3) 
Harvesting Finfish Using ike jime – A summary of a University of 
Rhode Island-led grant project funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration in 2023, describes ike jime as a traditional Japanese dispatch method 
that preserves the maximum freshness and taste of a fish (making the most 
difference when fish is consumed raw, such as in sushi or ceviche). DNR indicates 
that the bill ensures finfish harvesters that they can use this dispatch method (that 
involves piercing the skin of the fish) without needing to be licensed as a food 
establishment. Under State law, food processing plants (including, with respect to 
fisheries, crab meat picking plants and shellfish plants) are included under the 
definition of “food establishment.” 
 
(4) 
Water Quality Monitoring – DNR indicates that the bill’s establishment of the 
Water Quality Monitoring Program in statute formalizes the department’s current 
water quality monitoring in tidal and nontidal waters of the State and establishes 
policy directives to align existing work with scientific recommendations and 
improve restoration outcomes. The bill’s authorization for DNR to assess and 
incorporate water quality monitoring data that meets quality assurance and use goals 
allows the department to incorporate community groups’ water quality monitoring 
data when appropriate.  
 
(5) 
Fishery Management Plans – DNR is required by statute to prepare fishery 
management plans for various listed species and has specified authority to prepare 
plans for additional species. The plans contain a systematic description of a given 
fishery and the objectives and conservation and management measures for the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 506/ Page 6 
fishery. Various requirements apply to both the plans and the conservation and 
management measures in the plans. Regardless of other statutory provisions under 
State fisheries law, once a fishery management plan has been adopted by regulation, 
the fishery must be harvested in accordance with the conservation and management 
measures in the plan and any regulations implementing or amending that plan. The 
department indicates that the bill’s changes (1) more formally recognize the role of 
interstate/regional fishery management plans in the State’s fishery management 
efforts and (2) include in statute recognition of environmental/climate effects on 
fisheries in the State’s fishery management efforts.  
 
(6) 
Aquaculture Lease Issuance and Reporting – Among other requirements that 
must be met for an aquaculture lease application, an applicant must mark the 
proposed area and DNR must provide notice (to affected property owners and 
others) and advertising of the proposed lease. Within 30 days of the publication of 
the last advertisement, any person with a specific right, duty, privilege, or interest 
different from the general public that may be adversely affected may file a protest 
with DNR, to be heard in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act. The 
department must also hold a public informational meeting on a proposed lease on 
the request of any person. By January 1 of each year, a leaseholder must provide 
DNR a report documenting the use of the lease during the prior year. 
 
(7) 
Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership – Chapters 558 and 559 established 
the Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership to accelerate restoration of the 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays and their watersheds by equitably focusing 
assistance on actions and areas that are cost-effective and likely to demonstrate a 
rapid systemic response to restoration activity, including rapid de-listing of impaired 
streams identified under the federal Clean Water Act. The partnership is 
administered by a State management team that approves up to five projects every 
five years and works with, and awards funding to, project sponsors over those 
five years, including providing for coordinated and transparent State permitting, 
aided by a permit tracking dashboard that must be established by the Secretary of 
Natural Resources. DNR indicates that the bill clarifies in statute necessary 
coordination of permitting for projects under the partnership. 
 
(8) 
MDE’s Water Quality Trading Program – MDE’s Water Quality Trading 
Program (COMAR 26.08.11) creates a public marketplace of credits for nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and sediment reductions, where pollution sources subject to pollution 
limits can purchase credits to help comply with those limits, creating revenue for 
those creating nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment reductions. The program 
currently offers certification of nutrient reduction credits for oyster aquaculture but 
not for oyster restoration projects, and public funding cannot be used for generation 
of credits. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 506/ Page 7 
(9) 
Stream and Floodplain Restoration Project Requirements – Chapters 558 and 
559 (which established the Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership) also 
established additional requirements applicable to stream and floodplain restoration 
projects related to public notice and application review by MDE. Those additional 
requirements take effect July 1, 2025. MDE indicates that, in the absence of the bill, 
it does not intend to impose the additional requirements on applications submitted 
before July 1, 2025, but establishing in the law that the additional requirements only 
apply to applications submitted on or after July 1, 2025, helps to remove any 
uncertainty or risk for applicants and MDE regarding whether the requirements 
apply, beginning July 1, 2025, to any applications submitted prior to July 1, 2025. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The estimated effect of the bill on State finances is summarized in 
Exhibit 1 and discussed further below.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated State Fiscal Effect of the Bill 
 
Provision 
Description 
Agency 
Type 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
LEEF Program MDA 
GF Exp 
$500,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
$900,000 
 
 
 
SF Rev 
500,000 
900,000 
900,000 
900,000 
900,000 
 
 
 
SF Exp 
500,000 
900,000 
900,000 
900,000 
900,000 
 
 
 
SF Pos’s 
(New) 
1.0 
1.0 
 
 
 
6 
Aquaculture 
advertising/ 
survey fees 
DNR 
SF Rev 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
8 
Water quality 
trading credits 
for oyster 
restoration 
projects 
DNR 
SF Rev 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
State Net Effect 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
-/(-) 
Total Pos’s 
(New) 
1.0 
1.0 
 
DNR:  Department of Natural Resources 
Exp:  expenditures 
GF:  general fund 
MDA:  Maryland Department of Agriculture 
Pos’s:  positions 
Rev:  revenues 
SF:  special fund 
-/(-):  indeterminate increase/decrease 
-:  indeterminate increase 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 506/ Page 8 
As summarized in Exhibit 1, the bill has the following effects on State finances:   
 
 
LEEF Program (provision 1) –  
 
General Funds:  MDA general fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in 
fiscal 2026 and by $900,000 annually from fiscal 2027 through 2030, reflecting 
(1) for fiscal 2026, the funding included in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General 
Assembly 
for 
the 
LEEF 
Program 
(discussed 
above 
under 
Current Law/Background) and (2) for fiscal 2027 through 2030, the bill’s 
requirement that the Governor include an appropriation of at least $900,000 to the 
LEEF Program Fund in the annual budget bill each fiscal year. This estimate 
assumes that the minimum required amount ($900,000) is appropriated each fiscal 
year from fiscal 2027 through 2030. While the bill also requires that the Governor 
include an appropriation of at least $900,000 to the fund in the annual budget bill 
for fiscal 2026, that requirement is not a mandated appropriation for fiscal 2026. 
Under Article III, § 52, of the Maryland Constitution, a funding mandate must be 
enacted prior to July 1 of the year before the fiscal year to which the mandate applies 
(in this case, prior to July 1, 2024, in order for a funding mandate to apply to 
fiscal 2026). 
 
Special Funds:  LEEF Program Fund revenues and expenditures correspondingly 
increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2026 and by $900,000 annually from fiscal 2027 
through 2030, reflecting receipt and spending of the general fund appropriations. It 
is assumed that all revenues received by the fund are spent each fiscal year. The 
annual funding is expected to cover the costs of (1) one new position in fiscal 2026 
to administer the program, and a second new position beginning in fiscal 2027; 
(2) contractual services expected to be needed to reduce the burden on program 
participants of verifying implementation of multiple conservation and/or 
community best practices; and (3) financial incentives for program participants. 
 
This analysis assumes that only MDA’s personnel costs are considered to be 
administrative costs and that contractual services MDA expects to need, to reduce 
the burden on program participants of verifying implementation of multiple 
conservation and/or community best practices, can be considered an “action 
associated with fulfilling the program’s purpose” that, under the bill, is not subject 
to the 20% administrative costs limit. 
 
 
Aquaculture Advertising/Survey Fees (provision 6) – DNR special fund revenues 
increase by up to $13,725 in fiscal 2026 and future years, assuming (1) the 
department chooses to charge aquaculture lease applicants reasonable advertising 
and survey fees; (2) those fees do not generate an amount of money greater than the 
amount the department spends on advertising and surveys; and (3) the department 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 506/ Page 9 
spends, on average, $415 for advertising and $500 for survey work, per application, 
for 15 applications per fiscal year. 
 
 
Water 
Quality 
Trading 
Credits 
for 
Oyster 
Restoration 
Projects 
(provision 8) – DNR special fund revenues may increase by an indeterminate 
amount, as early as fiscal 2026, to the extent the department generates revenue from 
water quality trading credits generated from its oyster restoration projects as a result 
of the bill. While it is not clear at this time how any such revenues are used by DNR, 
this estimate assumes that such revenues are received by DNR as special fund 
revenues in order for them to be designated for use in future oyster restoration 
efforts. Both MDE and DNR generally indicate that it is too early to accurately 
estimate whether and to what extent DNR may generate revenues from water quality 
trading credits associated with the department’s oyster restoration efforts. However, 
solely for purposes of illustrating the general magnitude of revenues that might be 
generated, a DLS analysis of available information indicates that, if credit 
calculations currently applicable to oyster aquaculture, and current market prices, 
are applied to a conservative assumption of oysters (30 million oysters) that may 
generate credits from DNR’s current effort to establish the oyster sanctuary in the 
Manokin River, revenues generated are in the range of $1.5 million. 
 
Remaining provisions of the bill are not expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments may benefit from increased revenues to the extent 
they undertake oyster restoration projects that generate water quality trading credits. The 
bill includes oyster restoration projects funded in whole or in part by local governments 
among those that must be eligible to generate water quality trading credits and DNR 
indicates that there has been interest from at least one local government in undertaking an 
oyster restoration project. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 428 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Cecil, 
Frederick, 
and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal 
League; University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 506/ Page 10 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Planning; Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland Energy Administration; 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 506/ Page 11 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Chesapeake Bay Legacy Act 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 506 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Saif Ratul 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
  X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Small aquaculture businesses may see a positive impact. Aquaculture lease applicants may 
see a faster process for lease issuance if the proposed changes are able to cut down on 
frivolous lease protests. Leases will have more time to submit their annual reports and this 
will be in conjunction with the agency changing regulations to issue lease permits and 
harvester cards at a different time of year so that lease operations can continue as reports 
are turned in. Right now both reports and permits are issued at the beginning of the year, 
and if there are issues with the reports, the permits are held which means some leases 
cannot be operated until the report issues are settled. This would alleviate that problem. 
 
The regenerative agriculture leases could provide more of an opportunity for small 
agriculture businesses to access DNR owned land for agricultural leases. 
 
Small farmers may be benefitted by the LEEF Program. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11