START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 559 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 559 
(Delegate T. Morgan) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Food Establishments - Portable Chemical Toilets 
 
 
This bill allows specified food establishments – a business that conducts agritourism, 
Class 4 limited wineries, and Class 8 farm breweries – to comply with the requirement to 
have a convenient lavatory by providing a portable chemical toilet that is (1) supplied with 
soap, water, and a method to dry hands; (2) kept in sanitary condition; (3) properly 
ventilated; and (4) placed at least 25 feet from a well. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can update regulations and 
provide guidance to local health departments (LHD) with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  LHDs can cover necessary inspections with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Food establishment” means a food service facility or a food processing 
plant. “Food service facility” means (1) a place where food or drink is prepared for sale on 
the premises or elsewhere or (2) any operation where food is served to or provided to the 
public, with or without charge. 
 
Every food establishment is required to provide: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 559/ Page 2 
 
a convenient toilet, separated from any room containing or involving food, and kept 
in a sanitary condition; and 
 
a convenient lavatory that is (1) supplied with soap, water, and a method to dry 
hands; (2) kept in a sanitary condition; and (3) properly ventilated. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 26.04.02.08), chemical toilets must be (1) made of 
impervious materials; (2) vented to the outside air above the roof line of the structure 
housing them; and (3) supplied with an adequate amount of the chemical agent used to 
reduce and deodorize the tank contents. Chemical toilets also must only be used for 
special-term events, such as construction projects or music festivals. 
 
Agritourism 
 
“Agritourism” means an activity conducted on a farm that is offered to a member of the 
general public or to invited guests for the purpose of education, recreation, or active 
involvement in the farm operation. This includes corn mazes, petting zoos, hayrides, 
pumpkin patches, and “pick your own” produce establishments, among other businesses. 
 
Wineries 
 
A Class 4 limited winery license may be issued by the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission (ATCC). The holder of a Class 4 limited winery license may manufacture, 
sell, and serve fermented and distilled products for on- and off-premises consumption and 
provide samples of wine and pomace brandy that the license holder produces to a 
consumer, as specified. The annual license fee may not exceed $200. 
 
Farm Breweries 
 
A Class 8 farm brewery license may be issued by ATCC and generally authorizes the 
license holder to brew, bottle, or contract for up to 15,000 barrels of beer each year; 
however, that beer must be manufactured with an ingredient from a Maryland agricultural 
product, including hops, grain, and fruit, and produced on the licensed farm. The license 
holder may generally (1) sell the beer produced for on-premises consumption and (2) sell 
and deliver the beer to a licensed wholesaler or a person in another state authorized to 
acquire beer. The annual license fee may not exceed $200. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To implement the bill, MDH advises that it must update regulations 
(COMAR 10.15.03) for food establishments to allow chemical toilets to be used by 
specified food establishments to satisfy the convenient lavatory requirement. MDH will 
also provide guidance for LHDs that are licensing and inspecting facilities. This can be 
completed with existing budgeted staff and resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 559/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) 
advises that LHDs would be responsible for responding to complaints about chemical 
toilets. Additionally, if a business or operation needed to be inspected for licensure, such 
as a new food service establishment, then the inspection of chemical toilets by a LHD 
would be paid for as part of the larger licensing fee. Complaint responses and inspections 
can therefore be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may reduce upfront costs for individuals wishing to start 
wineries, breweries, and agritourism businesses, as they would no longer need to build a 
lavatory on the premises so long as they can provide a portable chemical toilet that meets 
the necessary conditions. 
 
Additional Comments:  MACHO advises that chemical toilets are currently used for 
short-term events and are inspected pre-emptively as part of the permit/licensing process 
for those events, so there may be issues in ensuring that chemical toilets used in the 
long-term meet State regulations. MACHO also advises that chemical toilets typically do 
not include hand washing supplies, which are a requirement in the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 544 (Senators Bailey and M. Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - February 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3