START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 571 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 571 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class C Licenses - Events 
 
 
This bill authorizes a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license holder; a Class C 
(fraternal/sororal) organization license holder; and a Class C (veterans’ organization) 
license holder in Anne Arundel County to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail for 
on-premises consumption, including (1) during an event held on the licensed premises, and 
(2) to a member of the club or a guest of the member. If the license holder hosts an event 
for an outside group, the bill requires the outside group to purchase a Class C per diem 
beer, wine, and liquor license from the Anne Arundel County Board of License 
Commissioners. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues increase to the extent additional Class C 
per diem licenses are issued under the bill. Anne Arundel County expenditures are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 571/ Page 2 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner. Class C licenses authorize the sale of alcohol to 
members and guests at a club, for on-site consumption only. 
 
Class C license holders in Anne Arundel County may sell beer, wine, and liquor 
Monday through Saturday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day. They may not sell beer, 
wine, or liquor after 2 a.m. on Sundays without a Sunday license. The board may issue a 
Sunday license to a Class C license holder, authorizing the sale of beer, wine, and liquor 
on Sunday according to the terms of that license. 
 
Class C (veterans’ organization) licenses can be issued by the board only to a local unit of 
a nationwide nonprofit organization or club that (1) is composed only of veterans of the  
U. S. Armed Forces; (2) has a charter from a national veterans’ organization; (3) has a 
membership of at least 100 individuals and dues of at least $5 per year per individual; and 
(4) operates for its members and meets in a clubhouse principally used by its members. 
The annual license fee for a Class C (veterans’ organization) license is $400. 
 
Class C (fraternal/sororal) organization licenses can be issued by the board for use by a 
local unit of a lodge, political organization, or chapter of a nonprofit and nationwide 
fraternal or service organization that (1) is composed only of inducted members; (2) was 
operating in the county before the license application was made; (3) has a membership of 
at least 100 individuals and dues of at least $5 per year per individual; and (4) owns and 
operates a home or clubhouse that is principally for the use of its members and guests 
accompanied by members. The annual fee for a Class C (fraternal/sororal) organization 
license is $400. 
 
Anne Arundel County issues Class C per diem alcoholic beverages licenses that allow the 
license holder to exercise the privileges of a Class C alcoholic beverage license when 
holding an entertainment event conducted by a club. The event must be at the place 
described in the license and cannot exceed seven consecutive days. The fee for a  
Class C per diem beer and wine license is $25, and the fee for a Class C per diem beer, 
wine, and liquor license is $50. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 571/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3