START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 541 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 541 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Department of Commerce - Nonprofit Organizations Navigator - Established 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes a nonprofit organizations navigator within the Department 
of Commerce. Among other duties, the navigator must represent the interests and concerns 
of nonprofit organizations as a member of the Maryland Efficient Grant Application 
(MEGA) Council. The bill specifies the intent of the General Assembly that the navigator 
position be filled by July 1, 2025. The bill also repeals study, recommendation, and 
reporting requirements for the MEGA Council related to the designation of a State Grants 
Ombudsperson and establishes a new one-time reporting requirement for assistance 
provided by the navigator position in fiscal 2026. Provisions establishing the navigator 
position terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025, under the assumptions discussed below. General fund 
expenditures for Commerce increase by $80,400 in FY 2026 and by $69,800 in FY 2027 
to hire a contractual nonprofit organizations navigator. The FY 2026 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly includes $80,400 in general funds for the position. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
80,400 
69,800 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($80,400) 
($69,800) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 541/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Secretary of Commerce must designate a nonprofit organizations 
navigator within Commerce, who must: 
 
 
provide technical assistance to nonprofit organizations in obtaining access to and 
applying for State grant programs; 
 
work with nonprofit organizations and units of State government to resolve 
procedural complexities and delays in State grant-making processes; 
 
collect and share information on opportunities for federal, State, and local grants 
with nonprofit organizations; and 
 
represent the interests and concerns of nonprofit organizations as a member of the 
MEGA Council (through the termination date of the council). 
 
By January 1, 2027, Commerce must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the 
House Health and Government Operations Committee on the following information for 
fiscal 2026:  (1) the number of nonprofit organizations that received technical assistance; 
(2) the total number of grant applications completed and submitted as a result of receiving 
technical assistance; (3) the total amount of grant funds awarded to nonprofit organizations 
as a result of receiving technical assistance; and (4) any findings and recommendations 
regarding implementation of the bill’s provisions establishing the navigator position. 
Commerce must collect sufficient information from the nonprofit organizations that 
receive technical assistance to complete the report. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 484 and 485 of 2020 established the MEGA Council to study and 
make recommendations regarding the entire grant’s life cycle. Among other duties and as 
required by Chapters 28 and 29 of 2024, the council must study the feasibility, cost, and 
impacts of designating a State Grants Ombudsperson and, by July 1, 2025, make 
recommendations regarding the designation of an ombudsperson, including recommended 
timelines and deadlines, to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). DBM must 
then report to the General Assembly on those MEGA Council recommendations by 
December 31, 2025. 
 
Staffing responsibilities for the council are shared by its member agencies (which do not 
include Commerce). The council terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill establishes a nonprofit organizations navigator position 
within Commerce and specifies the duties of the position. The bill authorizes the Secretary 
to designate the navigator, and Commerce has indicated its intent to create a new position. 
As the bill is of limited duration, this estimate assumes a contractual position is created 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 541/ Page 3 
and, consistent with the intent of the General Assembly, that the position is filled beginning  
July 1, 2025. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $80,428 in fiscal 2026. 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one nonprofit organizations navigator to assist 
nonprofits and otherwise carry out the specified duties of the position under the bill. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$72,783 
Operating Expenses 
    7,645 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$80,428 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of the position 
after fiscal 2027. 
 
To the extent that the position is filled prior to July 1, 2025, general fund expenditures for 
Commerce increase in fiscal 2025 (reallocation of start-up costs, additional salary) and 
decrease in fiscal 2026 (reallocation of start-up costs). The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly includes $80,400 in general funds for Commerce for a nonprofit 
organization’s navigator. 
 
Changes to reporting requirements for the MEGA Council are not anticipated to materially 
affect State expenditures. 
 
Additional Comments:  While nonprofits are not considered small businesses for 
purposes of fiscal and policy notes, some small nonprofits potentially benefit from the 
technical assistance and other services provided by the nonprofit organizations navigator 
under the bill. 
 
Section 2 of the bill (elimination of the navigator’s membership on the MEGA Council) 
takes effect on the taking effect of the MEGA Council termination provision specified in 
Section 4 of Chapters 484 and 485 (i.e., June 30, 2029, as amended by Chapters 28 and 29). 
However, Section 2 of the bill modifies provisions (the navigator position) that will already 
be repealed under Section 6 of the bill after June 30, 2027. The discrepancy has no effect 
on the above analysis. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 541/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 365 (Senator Kagan, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4