START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 307

Chapter 307

(House Bill 565)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Pharmacy – Renewal Notices – Electronic Means

FOR the purpose of requiring the State Board of Pharmacy to send renewal notices to
licensees, permit holders, and registrants by electronic means, rather than
first–class mail, unless the licensee, permit holder, or registrant requests to receive
the renewal notice by first–class mail; and generally relating to renewal notices sent
by the State Board of Pharmacy.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–308(a), 12–407(a), 12–6B–07(a), and 12–6C–06(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–308(b), 12–407(b), 12–6B–07(b), 12–6C–06(b)(1) through (3), and
12–6D–09
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

12–308.

(a) (1) A license expires on the date set by the Board unless it is renewed for
an additional term as provided in this section.

(2) A license may not be renewed for a term longer than 2 years.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board shall
send to each licensee, at least 1 month before a license expires, a renewal notice by
[first–class mail] ELECTRONIC MEANS to the last known E–MAIL address of the licensee.

(2) If requested by a licensee, the Board shall send to the licensee[, at least
two times within the month before a license expires,] a renewal notice by [electronic means]
FIRST–CLASS MAIL to the last known [electronic] address of the licensee.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 307 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) If a renewal notice sent by electronic means under paragraph [(2)] (1)
of this subsection is returned to the Board as undeliverable, the Board shall send to the
licensee a renewal notice by first–class mail to the last known address of the licensee.

(4) A renewal notice sent under this subsection shall state:

(i) The date on which the current license expires;

(ii) The date by which the renewal application must be received by
the Board for the renewal to be issued and mailed before the license expires; and

(iii) The amount of the renewal fee.

12–407.

(a) A pharmacy permit expires on the May 31 after its effective date, unless the
pharmacy permit is renewed for a 2–year term as provided in this section.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, on or before
March 1 of the year the permit expires, the Board shall send to each pharmacy permit
holder a renewal notice for each pharmacy permit by [first–class mail] ELECTRONIC
MEANS to the last known E–MAIL address of the pharmacy permit holder.

(2) If requested by a pharmacy permit holder, the Board shall send to the
pharmacy permit holder[, at least two times within the month before a pharmacy permit
expires,] a renewal notice for each pharmacy permit by [electronic means] FIRST–CLASS
MAIL to the last known [electronic] address of the pharmacy permit holder.

(3) If a renewal notice sent by electronic means under paragraph [(2)] (1)
of this subsection is returned to the Board as undeliverable, the Board shall send to the
pharmacy permit holder a renewal notice for each pharmacy permit by first–class mail to
the last known address of the pharmacy permit holder.

(4) A renewal notice sent under this subsection shall state:

(i) The date on which the current pharmacy permit expires;

(ii) The date by which the renewal application must be received by
the Board for the renewal to be issued and mailed before the pharmacy permit expires; and

(iii) The amount of the renewal fee.

12–6B–07.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 307

(a) (1) Unless the registration is renewed for an additional term as provided
in this section, registration expires on the date set by the Board.

(2) The ability of a registered pharmacy technician to function as a
pharmacy technician terminates on the date of expiration of the pharmacy technician’s
registration unless renewed.

(3) Registration may not be renewed for a term longer than 2 years.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board shall
send to each registered pharmacy technician, at least 1 month before a registration expires,
a renewal notice by [first–class mail] ELECTRONIC MEANS to the last known E–MAIL
address of the registered pharmacy technician.

(2) If requested by a registered pharmacy technician, the Board shall send
to the registered pharmacy technician[, at least two times within the month before a
pharmacy technician registration expires,] a renewal notice by [electronic means]
FIRST–CLASS MAIL to the last known [electronic] address of the registered pharmacy
technician.

(3) If a renewal notice sent by electronic means under paragraph [(2)] (1)
of this subsection is returned to the Board as undeliverable, the Board shall send the
registered pharmacy technician a renewal notice by first–class mail to the last known
address of the registered pharmacy technician.

(4) A renewal notice sent under this subsection shall state:

(i) The date on which the current registration expires;

(ii) The date by which the renewal application must be received by
the Board for the renewal to be issued and mailed before the registration expires; and

(iii) The amount of the renewal fee.

12–6C–06.

(a) A wholesale distributor permit expires on May 31 after its effective date,
unless the wholesale distributor permit is renewed for an additional 2–year term as
provided in this section.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, at least 1 month
before a wholesale distributor permit expires, the Board shall send to the wholesale
distributor permit holder a renewal notice by [first–class mail] ELECTRONIC MEANS to
the last known E–MAIL address of the permit holder.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 307 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) If requested by a wholesale distributor permit holder, the Board shall
send to the permit holder[, at least two times within the month before a wholesale
distributor permit expires,] a renewal notice by [electronic means] FIRST–CLASS MAIL to
the last known [electronic] address of the permit holder.

(3) If a renewal notice sent by electronic means under paragraph [(2)] (1)
of this subsection is returned to the Board as undeliverable, the Board shall send to the
wholesale distributor permit holder a renewal notice by first–class mail to the last known
address of the permit holder.

12–6D–09.

(a) (1) Registration expires on the date set by the Board.

(2) Registration is valid for up to 2 years from the date of issue.

(b) (1) A registered pharmacy intern who qualified for registration under §
12–6D–03(a)(1) and (2) of this subtitle may renew the registration one time if the registered
pharmacy intern [is]:

(i) Otherwise IS entitled to be registered as a pharmacy intern;

(ii) Submits to the Board a renewal application on the form that the
Board requires; and

(iii) Pays to the Board a renewal fee set by the Board.

(2) A registered pharmacy intern who qualified for registration under §
12–6D–03(a)(3) and (4) of this subtitle may not renew the registration.

(c) The registration of a pharmacy intern registered under this subtitle expires
and may not be renewed on the date that the registered pharmacy intern becomes a licensed
pharmacist.

(d) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Board shall
send to each registered pharmacy intern, at least 1 month before a registration expires, a
renewal notice by [first–class mail] ELECTRONIC MEANS to the last known E–MAIL
address of the registered pharmacy intern.

(2) If requested by a registered pharmacy intern, the Board shall send to
the registered pharmacy intern[, at least two times within the month before a pharmacy
intern registration expires,] a renewal notice by [electronic means] FIRST–CLASS MAIL to
the last known [electronic] address of the registered pharmacy intern.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 307

(3) If a renewal notice sent by electronic means under paragraph [(2)] (1)
of this subsection is returned to the Board as undeliverable, the Board shall send the
registered pharmacy intern a renewal notice by first–class mail to the last known address
of the registered pharmacy intern.

(4) A renewal notice sent under this subsection shall state:

(i) The date on which the current registration expires;

(ii) The date by which the renewal application shall be received by
the Board for the renewal to be issued and mailed before the registration expires; and

(iii) The amount of the renewal fee.

(e) The Board shall renew the registration of each pharmacy intern who meets
the requirements of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5