START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 574 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 574 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
St. Mary's County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Multiple Licensing Plans 
 
 
This bill prohibits the St. Mary’s County Board of License Commissioners from issuing 
more than three Class B beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) restaurant licenses for separate 
premises to an individual or for the use of a person, as specified. Only one of the 
three licenses specified may authorize the sale of alcohol for off-premises consumption. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect St. Mary’s County operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person may not have a direct or indirect interest in more than 
one Class B BWL license that authorizes the sale of alcohol for off-premises consumption. 
 
An indirect interest is presumed to exist between a person or persons if any of the following 
conditions exist between them: 
 
 
a common parent company; 
 
a franchise agreement; 
 
a licensing agreement; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 574/ Page 2 
 
a concession agreement;  
 
dual membership in a chain of businesses commonly owned and operated; 
 
a sharing of directors, stockholders, partners, or members; or a sharing of directors, 
stockholders, partners, or members of parents or subsidiaries; 
 
common direct or indirect sharing of profit from the sale of alcoholic beverages; or 
 
a sharing of common trade name, trademark, logo, or theme or mode of operation 
identifiable by the public. 
 
Current Law:  In St. Mary’s County, a Class B BWL restaurant license authorizes the 
license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor in a restaurant for retail at the place described 
in the license for on- and off- premises consumption. The license holder may sell beer, 
wine, and liquor from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day on Monday through Sunday. 
The annual license fee is $650. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2