START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 410

Chapter 410

(House Bill 535)

AN ACT concerning

Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund – Establishment ~~and~~ ~~Income~~ ~~Tax~~
~~Checkoff~~

FOR the purpose of establishing the Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund;
~~establishing~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax~~ ~~checkoff~~ ~~for~~ ~~voluntary~~ ~~contributions~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~a~~ ~~checkoff~~ ~~on~~ ~~individual~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax~~ ~~return~~
~~forms~~ ~~for~~ ~~voluntary~~ ~~contributions~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~in~~
~~each~~ ~~individual~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax~~ ~~return~~ ~~package~~ authorizing the Governor to include in
the annual budget bill a certain appropriation to the Fund; and generally relating to
the Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 1–101(a), (f), and (h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Business Regulation
Section 5–805
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)204. and 205.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)206.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 410 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 717 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2024
Section 8(85) and (86)

BY adding to
Chapter 717 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2024
Section 8(87)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~2–120~~ ~~and~~ ~~10–804(m)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

1–101.

(a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

(f) “Department” means the Maryland Department of Labor.

(h) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Labor.

5–805.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ABANDONED CEMETERY” MEANS A CEMETERY FOR WHICH:

(I) 1. THE ORGANIZATION ESTABLISHED TO ENGAGE IN THE
OPERATION OF THE CEMETERY HAS BEEN TERMINATED, HAS BEEN SUBJECT TO
ADMINISTRATIVE DISSOLUTION BY THE STATE, OR HAS OTHERWISE CEASED TO
EXIST; AND

2. TITLE HAS NOT BEEN CONVEYED;

(II) THERE IS NO PROPERTY OWNER LISTED IN THE RECORDS OF
THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION;

(III) THE PROPERTY HAS BEEN CONDEMNED; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 410

(IV) NO PERSON WHO IS LEGALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
PROPERTY CAN BE FOUND AND LEGAL OWNERSHIP OF THE PROPERTY CANNOT BE
DETERMINED.

(3) “FUND” MEANS THE ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES
FUND.

(4) “NEGLECTED CEMETERY” MEANS A CEMETERY FOR WHICH:

(I) TWO OR MORE CITATIONS HAVE BEEN ISSUED BY A COUNTY
OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION AGAINST THE PROPERTY FOR FAILURE TO MAINTAIN
THE PROPERTY;

(II) THE PROPERTY HAS FALLEN INTO DISREPAIR DUE TO
NEGLECT AND INSUFFICIENT MAINTENANCE;

(III) THE PROPERTY HAS BEEN THE OBJECT OF VANDALISM,
LOITERING, OR OTHER CRIMINAL CONDUCT; OR

(IV) THERE HAS BEEN PHYSICAL DESTRUCTION OR
DETERIORATION OF THE PROPERTY.

(B) THERE IS AN ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FOR THE CARE,
PRESERVATION, MAINTENANCE, AND RESTORATION OF ABANDONED AND
NEGLECTED CEMETERIES IN THE STATE.

(D) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE NET PROCEEDS FROM CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER THE INCOME
TAX CHECKOFF ESTABLISHED UNDER § 2–120 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 410 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (2) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(4) (3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) (1) MONEY IN THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE COSTS OF:

(I) CARE, PRESERVATION, MAINTENANCE, AND RESTORATION
OF ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES;

(II) ADMINISTERING THE FUND THROUGH DISTRIBUTION TO AN
ADMINISTRATIVE COST ACCOUNT IN THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
PROMOTING DONATIONS TO THE FUND THROUGH DISTRIBUTION TO A PROMOTION
COST ACCOUNT IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) NOT MORE THAN 5% OF THE NET PROCEEDS OF THE FUND MAY
BE USED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(J) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PRESERVATION, CARE,
AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES IS
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT
OTHERWISE WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE OFFICE OF CEMETERY
OVERSIGHT.

(K) THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION OF $250,000 TO THE FUND.

(K) (L) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 30 EACH YEAR, THE SECRETARY
SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE
FUND.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 410

(L) (M) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (K) (L) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE GROSS AMOUNT OF DONATIONS TO THE FUND;

(2) THE COSTS OF ADMINISTRATION BY THE COMPTROLLER OF THE
INCOME TAX CHECKOFF SYSTEM;

(3) A DESCRIPTION OF PROMOTIONAL EFFORTS UNDERTAKEN WITH
MONEY FROM THE FUND; AND

(4) (3) A DETAILED ACCOUNTING OF THE USE OF THE FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) 1. This subparagraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024
through 2028.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

204. the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund;
[and]

205. the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund; AND

206. THE ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES
FUND.

Chapter 717 of the Acts of 2024

SECTION 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding any other
provision of law, and unless inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other
federal requirement, or with the terms of a gift or settlement agreement, for fiscal years
2024 through 2028, net interest on all State money allocated by the State Treasurer under
§ 6–226 of the State Finance and Procurement Article to special funds or accounts, and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 410 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

otherwise entitled to receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall
accrue to the General Fund of the State, with the exception of the following funds:

(85) the Bus Rapid Transit Fund; [and]

(86) the Transit–Oriented Development Capital Grant and Revolving Loan
Fund; AND

(87) THE ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES FUND.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~
~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~

~~2–120.~~

(A) (1) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL INCLUDE ON THE INDIVIDUAL
INCOME TAX RETURN FORM A CHECKOFF DESIGNATED AS THE “ABANDONED AND
~~NEGLECTED~~ ~~CEMETERIES~~ ~~FUND”.~~

(2) THE CHECKOFF SHALL STATE THAT:

(I) THE INDIVIDUAL, OR EACH SPOUSE IN THE CASE OF A JOINT
RETURN, MAY CONTRIBUTE TO THE ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES
FUND THE AMOUNT DESIGNATED BY THE INDIVIDUAL; AND

(II) 1. THE INDIVIDUAL SHALL DEDUCT THE AMOUNT OF THE
CONTRIBUTION FROM ANY REFUND TO WHICH THE INDIVIDUAL IS ENTITLED; OR

2. IF THE INDIVIDUAL IS NOT ENTITLED TO A REFUND,
~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~ADD~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONTRIBUTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INCOME~~
TAX TO BE PAID WITH THE RETURN.

(3) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL INCLUDE, WITH THE INDIVIDUAL
INCOME TAX RETURN PACKAGE, A DESCRIPTION OF THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE
ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES FUND WAS ESTABLISHED AND THE
PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE FUND MAY BE USED.

~~(B)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMPTROLLER~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) COLLECT THE CHECKOFF CONTRIBUTIONS AND ACCOUNT TO THE
STATE TREASURER FOR THE MONEY COLLECTED;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 410

(2) FROM THE CONTRIBUTIONS COLLECTED, DISTRIBUTE THE
~~AMOUNT~~ ~~NECESSARY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ADMINISTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHECKOFF~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~COST~~
ACCOUNT; AND

(3) AFTER THE DISTRIBUTION UNDER ITEM (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
~~DISTRIBUTE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REMAINDER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MONEY~~ ~~COLLECTED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~
TO THE ABANDONED AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER §
5–805 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE.

~~10–804.~~

(M) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY DESIGNATE A CONTRIBUTION TO THE ABANDONED
AND NEGLECTED CEMETERIES FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–805 OF THE
BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE BY THE CHECKOFF ON THE RETURN.

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~
~~effect~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2026,~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~all~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~years~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~after~~ ~~December~~
~~31,~~ ~~2025.~~

SECTION ~~4.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, ~~except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~
~~Section~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ this Act shall take effect October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7