START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 599 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 599 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Personnel - BWI Airport Fire and Rescue Department - Collective 
Bargaining and Arbitration Processes 
 
 
This bill alters the collective bargaining process for uniformed fire employees of the 
Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport Fire and Rescue 
Department (BWI Fire/Rescue) by establishing binding arbitration in the event of an 
impasse in negotiations, though an arbitrator’s decision related to wages is subject to the 
limitations of the State budget. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and potentially general fund expenditures 
may increase significantly as early as FY 2026, as discussed below. TTF personnel and 
other expenditures are affected, potentially significantly, likely beginning in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not directly affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Negotiations between the State and the exclusive representative of the 
uniformed fire employees of BWI Fire/Rescue are excluded from the process of using a 
fact finder to resolve issues if negotiations are not concluded by October 25, as specified 
under current law. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 599/ Page 2 
Instead, the State and the exclusive representative of the uniformed fire employees of  
BWI Fire/Rescue must reach an agreement by September 30 of the year in which a 
collective bargaining agreement will expire. An impasse occurs if the parties do not reach 
an agreement by October 1 or by stating that they mutually agree that they are at an 
impasse. If an impasse is reached, each party must submit its last, best, and final offer to 
the other party within 48 hours after the impasse is reached. Unless the impasse has been 
resolved, the parties must meet within five business days after the impasse is reached to 
select an arbitrator. The parties must select the arbitrator from a list of 15 arbitrators 
provided by the American Arbitration Association’s labor arbitration panel by alternatively 
striking names from the list until one name remains. If the selected arbitrator is unable to 
fulfill the responsibilities of the arbitration, the selection process is repeated with a new list 
of arbitrators. 
 
The parties must submit the dispute and the last, best, and final offers to the arbitrator 
within five business days after the arbitrator is selected, and the arbitrator must hold formal 
hearings as necessary to resolve the impasse. During the first 21 days immediately 
following the appointment of the arbitrator and before holding any formal hearings, the 
arbitrator may attempt to resolve the impasse by acting as a neutral mediator between the 
parties. 
 
By December 15, the arbitrator must select one party’s last, best, and final offer, and the 
arbitrator’s decision is binding, though an arbitrator’s decision related to wages is subject 
to the limitations of the State budget. The parties must equally share the costs of the 
arbitrator’s services. 
 
The bill specifies that a memorandum of understanding (MOU) agreed to and ratified may 
not expire until it is succeeded by an MOU that is adopted by arbitration, in addition to an 
MOU agreed to and ratified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Employees and Collective Bargaining 
 
Title 3 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes statutory collective 
bargaining rights for a large number of State employees. Title 3 authorizes the State, State 
institutions of higher education, and the Maryland Environmental Service (MES) to meet 
and confer with exclusive employee representatives about negotiable terms. Title 3 does 
not provide for binding arbitration but does allow fact finding in the event of an impasse, 
as discussed later in this Current Law section. Employees, employers, and exclusive 
representatives subject to Title 3 are also subject to the provisions of the Maryland Public 
Employee Relations Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 599/ Page 3 
Maryland’s collective bargaining law generally applies to employees of the 
Executive Branch departments, the Maryland Insurance Administration, the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation, the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, 
the University System of Maryland (USM), the Office of the Comptroller, the Maryland 
Transportation Authority (MDTA) (for those who are not police officers), the State 
Retirement Agency, the Maryland State Department of Education, MES, the Office of 
Public Defender, the Maryland School for the Deaf, Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC), along with specified firefighters for the Martin State Airport and all full-time 
MDTA police officers at the rank of first sergeant and below. 
 
The State’s collective bargaining law does not apply to:   
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) employees; 
 
Legislative and Judicial Branch personnel; 
 
elected and appointed officials; 
 
the Governor’s and Lieutenant Governor’s staff; 
 
an employee assigned to, or with access to records of, the Public Employee 
Relations Board; 
 
special appointees and executive service personnel in the State Personnel 
Management System (SPMS); 
 
senior administrators, faculty members, student employees, and other designated 
employees of USM, MSU, SMCM, or BCCC; 
 
the chief, deputy, or assistant administrator of a unit with an independent personnel 
system; 
 
temporary or contractual employees in SPMS; 
 
temporary, contractual, or emergency employees in a unit of the Executive Branch 
with an independent personnel system; 
 
an employee who is entitled to participate in collective bargaining under another 
law; 
 
an employee whose participation in a labor organization is contrary to the State’s 
ethics laws; 
 
any managerial or confidential employee of specified units of State Government as 
defined by regulation; and 
 
any supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee of USM, MSU, SMCM, or 
BCCC. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 599/ Page 4 
Bargaining Process 
 
The parties must meet at reasonable times and engage in collective bargaining in good 
faith, as specified. The parties must make every reasonable effort to conclude negotiations 
in a timely manner for inclusion by the principal unit in its budget request to the Governor, 
and they must conclude negotiations by January 1 for any item requiring an appropriation 
of funds for the fiscal year that begins on the following July 1. The Governor must include 
in the annual budget bill submitted to the General Assembly any amounts in the budgets of 
the principal units required to accommodate any additional cost resulting from the 
negotiations for the fiscal year beginning the following July 1, including the actuarial 
impact of any required legislative changes to any of the State pension or retirement 
systems, if the legislative changes have been negotiated to become effective in that 
fiscal year. 
 
If the parties do not conclude negotiations for the next fiscal year before October 25, either 
party may request that a fact finder be employed to resolve the issues. The fact finder must 
be employed no later than November 1 and must be a neutral party appointed by alternative 
striking from a list provided by the Federal Mediation Conciliation Service or under the 
Labor Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association. The fact finder may give 
notice and hold hearings in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, administer 
oaths and take testimony and other evidence, and issue subpoenas. Before November 20, 
the fact finder must make written recommendations regarding wages, hours, and working 
conditions and any other terms or conditions of employment that may be in dispute. The 
written recommendations of the fact finder must be delivered to the Governor, the 
exclusive representative, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of 
Delegates by December 1. 
 
Memoranda of Understanding 
 
All matters of agreement reached by the parties must be incorporated into an MOU. No 
MOU is valid if it extends for less than one year or longer than three years. An MOU is not 
effective until it is ratified by the Governor (or, in the case of a State higher education 
institution or MES, ratified by the higher education institution’s governing board or the 
Board of Directors of MES, respectively) and a majority of the votes cast by employees in 
the bargaining unit. Any matters in the MOU that require legislative changes are subject to 
the approval of the General Assembly. An MOU agreed to and ratified may not expire until 
it is succeeded by an MOU that is agreed to and ratified. 
 
Matters to Be Negotiated 
 
Collective bargaining must include any matters relating to wages, hours, and terms and 
conditions of employment. The State is not required to negotiate any matter that is 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 599/ Page 5 
inconsistent with State law; however, the State may negotiate such matters as long as the 
parties understand that the item cannot become effective until the General Assembly takes 
action. The General Assembly, however, is not bound by the agreement. 
 
Maryland Transit Administration – Arbitration in Labor Disputes 
 
While the State’s collective bargaining statute under Title 3 of the State Personnel and 
Pension Article does not authorize binding arbitration, § 7-602 of the Transportation 
Article provides for binding arbitration in disputes between MTA and MTA employees 
relating to wages, salaries, hours, or other working conditions; benefits; grievances; or 
collective bargaining agreements, as specified. If a labor dispute between MTA and 
employees represented by an accredited representative does not result in agreement, MTA 
must submit the dispute to a three-member arbitration board. A majority determination of 
the board is final and binding on all disputed matters. 
 
State Expenditures:  The uniformed fire employees of BWI Fire/Rescue are under the 
Maryland Aviation Administration of the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT) and are funded by TTF. As discussed above, the bill requires the selection of an 
arbitrator to oversee negotiations between the State and the exclusive representative of the 
uniformed fire employees of BWI Fire/Rescue whenever an impasse is reached. The cost 
of the services of an arbitrator employed under the bill must be shared equally between the 
parties. MOUs generally last for three years, so TTF expenditures may increase beginning 
in fiscal 2026 to pay for arbitrator services, and then at three-year intervals thereafter (or 
at intervals otherwise determined by the MOUs). For context, the Department of Budget 
and Management (DBM) advises that the average hourly rate for a third-party arbitrator is 
likely to range from $375 to $1,125; thus, TTF expenditures may increase by several 
thousand dollars in any year when an impasse is reached. However, actual expenses related 
to arbitration services cannot be reliably estimated, as they depend on the timing of the 
labor negotiations, whether an arbitrator is necessary in a given cycle, and the costs of that 
arbitrator, which may be influenced by a variety of factors. 
 
DBM usually works in association with MDOT during their labor negotiations. Therefore, 
to the extent that the arbitration process established under the bill significantly increases 
the workload demands on MDOT and DBM, MDOT and DBM may incur costs to hire 
additional human resources or labor relations personnel, thereby increasing TTF and 
general fund expenditures beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Additionally, the Public Employee Relations Board notes the bill may have an operational 
impact on the board as matters that fall under the board’s jurisdiction now might also fall 
under the arbitrator’s jurisdiction. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 599/ Page 6 
Effects on Personnel and Other Expenditures 
 
As noted above, the bill provides for binding arbitration in the event of an impasse (though 
decisions related to wages are subject to limitations of the State budget). The bill’s impact 
on uniformed fire personnel and other expenditures cannot be reliably estimated or 
predicted, as it depends on the extent to which the terms of MOUs concluded as a result of 
the bill differ from the terms that would be negotiated in the absence of the bill, and the 
monetary value of those terms; it also depends on the State’s budgetary condition each 
year. However, the impact is potentially significant, particularly to the extent that matters 
are concluded through arbitration under the bill. Thus, TTF expenditures for personnel and 
related costs may be affected beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 373 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Employee Relations Board; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6