START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 535 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 535 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund to provide for the care, 
preservation, maintenance, and restoration of abandoned and neglected cemeteries in the 
State. The Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $250,000 to 
the fund. By September 30 annually, the Secretary of Labor must report to the 
General Assembly on the administration of the fund.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2026; special fund revenues and expenditures for the Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor) increase correspondingly. MD Labor can administer the fund with existing 
resources.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
GF Expenditure 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
SF Expenditure 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$250,000 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 535/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Abandoned cemetery” is defined as a cemetery for which (1) the 
organization established to operate the cemetery has been terminated, dissolved by the 
State, or otherwise ceased to exist and the title has not been conveyed; (2) there is no 
property owner listed in the records of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
(3) the property has been condemned; or (4) no person who is legally responsible for the 
property can be found and legal ownership of the property cannot be determined.  
 
“Neglected cemetery” means a cemetery for which (1) two or more citations have been 
issued by a county or municipality against the property for failure to maintain the property; 
(2) the property has fallen into disrepair due to neglect and insufficient maintenance; 
(3) the property has been the object of vandalism, loitering, or other criminal conduct; or 
(4) there has been physical destruction or deterioration of the property.  
 
The Abandoned and Neglected Cemeteries Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered 
by the Secretary of Labor. The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget for 
the fund, interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. 
 
Money in the fund may be used only for the costs of (1) care, preservation, maintenance, 
and restoration of abandoned and neglected cemeteries; (2) administering the fund; and 
(3) promoting donations to the fund, provided that no more than 5% of the net proceeds of 
the fund are used for this purpose. Money expended from the fund for the preservation, 
care, and maintenance of abandoned and neglected cemeteries is supplementary to and not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for the Office 
of Cemetery Oversight. 
 
Current Law:  The Office of Cemetery Oversight within MD Labor regulates the 
operation of cemeteries, including those offering perpetual care and preneed burial 
contracts, and certain crematories. An individual must be registered with the office before 
operating a cemetery, crematory, or providing burial goods. A corporation, limited liability 
company, or partnership must obtain a permit before operating a cemetery, crematory, or 
burial goods business. The operations of the office are supported by registration and permit 
fees, which are deposited into the Cemetery Oversight Fund.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, the bill specifies that the Governor may include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $250,000 to the Abandoned and Neglected 
Cemeteries Fund. Assuming the program is funded at the contemplated level, general fund 
expenditures increase by $250,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026 (at the Governor’s 
discretion). Special fund revenues and expenditures increase accordingly as the funds are 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 535/ Page 3 
expended for authorized purposes, including any related administrative expenses (which 
are anticipated to be minimal or none).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 647 and HB 828 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 963 (Senator Mautz) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3