START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 516 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 516 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Automated Enforcement Programs - Privacy Protections 
 
This bill generally prohibits an “agency” (i.e., a State police department, the State Highway 
Administration, a local police department, or another local agency that implements and 
operates an automated enforcement program) from accessing or using a recorded image or 
associated data without a warrant, subpoena, or court order unless the access or use is for 
an appropriate traffic enforcement purpose, subject to certain exceptions. An agency that 
knowingly violates this requirement is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation. 
The bill alters current statutory provisions by applying newly established standards and 
requirements for the use, processing, and disposal of recorded images (and associated data) 
to citations issued by automated enforcement systems in the State (i.e., traffic control signal 
monitoring systems, automated railroad grade crossing enforcement systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, stop sign monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, work zone 
speed control systems, bus lane monitoring systems, noise abatement monitoring systems, 
vehicle height monitoring systems, and any other automated traffic enforcement system 
authorized under State law). The bill also requires a custodian of recorded images produced 
by certain automated enforcement systems to deny inspection of the recorded images, 
subject to the bill’s changes. The bill generally takes effect October 1, 2025, but 
accounts for the termination dates of stop sign and noise abatement monitoring 
system programs.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has an operational and potential fiscal impact on State law 
enforcement agencies, as discussed below. The Judiciary can likely handle any additional 
requests for warrants, subpoenas, or court orders with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill has an operational and potential fiscal impact on local law 
enforcement agencies, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 516/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Appropriate traffic enforcement purpose” is defined by the bill as the 
detection, investigation, or analysis of, or assessment or adjudication of liability for, a 
violation. “Violation” means a traffic violation that a particular automated enforcement 
system is intended to capture. 
 
An agency may access and use a recorded image or associated data already retained by the 
law enforcement agency if (1) the law enforcement agency documents a request to access 
and use the recorded image or associated data that articulates a specific, legitimate law 
enforcement purpose for accessing and using the recorded image or associated data and 
(2) the custodian of the recorded image or associated data maintains a written record of the 
request and whether or not the request was granted. A law enforcement agency that 
accesses a recorded image or associated data pursuant to this authorization may use the 
recorded image or associated data only for the legitimate law enforcement purpose required 
to be specified with the request. 
 
Additionally, an employee or a contractor of an agency may access and use a recorded 
image and associated data (1) to administer and process citations or to audit or evaluate the 
accuracy of the automated enforcement system and (2) in a manner consistent with 
provisions of the bill requiring the removal and destruction of recorded images. 
 
An agency must immediately remove from its records and destroy any recorded image or 
associated data captured under a program that does not constitute evidence of a violation.  
 
A recorded image or associated data captured under a program that does constitute 
evidence of a violation may be retained only until the earlier of:   
 
 
one year following the conclusion of any criminal investigation or the exhaustion of 
all the avenues of adjudication for the violation; or 
 
five years after the day on which the recorded image or associated data was 
captured. 
 
Before an agency removes and destroys a recorded image or associated data, the agency 
may disaggregate the data for analysis purposes in a manner that does not identify any 
individual or vehicle. 
 
An agency that implements and operates a program must adopt procedures relating to the 
operation of the program and the use of automated enforcement systems. The procedures 
must:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 516/ Page 3 
 
identify the employee classifications in the agency that have authorization to access 
or use recorded images and associated data produced by an automated enforcement 
system; 
 
establish an audit process to ensure that information obtained through the use of an 
automated enforcement system is used only for appropriate traffic enforcement 
purposes (as authorized in the bill); 
 
establish procedures and safeguards to ensure that agency personnel with access to 
recorded images and associated data are adequately screened and trained; 
 
establish procedures and safeguards for the secure storage of the recorded images 
and associated data (i.e., prior to removal and destruction); and 
 
establish procedures for the removal and destruction of recorded images and 
associated data. 
 
Recorded images and associated data must be stored using software that is independent 
from (and inaccessible to) other systems and networks. An automated enforcement system 
must be situated and focused in a manner that (1) captures recorded images and associated 
data of violations and (2) to the maximum extent possible, does not capture identifying 
images of the driver, other drivers or vehicles, or pedestrians. An automated enforcement 
system may not use biometric identifying technology, including facial recognition 
technology. 
 
An agency or a contractor of an agency may not sell or otherwise transfer or share recorded 
images and associated data with another person other than (1) a person alleged to be liable 
for a civil violation recorded by an automated enforcement system; (2) a court of competent 
jurisdiction when adjudicating liability; or (3) another law enforcement agency for use only 
in an ongoing investigation (after the other law enforcement agency has obtained an 
appropriate warrant, subpoena, or court order). A law enforcement agency that receives 
recorded images or associated data pursuant to this sharing authorization is subject to the 
prohibitions and requirements established by the bill. 
 
Current Law:  State law currently authorizes the use of various automated enforcement 
systems, including traffic control signal monitoring systems, automated railroad grade 
crossing enforcement systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring systems, 
stop sign monitoring systems, bus lane monitoring systems, noise abatement monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
Access to Public Records 
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act (PIA) establishes that all persons are entitled to have 
access to information about the affairs of government and the official acts of public 
officials and employees. Each governmental unit that maintains public records must 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 516/ Page 4 
identify a representative whom a member of the public may contact to request a public 
record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) must post all such contact information 
on its website and in any Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Denials 
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the 
Maryland Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for 
specified personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, 
personnel and student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial 
information, and shielded criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a 
record relating to an administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police 
officer is not a protected personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow 
access to such records by federal and State prosecutors. Chapters 548 and 549 of 2024 
further specify that a record of positive community feedback that was not solicited by the 
police officer who is the subject of the feedback is not a protected personnel record under 
PIA. 
 
Denials Related to Automated Enforcement Systems:  Generally, a custodian must deny 
inspection of recorded images produced by (1) a traffic control monitoring system 
(red light camera); (2) a speed monitoring system; (3) a work zone speed control system; 
or (4) a vehicle height monitoring system. However, a custodian must allow inspection of 
recorded images (1) as required by the relevant authorizing statutes; (2) by any person 
issued a citation, or by an attorney of record for the person; or (3) by an employee or agent 
of an agency in an investigation or proceeding relating to the imposition or indemnification 
from civil liability under the relevant statutory provisions.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 516/ Page 5 
State/Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Fiscal Impact on State and Local Governments  
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that certain provisions of the bill (e.g., the 
removal of records within specified periods and the establishment of procedures such as an 
audit process) may have a fiscal impact – specifically, there may be additional 
administrative costs for agencies that manage automated enforcement systems throughout 
the State. The Maryland Municipal League similarly advises of potential administrative 
costs. 
 
The Judiciary advises that, although the bill may result in an increase for requests for a 
warrant, subpoena, or court order, any impact is not anticipated to significantly affect 
court operations. 
 
Operational Impact on Law Enforcement Agencies 
 
The Prince George’s County Police Department advises that the bill’s limitations on the 
use of accessing or using a recorded image (or associated data) likely has an operational 
impact. Under current law, for example, law enforcement agencies are generally able to 
retain recorded images and associated data even if there is no evidence of a traffic violation. 
In certain cases, the images/data may subsequently be used for other criminal investigations 
(i.e., unrelated to a traffic violation). This practice may be significantly curtailed under the 
bill, given the general requirement to immediately remove recorded images/associated data 
that do not constitute evidence of a traffic violation. Although the bill authorizes a recorded 
image or associated data to be retained for up to five years, the image must constitute 
evidence of a traffic violation (specific to the intended purpose of the camera that captured 
the image) in order to be retained by an agency. These requirements may limit the use of 
automated enforcement systems for other investigations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1001 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 381 (Senator Love, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, 
Harford, 
and 
Prince 
George’s 
counties; 
Maryland 
Municipal 
League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 516/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6