START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 567 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 567 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Dorchester County - Alcoholic Beverages - Arts Beer and Wine License 
 
 
This bill establishes an arts beer and wine license in Dorchester County and authorizes the 
Dorchester County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to a nonprofit or 
for-profit retail business, including an art center, art gallery, a museum, or a similar 
business primarily devoted to art that expresses matters of serious literary, artistic, 
scientific, or political value that (1) engages in the display and sale or original artwork and 
(2) is located in an arts and entertainment district. The license holder may sell or serve beer 
and wine for on-premises consumption Monday through Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 
10:00 p.m. provided that snacks are also served. The board cannot issue the license to a 
business that displays and sells commercially prepared or mass-produced artistic products, 
and the license cannot be transferred to another location. The annual license fee is $250. 
The bill also authorizes the board to issue an arts beer and wine license to an establishment 
within 300 feet of a place of worship or school if the board receives written consent for the 
issuance of the license from each place of worship or school. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  Dorchester County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent 
that arts beer and wine licenses are issued under the bill. Dorchester County can handle 
any additional enforcement activity with existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potentially meaningful for a nonprofit or 
retail business that is able to sell beer and wine under the bill.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 567/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners that issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner and may authorize the sale of alcohol for 
on-premises consumption. For example, Class A licenses generally only allow the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption, and Class B licenses are generally 
issued to restaurants and allow the sale of alcoholic beverages with food. 
 
Each local jurisdiction has its own regulatory processes and requirements in place for who 
can apply for and obtain a license and how many licenses, in total, may be issued for use 
in the jurisdiction. 
 
In Dorchester County, the board is prohibited from issuing a new license for an 
establishment that is within 300 feet in a direct line of a place of worship or a public or 
nonpublic kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school except for (1) a license for a 
premises that was licensed on October 1, 1996; (2) a class B beer, wine, and liquor license 
for a premises in Cambridge, Secretary, or Hurlock; or (3) a temporary license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 800 (Dorchester County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Dorchester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2