START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 538 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 538 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Department of Human Services - Federal Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program - Administration 
 
 
This bill requires the Family Investment Administration (FIA) in the Department of Human 
Services (DHS) to be the central coordinating and directing agency of the federal 
Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) with funds and resources received from 
the U. S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall CSFP federal fund revenues and expenditures are not affected, but 
funding is redirected from the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) to DHS. As a 
result, MDOA federal fund revenues and expenditures decrease by approximately 
$225,000 in FY 2026 and $300,000 annually thereafter; DHS federal fund revenues and 
expenditures increase correspondingly. MDOA general fund expenditures increase by 
$22,000 in FY 2026 to supplement administrative costs, as discussed below; future years 
reflect annualization and inflation. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local governmental operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDOA administers the federally funded CSFP (also known as 
“My Groceries to Go!”). The Secretary of Aging is specifically required to administer the 
programs and activities that the federal government delegates to the State under the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 538/ Page 2 
Older Americas Act of 1965 that are not otherwise committed by law to another unit of 
State government. 
 
CSFP is designed to improve the health of low-income elderly persons at least age 60 by 
supplementing their diets with USDA foods. Through CSFP, USDA distributes both food 
and administrative funds to participating states and Indian tribal organizations. CSFP food 
packages are not designed to provide a complete diet but rather are intended to be a source 
of the nutrients typically lacking in the diets of the target population. 
 
Family Investment Administration 
 
FIA is the central coordinating and directing agency of all public assistance programs in 
the State, including (1) the Family Investment Program and related cash benefit programs; 
(2) public assistance to adults; (3) emergency assistance; (4) food stamps; (5) medical 
assistance eligibility determinations; (6) the Energy Assistance Program; (7) the 
Temporary Disability Assistance Program; and (8) any other public assistance activities 
financed wholly or partly by FIA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
approximately $300,000 in federal funds for CSFP. This analysis assumes that these funds 
are transferred to DHS after the October 1, 2025 effective date of the bill. Therefore, 
approximately $225,000 in federal fund revenues transfer from MDOA to DHS in 
fiscal 2026 (with a corresponding decrease in MDOA federal fund expenditures); DHS 
federal fund expenditures (and revenues) increase accordingly since, effective 
October 1, 2025, FIA assumes responsibility as the central and directing agency of CSFP. 
DHS advises that existing FIA staff resources are sufficient to meet the requirements of the 
bill. 
 
MDOA advises that CSFP federal fund revenues earmarked for administrative expenses 
are used to fund a portion of the salary for one program coordinator that currently oversees 
CSFP, in addition to other existing MDOA programs. General fund expenditures are 
necessary to supplement the loss of federal funds; therefore, MDOA general fund 
expenditures increase by approximately $22,000 in fiscal 2026, and by approximately 
$29,000 annually thereafter, to fully fund the program coordinator salary. 
 
Additional Comments:  CSFP local agency partners include the Maryland Food Bank, 
Capital Area Food Bank, and Allegany County Human Resources Development 
Commission. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 538/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 445 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Human Services; 
U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 29, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3