START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 345

Chapter 345

(House Bill 672)

AN ACT concerning

School Health and Wellness Personnel Assessment and Maryland Council on
Advancement of School–Based Health Centers

FOR the purpose of requiring the State Department of Education and the Maryland
Department of Health jointly to conduct an assessment of school health and wellness
personnel each year; altering the membership of the Maryland Council on
Advancement of School–Based Health Centers; and generally relating to school
health and wellness personnel and the Maryland Council on Advancement of
School–Based Health Centers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–22A–05(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–22A–06(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 24–2501 and 24–2502 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 25. School
Health and Wellness Personnel Assessment”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–22A–05.

(a) There is a Maryland Council on Advancement of School–Based Health Centers
in the Department.

19–22A–06.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 345 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) The Council consists of the following [15] 16 voting members and 6 ex officio
members:

(1) One member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate, as an ex officio member;

(2) One member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
House, as an ex officio member;

(3) The Secretary of Health, or a designee of the Secretary, as an ex officio
member;

(4) The State Superintendent of Schools as an ex officio member;

(5) The Executive Director of the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange as an
ex officio member;

(6) The Chairman of the Commission, or a designee of the Chairman, as an
ex officio member; and

(7) The following [15] 16 members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) The President of the Maryland Assembly on School–Based
Health Care, or a designee of the President;

(ii) Three representatives of school–based health centers, nominated
by the Maryland Assembly on School–Based Health Care:

1. From a diverse array of sponsoring organizations; and

2. For at least one of the representatives, from a nursing
background;

(iii) One representative of the Public Schools Superintendents
Association of Maryland;

(iv) One representative of the Maryland Association of Boards of
Education;

(v) One elementary school principal of a school that has a
school–based health center;

(vi) One secondary school principal of a school that has a
school–based health center;

(vii) One representative of the Maryland Hospital Association;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 345

(viii) One representative of the Maryland Association of County
Health Officers;

(ix) One representative of a federally qualified health center,
nominated by the Mid–Atlantic Association of Community Health Centers;

(x) One representative of a managed care organization;

(xi) One representative of a commercial health insurance carrier;

(xii) One pediatrician, nominated by the Maryland Chapter of the
American Academy of Pediatrics; [and]

(xiii) One parent or guardian of a student who utilizes services at a
school–based health center; AND

(XIV) ONE SCHOOL NURSE, NOMINATED BY THE MARYLAND
ASSOCIATION OF SCHOOL HEALTH NURSES.

SUBTITLE 25. SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS PERSONNEL ASSESSMENT.

24–2501.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS PERSONNEL” INCLUDES:

(1) COUNSELORS;

(2) DENTAL HYGIENISTS;

(3) OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS;

(4) OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY ASSISTANTS;

(5) PHYSICAL THERAPISTS;

(6) SCHOOL COUNSELORS;

(7) SCHOOL NURSES;

(8) SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGISTS;

(9) SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKERS; AND

(10) SPEECH–LANGUAGE PATHOLOGISTS.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 345 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

24–2502.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
JOINTLY SHALL CONDUCT AN ASSESSMENT OF THE SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS
PERSONNEL WORKFORCE IN THE STATE EACH YEAR TO:

(1) IDENTIFY THE RATIO OF SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS
PERSONNEL TO STUDENTS AND SCHOOLS BY JURISDICTION;

(2) OBTAIN INFORMATION FROM EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM AND
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGARDING VACANCY RATES FOR EACH TYPE OF
PROVIDER OF SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS SERVICES; AND

(3) OBTAIN FEEDBACK FROM EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM, EACH
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT, ASSOCIATIONS OF SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS
PROFESSIONALS, AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS ON STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE THE
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION OF SCHOOL HEALTH AND WELLNESS PERSONNEL.

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2027, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
JOINTLY SHALL SUBMIT:

(1) SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE FINDINGS OF THE
ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(2) PUBLISH THE REPORT ON THE WEBSITE OF EACH AGENCY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4