START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

Chapter 256

(House Bill 600)

AN ACT concerning

Educational Equality for Service Members Act

FOR the purpose of establishing rules of interpretation related to the uniformed services;
altering the rule of interpretation for “veteran”; altering the application of certain
provisions of law governing education to apply to all uniformed services, rather than
only the armed forces; and generally relating to veterans and uniformed services.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 1–101(a), 4–122.1(a)(1), and 7–101(c)(1)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 1–101(a–1), (a–2), (b–1), (k–1), (n), and (o)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 4–122.1(a)(9)(vi), 4–128, 6–101.1, 7–101(b)(2)(i) and (c)(1)(iv)6. and (4),
7–115(a), 7–115.1, 7–129(a), (b), and (d)(1), 13–516(b–1), 15–106.4(a) and (b),
15–124(a), 16–109, 18–205, 18–405(d)(3), 18–406(g), ~~18–501(b)(2)(iii),~~
18–501(b)(2)(iii); 18–601(c)(1) and (d)(2), ~~18–604(a),~~ ~~(c),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(d),~~ and
18–604(a), (c), and (d) to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 6.
Scholarships for Uniformed Services and Public Safety Personnel and Their
Dependents and the Dependents of Certain School Employees”; and
18–708(l)(7), 18–1910(c)(2), 18–3005(1)(iv), and 21–309(a)(5)(ii)1.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 1–101.1, 1–101.2, 1–103.1, 1–114.1, 1–114.2, and 1–116
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 1–117
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

1–101.

(a) In this article, unless the context requires otherwise, the following words have
the meanings indicated.

(A–1) “ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(A–2) “ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(B–1) “ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(K–1) “RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(N) “UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(O) “VETERAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

4–122.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(9) “Serious family hardship” means:

(vi) Assignment of a parent or legal guardian of a child to active
[military] UNIFORMED SERVICES duty.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

4–128.

A county board of education is subject to the requirements relating to employees who
return from [military services] SERVICE IN THE UNIFORMED SERVICES in § 1–203 of the
Local Government Article.

6–101.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) [“Military] “ELIGIBLE spouse” means the spouse of [a] AN
ACTIVE service member or ELIGIBLE veteran.

(ii) [“Military] “ELIGIBLE spouse” includes a surviving spouse of:

1. [A] AN ELIGIBLE veteran; or

2. [A] AN ACTIVE service member who died within 1 year
before the date on which the application for an educator certificate LICENSE is submitted.

[(3) “Service member” means an individual who is an active duty member
of:

(i) The armed forces of the United States;

(ii) A reserve component of the armed forces of the United States; or

(iii) The National Guard of any state.

(4) (i) “Veteran” means a former service member who was discharged
from active duty under circumstances other than dishonorable within 1 year before the date
on which the application for an educator certificate is submitted.

(ii) “Veteran” does not include an individual who has completed
active duty and has been discharged for more than 1 year before the application for an
educator certificate is submitted.]

(3) (I) “ELIGIBLE VETERAN” MEANS A VETERAN WHO WAS
DISCHARGED FROM ACTIVE DUTY WITHIN 1 YEAR BEFORE THE DATE ON WHICH THE
APPLICATION FOR AN EDUCATOR CERTIFICATE LICENSE IS SUBMITTED.

(II) “ELIGIBLE VETERAN” DOES NOT INCLUDE A VETERAN WHO
HAS BEEN DISCHARGED FROM ACTIVE DUTY FOR MORE THAN 1 YEAR BEFORE THE
APPLICATION FOR AN EDUCATOR CERTIFICATE LICENSE IS SUBMITTED.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) The State Superintendent shall expedite educator certification LICENSURE
for [a] AN ACTIVE service member, ELIGIBLE veteran, or [military] ELIGIBLE spouse.

(c) To qualify for expedited educator certification LICENSURE under this section,
[a] AN ACTIVE service member, ELIGIBLE veteran, or [military] ELIGIBLE spouse shall:

(1) Submit an application for educator ~~certification~~ LICENSURE;

(2) Hold a valid educator license or certificate in good standing issued in
another state;

(3) Meet the applicable qualifications for certification LICENSURE in
COMAR 13A.12.01.04 and .05; and

(4) Pay the applicable certification LICENSURE fee.

(d) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the State Superintendent,
at the request of a local school system, may issue a temporary educator certificate LICENSE
to [a] AN ACTIVE service member, ELIGIBLE veteran, or [military] ELIGIBLE spouse who
holds a valid educator certificate or license in good standing issued in another state but
who does not meet the qualifications for educator certification LICENSURE in this State.

(2) A temporary educator certificate LICENSE issued under this subsection
authorizes the ACTIVE service member, ELIGIBLE veteran, or [military] ELIGIBLE spouse,
for a limited period of time, as determined by the State Superintendent, to be employed as
an educator in the State while the ACTIVE service member, ELIGIBLE veteran, or
[military] ELIGIBLE spouse completes additional requirements for certification
LICENSURE in this State.

(e) The Department shall publish prominently on its website the process for
obtaining expedited educator certification LICENSURE under this section.

(f) The State Board may adopt regulations to carry out this section.

7–101.

(b) (2) (i) [Upon] ON request and in accordance with a county board’s
policies concerning residency, a county superintendent:

1. May allow a child to attend school in the county even if the
child is not domiciled in that county with the child’s parent or guardian; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

2. Shall allow a dependent child of [a] AN ACTIVE service
member who is relocating to the State on [military] OFFICIAL orders to enroll in school in
the county in accordance with § 7–115.1 of this subtitle.

(c) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(iv) “Serious family hardship” means:

6. Assignment of a parent or legal guardian of a child to
active [military] UNIFORMED SERVICES duty.

(4) The affidavit shall be in the following form:

(i) I, the undersigned, am over eighteen (18) years of age and
competent to testify to the facts and matters set forth herein.

(ii) ____________________ (name of child), whose date of birth is
_____________, is living with me because of the following serious family hardship: (check
each that is applicable)

_____ death of father/mother/legal guardian
_____ serious illness of father/mother/legal guardian
_____ drug addiction of father/mother/legal guardian
_____ incarceration of father/mother/legal guardian
_____ abandonment by father/mother/legal guardian
_____ assignment of a parent or legal guardian of a child to active [military]
UNIFORMED SERVICES duty

(iii) The name and last known address of the child’s parent(s) or legal
guardian is:
___________________________________________________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________________________

(iv) My kinship relation to the child is ___________________________

(v) My address is:
___________________________________________________________________________________

Street Apt. No.
___________________________________________________________________________________

City State Zip Code

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(vi) I assumed informal kinship care of this child for 24 hours a day
and 7 days a week on __________________(day/month/year).

(vii) The name and address of the last school that the child attended
is:
___________________________________________________________________________________

___________________________________________________________________________________

(viii) The county superintendent may verify the facts contained in the
foregoing affidavit and conduct an audit on a case–by–case basis after the child has been
enrolled in the county public school system. If the county superintendent discovers fraud
or misrepresentation, the child shall be removed from the public school or county public
school system roll.

(ix) I solemnly affirm under the penalties of perjury that the contents
of the foregoing are true to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief.

___________________________________
Signature of affiant

___________________________________
(Day/month/year)

(x) Any person who willfully makes a material misrepresentation in
this affidavit shall be subject to a penalty payable to the county for three times the pro rata
share of tuition for the time the child fraudulently attends a public school in the county.

7–115.

(a) To facilitate the transfer of school–aged student dependents of [military
personnel] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBERS to and from the public schools of this State, the
State Board shall pursue reciprocity agreements with other states regarding the terms of
those student transfers.

7–115.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Dependent child” means an individual of school age who is a natural
child, a stepchild, an adopted child, or a financially dependent child of [a] AN ACTIVE
service member.

(3) “Enrollment” includes course registration and charter school lotteries.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

[(4) (i) “Service member” means an active duty member of the United
States armed forces.

(ii) “Service member” includes a member of the National Guard on
active duty orders.]

(b) A county superintendent shall allow a dependent child of [a] AN ACTIVE
service member who is relocating to the State on [military] OFFICIAL orders and is not
domiciled in that county during the enrollment period to apply for enrollment in a public
school in the county, in the same manner and at the same time as individuals domiciled in
the county.

(c) (1) Within 10 days of the published arrival date on the ACTIVE service
member’s [military] OFFICIAL orders, the ACTIVE service member shall provide the school
with:

(i) Satisfactory evidence of the dependent child’s status as a
dependent child of the ACTIVE service member;

(ii) A copy of the ACTIVE service member’s [military] OFFICIAL
orders to relocate; and

(iii) Proof of residence in the county.

(2) The ACTIVE service member may use the address of any of the following
as proof of residence:

(i) A temporary on–base lodging facility;

(ii) A purchased or leased home or apartment; or

(iii) Any federal government housing unit or off–base military
housing unit.

7–129.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Military–connected student” means a student who is a dependent of:

(i) [A current] AN ACTIVE DUTY UNIFORMED SERVICES member
[of:

1. The United States military serving in the Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marine Corps, Space Force, or Coast Guard on active duty;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. The Maryland National Guard or the National Guard of
any other state; or

3. A reserve force of the United States military];

(II) A MEMBER OF A RESERVE COMPONENT; or

[(ii)] (III) A member [of a military or reserve force] described in item
(i) OR (II) of this paragraph who was killed in the line of duty.

(3) “Program” means the Purple Star Schools Program.

(b) (1) There is a Purple Star Schools Program.

(2) The purpose of the Program is to recognize public schools that provide
strong services and support for military–connected students and their families when, as a
result of [military service] OFFICIAL ORDERS, a military–connected student transfers
schools.

(d) At a minimum, the Department’s criteria for a Purple Star School shall
require a public school to:

(1) Designate a staff member as a [military] UNIFORMED SERVICES
liaison, whose duties shall include:

(i) Identifying military–connected students who are newly enrolled
or soon to be enrolled at the school;

(ii) Serving as the point of contact between the school and newly
enrolled or soon to be enrolled military–connected students and their families;

(iii) Determining appropriate school services available to newly
enrolled or soon to be enrolled military–connected students;

(iv) Assisting in coordinating school programs for newly enrolled or
soon to be enrolled military–connected students; and

(v) Generally aiding with a military–connected student’s transition
to a new school;

13–516.

(b–1) (1) [In this subsection, “service member” means an individual who is an
active duty member of:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

(i) The armed forces of the United States;

(ii) A reserve component of the armed forces of the United States; or

(iii) The National Guard of any state.

(2) (i)] In calculating an individual’s years of experience in an
occupation or profession, the EMS Board shall give credit to the individual for all relevant
experience as [a] AN ACTIVE service member.

[(ii)] (2) The EMS Board shall credit any training and education
provided by the [military] UNIFORMED SERVICES and completed by [a] AN ACTIVE
service member toward any training or education requirements for licensure or certification
if the training or education is determined by the EMS Board to be:

[1.] (I) Substantially equivalent to the training or
education required by the EMS Board; and

[2.] (II) Not otherwise contrary to any other licensing
requirement.

15–106.4.

(a) This section applies to the following individuals:

(1) [An active duty member of the United States armed forces] AN ACTIVE
SERVICE MEMBER;

(2) The spouse of [an active duty member of the United States armed
forces] AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER;

(3) A financially dependent child of [an active duty member of the United
States armed forces] AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER;

(4) [An honorably discharged veteran of the United States armed forces] A
~~VETERAN;~~ or

(5) A member of the National Guard as defined in § 13–405(a)(3) of the
Public Safety Article.

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an individual described in
subsection (a) of this section who attends a public institution of higher education in the
State is exempt from paying nonresident tuition at a public institution of higher education
in this State if:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) The active [duty] SERVICE member [described in subsection (a) of this
section]:

(i) Is stationed in this State;

(ii) Resides in this State; or

(iii) Is domiciled in this State;

(2) The spouse or financially dependent child [described in subsection (a)
of this section] OF AN ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER presents documentation that, during
the time period in which the active [duty] SERVICE member met the requirements of
paragraph (1) of this subsection, the individual:

(i) Enrolled as an entering student in a public institution of higher
education in the State; or

(ii) Was accepted to attend a public institution of higher education
in the State;

(3) The [honorably discharged] veteran [described in subsection (a) of this
section] presents documentation that the individual:

(i) Was honorably discharged from the [United States armed forces]
UNIFORMED SERVICES; and

(ii) 1. Resides in this State; or

2. Is domiciled in this State; or

(4) The National Guard member ~~described~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(a)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~
is a member of the Maryland National Guard and joined or subsequently serves in the
Maryland National Guard to:

(i) Provide a Critical Military Occupational Skill; or

(ii) Be a member of the Air Force Critical Specialty Code as
determined by the National Guard.

15–124.

(a) In this section, “eligible service member” means:

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

(1) [A currently serving member of any branch of the armed forces of the
United States, including the National Guard and the military reserves] AN ACTIVE
SERVICE MEMBER; and

(2) A veteran [of any branch of the armed forces of the United States,
~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~National~~ ~~Guard~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~military~~ ~~reserves,~~ who has received an honorable
discharge or a certificate of satisfactory completion of military service].

16–109.

Each community college shall:

(1) Ensure all student advisors are trained on the unique needs and
resources available for students who are veterans;

(2) Employ at least one employee who, as a component of the employee’s
job duties and responsibilities, provides comprehensive and intensive enrollment and
advising services to current and prospective students who are veterans; and

(3) Establish a veterans resource center on campus to:

(i) Provide access to federal and State veterans resources;

(ii) Serve as a quiet place for veterans to study;

(iii) Enable veterans to connect to other veterans, helping them
renew the bonds of [military] service; and

(iv) Be the central hub for all activities on campus related to
veterans.

18–205.

Subject to rules and regulations adopted by the Commission, the Office shall grant
a deferment from the service obligation component of student financial assistance awarded
under this title to:

(1) An [individual] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who has been assigned
[military] duty outside of the State; or

(2) The spouse of an [individual] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who has been
assigned [military] duty outside of the State.

18–405.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) Each Senator may award not more than 10% of the funds available under this
subtitle to applicants planning to attend accredited undergraduate, graduate, or
professional institutions outside the State, provided the applicant:

(3) Is an [individual who is on active duty with the United States military]
ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who is domiciled in this State.

18–406.

(g) A recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is an [individual who is on active
duty with the United States military] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER and otherwise meets the
conditions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section may be domiciled in this State rather than
eligible for in–State tuition under this article.

18–501.

(b) A scholarship awarded under this subtitle may be used at:

(2) An accredited undergraduate, graduate, or professional institution
outside the State, if the applicant:

(iii) Is an [individual who is on active duty with the United States
military] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who is domiciled in this State; and

Subtitle 6. Scholarships for [Military] UNIFORMED SERVICES and Public Safety
Personnel and Their Dependents and the Dependents of Certain School Employees.

18–601.

(c) (1) The program for [military] UNIFORMED SERVICES and public safety
personnel and their eligible dependents is the Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial
Scholarship Program.

(d) (2) To apply for a scholarship under this section, the following persons are
required to be a resident of Maryland at the time of application or at the time of the
disabling or fatal event:

(i) A son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, or the surviving spouse
of a member of the [armed forces] UNIFORMED SERVICES who:

1. Died as a result of [military] service after December 7,
1941;

2. Suffered a service connected 100% permanent disability
after December 7, 1941; or

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

3. Was declared to be a prisoner of war or missing in action,
if that occurred on or after January 1, 1960, as a result of the Vietnam conflict, and if the
child was born prior to or while the parent was a prisoner of war or missing in action;

(ii) A prisoner of war or missing in action, if that occurred on or after
January 1, 1960, as a result of the Vietnam conflict and was a resident of this State at the
time the person was declared to be a prisoner of war or missing in action;

(iii) A veteran[, as defined under § 9–901 of the State Government
Article,] who:

1. Suffers a service connected disability of 25% or greater;
and

2. Has exhausted or is no longer eligible for federal veterans’
educational benefits;

(iv) A son, daughter, stepson, or stepdaughter of or the surviving
spouse of a victim of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks;

(v) A son, daughter, stepson, or stepdaughter of a school employee
who, as a result of an act of violence:

1. Died in the line of duty; or

2. Sustained an injury in the line of duty that rendered the
school employee 100% disabled; or

(vi) The surviving spouse of a school employee who, as a result of an
act of violence:

1. Died in the line of duty; or

2. Sustained an injury in the line of duty that rendered the
school employee 100% disabled.

18–604.

(a) For purposes of this section, an individual served in the Afghanistan or Iraq
conflict if the individual was [a] AN ACTIVE SERVICE member [of the uniformed services
of the United States] who served in:

(1) Afghanistan or contiguous air space, as defined in federal regulations,
on or after October 24, 2001; or

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Iraq or contiguous waters or air space, as defined in federal regulations,
on or after March 19, 2003.

(c) An individual may apply to the Office for a scholarship under this section if
the individual:

(1) Is a resident of Maryland;

(2) (i) Is accepted for admission or enrolled in the regular
undergraduate program at an eligible institution; or

(ii) Is accepted for admission or enrolled in a 2–year terminal
certificate program in which the course work is acceptable for transfer credit for an
accredited baccalaureate program in an eligible institution; and

(3) (i) 1. Is a veteran[, as defined under § 9–901 of the State
Government Article,] who served in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict;

2. Is an active [duty member of the armed forces] SERVICE
MEMBER who served in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict; or

3. Is a member of a reserve component [of the armed forces
of the United States or the Maryland National Guard] who was activated as a result of the
Afghanistan or Iraq conflict described in subsection (a) of this section; or

(ii) Is a son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, or spouse of:

1. A veteran or AN active [duty] SERVICE member [of the
armed forces] who is serving or has served in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict; or

2. A member of the reserve [or Maryland National Guard]
COMPONENT who was activated as a result of the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict described in
subsection (a) of this section.

(d) A scholarship awarded under this section may supplement, but is not
contingent on, any federal education benefits for which a recipient qualifies as a result of
an individual’s [military] service or status as a dependent of [a] AN ACTIVE SERVICE
member [of the armed forces] or of a veteran [of the armed forces].

18–708.

(l) (7) The Office shall grant a deferment from the service obligation required
under this section to:

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

(i) An [individual] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who has been
assigned [military] duty outside the State; or

(ii) The spouse of an [individual] ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER who
has been assigned [military] duty outside the State.

18–1910.

(c) (2) The time that a qualified beneficiary spends in active duty as a member
of the [United States armed forces] UNIFORMED SERVICES shall be added to the time
period allowed to exercise the benefits under a prepaid contract before a termination under
paragraph (1) of this subsection.

18–3005.

To qualify for participation in the Program, an individual shall:

(1) (iv) 1. Have been honorably discharged from the [United States
armed forces, the National Guard,] UNIFORMED SERVICES or a reserve component [of the
United States armed forces] within 18 months of the date of application;

2. Be a resident of Maryland; and

3. Have graduated from a public or private nonprofit
institution of higher education;

21–309.

(a) (5) (ii) “Qualified employee with a disability” includes:

1. An individual who has been determined by the Maryland
Department of Labor, in consultation with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, as
having been discharged or released from active duty in the [armed forces of the United
States] UNIFORMED SERVICES for a service–connected disability; and

Article – General Provisions

1–101.1.

“ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–101.2.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 256 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

“ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–103.1.

“ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–114.1.

“RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–114.2.

“SERVICE MEMBER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–116.

“UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

1–117.

(A) “VETERAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–901 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(B) With respect to any State program of benefits, rights, or privileges applicable
to a veteran under this Code, “veteran” includes[, if the individual is eligible under 38
U.S.C. § 101, a member of the commissioned corps of:

(1) the Public Health Service; or

(2) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or its
predecessor, the Coast and Geodetic Survey] AN INDIVIDUAL WHO MEETS THE
DEFINITION OF “VETERAN” UNDER § 9–901 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

Article – State Government

9–901.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

(B) “ACTIVE DUTY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

(C) “ACTIVE SERVICE MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS:

(1) AN ACTIVE DUTY MEMBER OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES; OR

(2) SERVING IN A RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE UNIFORMED
SERVICES ON ACTIVE DUTY ORDERS.

[(b)] (D) “ARMED FORCES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 10 U.S.C. § 101.

(E) “Board” means the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust.

[(c)] (F) “Department” means the Department of Veterans and Military
Families.

(G) “MILITARY FAMILY” INCLUDES THE SPOUSE AND DEPENDENT
CHILDREN OF A SERVICE MEMBER OR VETERAN RELATED BY BLOOD, MARRIAGE, OR
ADOPTION.

(H) “RESERVE COMPONENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

[(d)] (I) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families.

(J) “SERVICE MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A MEMBER OF:

(1) THE UNIFORMED SERVICES; OR

(2) A RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.

[(e)] (K) “Trust” means the Maryland Veterans Trust.

(L) “UNIFORMED SERVICES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 37 U.S.C. § 101.

[(f)] (M) Except as otherwise provided [in this subtitle], “veteran” [means an
individual who served on active duty in the armed forces of the United States, other than
for training, and was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable] HAS
THE MEANING STATED IN 38 U.S.C. § 101.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17