START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 614 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 614 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Local Earned Income Tax Credit - Calculation - County Income Tax Rate 
 
 
This bill specifies that the county income tax rate used to calculate the local earned income 
tax credit is the “applicable county income tax rate” for the tax year. If a county imposes 
marginal income tax rates, the applicable county income tax rate is the county’s lowest 
marginal income tax rate for the tax year. If a county imposes one or more flat income tax 
rates, the applicable county income tax rate is the county income tax rate that applies to the 
taxpayer, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and applies to tax year 2025 
and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s changes with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that the bill is largely clarifying in nature and does not directly 
affect local income tax revenues, as discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  A taxpayer who is eligible for the State earned income tax 
credit may claim a nonrefundable credit against the county income tax in an amount equal 
to the federal earned income credit allowed for the tax year (or that would be allowed but 
for certain federal minimum age or identification requirements) multiplied by 10 times the 
county income tax rate. Additionally, a county may provide, by law, for a refundable 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 614/ Page 2 
county earned income credit equal to the federal earned income credit allowed for the tax 
year (or that would have been allowed but for the federal minimum age or identification 
requirement) multiplied by 5 times the county income tax rate. To date, no county has 
provided for a refundable local earned income tax credit. 
 
Chapter 23 of the 2021 special session authorized counties to impose the county income 
tax on a bracket basis. However, absent conforming changes to the provisions governing 
the calculation of the local earned income tax credit, the statute is unclear as to the county 
income tax rate that should be used to calculate the credit for a resident of a county that has 
adopted bracket-based income tax rates. 
 
To date, only Anne Arundel County has adopted bracket-based marginal income tax rates; 
for tax year 2025, the county imposes a bottom marginal income tax rate of 2.70% on the 
first $50,000 of Maryland taxable income ($75,000 for joint filers, heads of household, and 
qualified surviving spouses). Per the Comptroller’s resident income tax return instructions 
for tax years 2023 and 2024, Anne Arundel County residents must calculate the amount of 
the local earned income tax credit using the county’s bottom marginal income tax rate of 
2.70%. Thus, the bill’s changes codify the Comptroller’s current practice with respect to 
Anne Arundel County residents. 
 
Frederick County, on the other hand, has adopted a flat income tax rate schedule with rates 
that vary based on income level. For tax year 2025, Frederick County residents with 
Maryland taxable income of up to $25,000 are subject to the minimum allowable county 
income tax rate of 2.25%. Frederick County residents calculate the amount of the local 
earned income tax credit using the county income tax rate that otherwise applies to 
them – thus the bill’s changes codify the current calculation of the credit for residents of 
Frederick County. 
 
Local Revenues:  For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that the bill is largely 
clarifying in nature and conforms the statute to the existing practice and, thus, does not 
directly affect local income tax revenues. However, the Department of Legislative Services 
notes that, to the extent additional counties adopt bracket-based marginal income tax rates, 
the structuring of income brackets may have the effect of reducing the amount of the local 
earned income tax credit relative to the county income tax for some taxpayers – 
specifically, if affected taxpayers are subject to an average county income tax rate that is 
greater than the lowest marginal county income tax rate. Given the tax year 2025 income 
brackets for Anne Arundel County and income eligibility limits for the earned income tax 
credit, it is assumed that the value of the local earned income tax credit for eligible  
Anne Arundel County residents generally is not affected for tax year 2025. It is also 
assumed that counties that adopt bracket-based marginal income tax rates can structure 
brackets and rates in a manner that is revenue neutral and/or preserves the value of the local 
earned income tax credit for affected taxpayers. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 614/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery 
counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3