START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 633 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 633 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Gaming - Slot Machines - Skills-Based Amusement Devices 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “slot machine” to exclude a machine, apparatus, or device 
that is a skills-based amusement device that awards prizes of merchandise, tickets, tokens, 
or other objects that per play do not exceed minimal value, as approved by State Lottery 
and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC) regulation, and may be accumulated and 
exchanged for noncash merchandise or prizes of value that is similar to the cumulated value 
of the objects exchanged and does not exceed a minimal wholesale value of $599. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Enforcement can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A skills-based amusement device that awards prizes of a minimal value, 
as approved by SLGCC regulation, is not a slot machine. Minimal value in regulations is 
defined as having a wholesale value of $30 or less.  
 
Chapter 595 of 2016 altered the definition of a slot machine to exclude a machine, 
apparatus, or device that is a skills-based device that awards noncash merchandise and is 
located at a licensed family entertainment center in Worcester County. SLGCC may issue 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 633/ Page 2 
an amusement gaming license to a family entertainment center that meets specified 
requirements in Worcester County.  
 
A licensed family entertainment center may operate skills-based devices that award 
noncash prizes of minimal value ($30 as established in regulations) and up to 
10 skills-based devices that award noncash prizes with a minimal wholesale value that does 
not exceed $599. A family entertainment center may not exchange merchandise for money. 
SLGCC may determine that a device at a family entertainment center is an illegal gaming 
device and order the device to be removed from the premises. An amusement gaming 
license may not be transferred to another geographic location.  
 
Under COMAR 36.08.04.01, the merchandise, prizes, tickets, tokens or other objects that 
are awarded by a skills-based amusement device may be accumulated and exchanged for 
noncash merchandise or prizes of value that is similar to the cumulative value of the items 
exchanged.  
 
Additional Comments:  The State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency published 
proposed regulations in August 2024 that would amend COMAR 36.08.04.01 so that the 
merchandise, prizes, tickets, tokens or other objects that are awarded by a skills-based 
amusement device may be accumulated and exchanged for non-cash merchandise or prizes 
of value that have a wholesale value of not more than the minimal value. As of 
February 2025, these regulations have not been submitted to the Maryland Register for 
final action.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 667 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2