START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 600 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 600 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Educational Equality for Service Members Act 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the Education, 
General Provisions, and State Government Articles of the Maryland Code, primarily by 
reference to definitions in the U.S. Code. While numerous alterations within the bill 
represent only stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. These changes 
generally make certain provisions more broadly applicable to additional service members, 
including those related to eligibility for certain benefits or privileges (e.g., exceptions to 
enrollment requirements, expedited teacher credentialing, tuition exemptions, scholarship 
eligibility, etc.). The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the number of additional awards made under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated, expanding eligibility may increase general fund expenditures and 
Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund special fund revenues and 
expenditures by an estimated $9,200 per award annually, as discussed below. Otherwise, 
State finances are not materially affected. This bill may increase the cost of an 
entitlement program beginning in FY 2026.  
  
Local Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, local 
finances are not materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the 
State Government Article (§ 9-901). This includes the definition of “military family” as 
well as all terms found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse and 
dependent children of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or adoption.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 600/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 600/ Page 3 
Expanded Eligibility for Privileges and Benefits 
 
In General:  Numerous provisions within the Education Article explicitly extend certain 
benefits or privileges to members of the armed forces or the military. Other provisions 
extend benefits or privileges to service members; however, the applicable definitions for 
“service members” may refer only to active-duty members of the armed forces, a reserve 
component of the armed forces, or the National Guard of any state. The bill expands certain 
provisions to apply more broadly, some of which are described below.  
 
Enrollment in Public Schools:  Generally, a student must attend the school designated to 
serve the student’s attendance area. However, local boards of education have various 
policies allowing for the enrollment (or the transfer) of a student outside of his or her 
attendance area, under certain circumstances. For example, a local school superintendent 
must allow a student whose parent or guardian resides in another school district to attend 
the local school system if the student is living with a relative within the school district due 
to a serious family hardship and the student’s relative is providing informal kinship care to 
the student. Under current law, “serious family hardship” includes assignment of a parent 
or legal guardian to active military duty. The bill expands this definition to include 
assignment to active uniformed services duty, thereby explicitly extending eligibility to a 
parent or guardian on assignment to active duty with the Public Health Service (PHS) or 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).  
 
Similarly, a local superintendent is required to allow a dependent child of a service member 
who is relocating to the State on military orders to apply for enrollment in a public school 
in the same manner and at the same time as individuals who reside in the county. The 
applicable definition of “service member” means an active-duty member of the 
United States armed forces, including a member of the National Guard on active-duty 
orders. The bill expands applicability by repealing the existing definition of “service 
member” and incorporating the definition of “active serve member” (as defined above); 
other conforming changes are also made.  
 
Teacher Credentialing:  Under current law, the State Superintendent of Schools must 
expedite educator certification for a service member, veteran, or military spouse provided 
they meet certain specified qualifications. However, the applicable definitions include 
references to the armed forces, thereby limiting applicability. The bill expands the 
individuals eligible for expedited certification to include all “active service members,” as 
defined above, thereby applying the benefit more broadly. The bill also makes technical 
changes to conform statute to terminology used by the Maryland State Department of 
Education, which, as of April 1, 2024, has introduced new licenses and licensing 
requirements for educators, replacing the old certification system. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 600/ Page 4 
Emergency Medical Services:  With specified exceptions, an individual may not provide 
emergency medical services (EMS) in the State unless issued a license or certificate by the 
EMS Board. Under current law, the EMS Board must give credit to an individual for all 
relevant experience as a “service member” (defined as an active-duty member of the  
armed forces of the United States, a reserve component of the armed forces, or the  
National Guard of any state). The EMS Board must also credit training and education 
provided by the military completed by a service member toward the service member’s 
licensure or certification under certain circumstances. The bill replaces the definition of 
“service member” with “active service member” (as defined above) and likewise specifies 
that training provided by the uniformed services must be eligible to be credited toward the 
licensure or certification under certain circumstances. The bill thereby expands credit for 
EMS experience to include experience gained by a current or former member of PHS or 
NOAA.  
 
Nonresident Tuition Exemption for Military Personnel:  Broadly, public institutions of 
higher education in Maryland charge in-state tuition rates to the following four categories 
of military individuals, subject to additional requirements:  (1) active-duty members of the 
United States armed forces; (2) the spouses and dependent children of active-duty members 
of the armed forces; (3) honorably discharged veterans of the armed forces; and 
(4) members of the National Guard. The bill updates these categories to apply more broadly 
and makes conforming changes so that groups eligible for in‐state tuition include, as further 
defined in the bill, (1) active service members; (2) the spouses and dependent children of 
active service members; (3) honorably discharged veterans; and (4) members of the 
National Guard.  
 
Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarships Program:  The Edward T. and 
Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program makes awards to specified public safety 
personnel and their eligible dependents to attend an eligible postsecondary institution in 
the State for five years of full-time study or eight years of part-time study. Under current 
law, eligible scholarship applicants include, as further specified, residents of Maryland who 
are the children, stepchildren, or surviving spouses of members of the armed forces who 
(1) died as a result of military service after December 7, 1941; (2) suffered a 
service-connected 100% permanent disability after December 7, 1941; or (3) were declared 
to be prisoners of war or missing in action as a result of the Vietnam conflict. The bill 
expands eligibility by specifying that children and surviving spouses of uniformed services 
members are eligible for the scholarship.  
 
Other Changes:  The bill alters several other provisions that extend applicability to 
individuals meeting certain requirements, generally related to military service. Alterations 
similar to those described above – as well as other changes that are clarifying or technical 
in nature (and do not otherwise expand applicability) – are among those made within 
various other sections of statute, including provisions related to:   

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 600/ Page 5 
 
reemployment of public school employees;  
 
reciprocity agreements with other states regarding the transfer of student dependents 
of military personnel;  
 
the Purple Star Schools Program;  
 
priority course registration within public institutions of higher education;  
 
deferment from the service obligation component of student financial assistance 
provided under Title 18 of the Education Article, including Workforce Shortage 
Student Assistance grants;  
 
Senatorial and Delegate scholarships;  
 
the Douglas J.J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship; 
 
refunds made under the Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College 
Trust;  
 
the Maryland Technology Internship Program; and 
 
the Maryland Disability Employment Tax Credit.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Although the changes in the bill expand access to various State 
benefits and privileges, primarily to certain members (or former members) of PHS and 
NOAA (including reserve components, as applicable), these changes represent a small 
number of people. In some cases, the bill extends benefits or privileges only to disabled 
members of these services, which is an even smaller population.  
 
In January 2020, the latest date for which information is readily available, there were an 
estimated 2,200 PHS officers living in Maryland, with about 1,500 on active duty and 
700 retired. As of September 2024, there are 53 NOAA officers in the State. Compared to 
the 321,000 veterans living in Maryland who are already covered by these programs, this 
change is very small.  
 
Elementary and Secondary School Enrollment 
 
This analysis assumes that, although the bill may alter the process for enrollment of the 
children of military dependent children, it nevertheless has minimal impact on the overall 
number of such children living in the State and enrolling in public schools or the number 
of children in one county relative to another. Accordingly, there is no material impact 
anticipated on State aid to education.  
 
Scholarships 
 
In fiscal 2024, 736 scholarships were awarded under the Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy 
Memorial Scholarship, representing more than $6.8 million in funding. Therefore, 
expanding eligibility may increase expenditures by an estimated $9,200 per award 
annually, based on current scholarship awards. However, each scholarship award may be 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 600/ Page 6 
up to the tuition and mandatory fees of a full-time undergraduate Maryland resident at the 
four-year public institution with the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident 
undergraduate within the University System of Maryland (USM), other than the University 
of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the University of Maryland Global Campus.  
 
Chapter 23 of 2022 mandates at least $4.0 million for the Edward T. Conroy and 
Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund beginning in fiscal 2024; even so, funding still must be 
allocated based on the number of eligible individuals and can exceed the mandated 
$4.0 million. Expanding eligibility to include additional members of the uniformed 
services is expected to increase the number of annual award recipients beginning in 
fiscal 2026. These additional awards likely cannot be absorbed by existing appropriations 
to the program as the Maryland Higher Education Commission advises the program is 
already on track to exceed the $7.0 million in funding appropriated in the fiscal 2025 
budget. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $7.0 million 
for the Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund in fiscal 2026; another 
$4.0 million is included as a deficiency appropriation for fiscal 2025. 
 
The bill’s changes to other scholarship programs are not anticipated to have a material 
impact.  
 
Nonresident Tuition Exemption 
 
Tuition revenues at public institutions of higher education are likely not materially affected. 
Public four-year institutions have considerable autonomy over admissions and generally 
maintain fairly stable proportions of in-state and out-of-state students. The bill does not 
affect that autonomy. Therefore, despite the differences in tuition levels for in-state and 
out-of-state students, tuition revenues at most institutions are not materially affected. As 
long as there are no major adjustments to the proportion of students who qualify for in-state 
tuition, institutions can adjust admissions to avoid any significant loss of tuition revenue. 
Nevertheless, the fiscal impact of this bill includes a potential minimal loss of tuition and 
fee revenues equal to the difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees for 
each eligible student who enrolls at a USM institution, Morgan State University, or 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 276 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 600/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
Systems; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural 
Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Maryland Insurance Administration; State Retirement Agency; Baltimore City 
Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7