START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 685 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 685 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Garrett County Alcoholic Beverages Act of 2025 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) a Class BDR-DC (deluxe complex restaurant) beer and wine 
license; (2) a class BDR-DC (deluxe complex restaurant) beer, wine, and liquor license; 
(3) a Class BRC-resort complex beer and wine license; and (4) a Class BRC-resort complex 
beer, wine, and liquor license in Garrett County. The bill also (1) clarifies that applicants 
for specified alcoholic beverages licenses must submit an application on the form that the 
board provides; (2) clarifies public notice requirements the board must follow prior to 
holding a hearing on specified alcoholic beverages license applications; and (3) clarifies 
that a nonprofit organization, rather than a club, may qualify for specified Class C 
multiple day and multiple event licenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Garret County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent 
additional alcoholic beverages licenses are issued under the bill. Garret County can handle 
any additional enforcement within existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Class BDR-DC (Deluxe Complex Restaurant) Beer and Wine License – Established 
 
The board may issue a Class BDR-DC (deluxe complex restaurant) beer and wine license 
to a holder of any Class B alcoholic beverages license issued by the board or an equivalent 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 685/ Page 2 
license that the local licensing board of a different jurisdiction issues only for use by a 
restaurant. The board may issue the license for use by a deluxe complex restaurant, as 
defined in regulations of the board, that (1) has seating for at least 20 individuals and (2) has 
a minimum capital investment of $25,000 for the restaurant facilities, not including the cost 
of land or buildings. If the applicant purchases or leases an existing building, the capital 
investment attributable to the cost of the land and improvements must be based on the 
assessed value of the land and improvements in accordance with the records of the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) at the time of purchase.  
 
The license authorizes the holder to sell, at retail, at the place described in the license 
(1) beer and wine for on-premises consumption and (2) beer for off-premises consumption. 
The board may issue the license with a catering option. A holder of a Class BDR-DC 
(deluxe complex restaurant) beer and wine license with a catering option may sell beer and 
wine for consumption at events that the license holder caters off the licensed premises. To 
exercise the catering option, the license holder must provide food at the catered event. The 
license holder may exercise the catering option only during the hours and days that the 
board allows.  
 
The annual license fees are (1) $500 for a six-day license without a catering option;  
(2) $625 for a six-day license with a catering option; (3) $585 for a seven-day license 
without a catering option; and (4) $710 for a seven-day license with a catering option. The 
board must charge a one-time issuing fee for a new license in an equal amount to the annual 
license fee and adopt regulations. 
 
Class 
BDR-DC 
(Deluxe 
Complex 
Restaurant) 
Beer, 
Wine, 
and 
Liquor 
License – Established 
 
The board may issue a Class BRC-DC (deluxe complex restaurant) beer, wine, and liquor 
license to a holder of any Class B alcoholic beverages license issued by the board or an 
equivalent license that the local licensing board of a different jurisdiction issues only for 
use by a restaurant. The board may issue the license for use by a deluxe complex restaurant, 
as defined in the regulations of the board with (1) seating at tables, not including seats at 
bars or counters, for at least 20 individuals and (2) a capital investment of at least $250,000 
for the restaurant facilities, not including the cost of land or buildings. If an applicant 
purchases or leases an existing building, the capital investment attributable to the cost of 
the land and improvements must be based on the assessed value of the land and 
improvements in accordance with the records of SDAT at the time of purchase or lease.  
 
The license authorizes the license holder to sell, at retail, at the place described in the 
license (1) beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption and (2) beer for 
off-premises consumption. A license holder of a Class BDR-DC (deluxe complex 
restaurant) license may acquire a catering option that authorizes the license holder to sell 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 685/ Page 3 
beer, wine, and liquor for consumption at events catered by the license holder in the county 
off the licensed premises. A license holder providing alcoholic beverages at a catered event 
off the licensed premises must also provide food. The license holder may exercise catering 
privileges only during the hours and days that are authorized under the Class B license, 
which are Monday through Saturday, from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, and 
Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to midnight, as specified.  
 
The annual license fees are (1) $2,250 for a six-day license without a catering option; 
(2) $2,750 for a six-day license with a catering option; (3) 2,625 for a seven-day license 
without a catering option; and (4) $3,125 for a seven-day license with a catering option. 
The board must charge a one-time issuing fee for a new license in an amount equal to the 
annual license fee and adopt regulations.  
 
Class BRC-Resort Complex Beer and Wine License – Established 
 
The board may issue a Class BRC-resort beer and wine license to a license holder for a 
complex that has at least two facilities (1) located on the same contiguous property; 
(2) separated by at least 150 feet from the main area of the licensed premises; and 
(3) determined by the board to be a hotel, motel, recreational, or restaurant facilities. The 
license authorizes the license holder to sell at specified locations at retail at the place 
described in the license (1) beer and wine for on-premises consumption and (2) beer for 
off-premises consumption. The license holder may sell beer and wine during the hours and 
days set out for a Class B beer and wine license which are Monday through Saturday, from  
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, and Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to midnight, as 
specified.  
 
The annual license fees are (1) $700 for a six-day license for two facilities; (2) $350 for 
each additional facility for a six-day license; (3) $820 for a seven-day license for 
two facilities; and (4) $410 for each additional facility for a seven-day license. The board 
must charge a one-time issuing fee for a new license in an equal amount to the annual 
license fee and adopt regulations.  
 
Class BRC-Resort Complex Beer, Wine, and Liquor License – Established 
 
The board may issue a Class BRC-resort complex beer, wine, and liquor license to a license 
holder for a complex that has at least two facilities that are (1) located on the same 
contiguous property; (2) separated by at least 150 feet from the main area of the licensed 
premises; and (3) determined by the board to be a hotel, motel, recreational, or restaurant 
facilities. The license authorizes the license holder to sell at specified locations at retail at 
the place described in the license (1) beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption 
and (2) beer for off-premises consumption. The license holder may sell beer, wine, and 
liquor during the hours and days as set out for a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 685/ Page 4 
which are Monday through Saturday, from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, and 
Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to midnight, as specified.  
 
The annual license fees are (1) $3,000 for a six-day license for two facilities; (2) $1,500 for 
each additional facility for a six-day license; (3) $3,500 for a seven-day license for 
two facilities; and (4) $1,750 for each additional facility for a seven-day license. The board 
must charge a one-time issuing fee for a new license in an amount equal to the annual 
license fee and adopt regulations. 
 
Applications for Specified Licenses – Hearings, Notice, and Regulations 
 
Generally, as part of the application process for specified alcoholic beverages licenses for 
use at an event, the applicant must submit the application on a form that the board provides. 
The board must (1) hold a hearing on a license application; (2) publish notice of the license 
application hearing one time at least seven days before the hearing; (3) choose a fixed 
period of time for the event of up to three consecutive days, excluding Sunday; and 
(4) choose a location that is not already licensed. The board must also adopt regulations to 
carry out the requirements related to the specified alcoholic beverages license.  
 
The bill generally conforms these requirements so they apply to (1) a beer festival license; 
(2) a Class C beer and wine street festival license; (3) a beer and wine festival license; 
(4) a beer, wine, and liquor festival license; and (5) a wine festival license, as specified 
under the bill.  
 
Class C Multiple Day Alcoholic Beverages License 
 
Generally, the board may issue a Class C multiple day license to a club, and the board may 
issue a multiple event license to a club that qualifies for a Class C multiple day license. 
 
The bill establishes that the specified licenses may be issued to a nonprofit organization, 
rather than a club. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Garrett County revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2026, to the 
extent the board issues Class BDR-DC (deluxe complex restaurant) and Class BRC-resort 
complex licenses. As the number of individuals that will obtain a license under the bill is 
unknown, any potential increase in Garrett County license fee revenues under the bill 
cannot be reliably estimated. Garrett County can handle the bill’s requirements and any 
administrative changes with existing resources. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 685/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 826 (Senator McKay) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5