START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 666 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 666 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Required 
Coverage for Calcium Score Testing 
 
 
This bill requires an insurer, a nonprofit health service plan, and a health maintenance 
organization (collectively known as carriers), as well as the Maryland Medicaid program, 
to cover calcium score testing in accordance with the most recent guidelines issued by the 
American College of Cardiology that expand the scope of preventive care services for the 
benefit of consumers. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or 
after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2026 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of additional 
filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. To the extent the bill increases the 
number of Medicaid participants that receive calcium score testing, Medicaid expenditures 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) may increase; however, any impact is likely 
minimal as this service is already covered. No material effect on the State Employee and 
Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program as the program already provides coverage as 
required under the bill. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance, costs may 
increase for local governments that purchase fully insured plans. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 666/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 
10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the following 
categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; (3) hospitalization; 
(4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, 
including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and 
habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness 
services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State benchmark 
plan and, notwithstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be the benefits 
required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans offered to small 
employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the Maryland Health 
Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in MHBE. 
 
Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, elderly or 
disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for Medicaid, 
applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Effective January 1, 2014, Medicaid 
coverage was expanded to persons with household incomes up to 138% of federal poverty 
guidelines, as authorized under ACA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Medicaid currently covers calcium score testing. To the extent the 
bill increases the number of individuals receiving calcium score testing, Medicaid costs 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) may increase. However, any impact is likely to be 
minimal as this service is already covered. Furthermore, any additional costs may be offset 
by prevention or early intervention of cardiac events. 
 
Additional Comments:  A coronary artery calcium test is a CT scan of the heart that shows 
any calcium deposits in the coronary arteries (“calcium score”). The calcium score may 
help predict the risk of a future heart attack and help determine risk for cardiovascular 
disease. Texas requires coverage of either a calcium scoring study or a carotid 
intima-media thickness study every five years for certain populations (men ages 45 to 75 
or women ages 55 to 75 who have either diabetes or a Framingham cardiac risk score of 
intermediate or higher). 
 
The Maryland Health Care Commission commissioned a calcium score testing analysis by 
Milliman in December 2024. The report concluded that mandated coverage of such testing 
as proposed under the bill is estimated to increase 2026 per member per year premiums by 
$0.009 to $0.147 in the fully insured commercial market and by $0.019 to $0.494 for the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 666/ Page 3 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. The impact is driven 
by an increase in utilization of calcium score testing as a result of expanded coverage and 
increased awareness, and an increase in statin therapy utilization as a result of additional 
tests. Expenditures are offset by savings from avoided ischemic cardiac events as a result 
of increased statin therapy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1137 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 60 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3