START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 643 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 643 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program - 
Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
(LARP) to include veterinary practitioners and veterinary technicians who received a 
graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from any accredited veterinary college or 
university. Veterinary practitioners and technicians must also have provided veterinary 
services (or veterinary technician services) as an employee in the State for a period not less 
than five years or as a volunteer for a minimum of 100 hours per year for a period not less 
than three years at an animal shelter that is owned by (1) a local government; (2) an 
organization contracted to perform animal control services for a local government; or (3) an 
organization that shelters animals and was a recipient of the Maryland Spay and Neuter 
Grants Program during the prior year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP does not require 
additional spending, as discussed below. Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC) expenditures increase minimally for software upgrades and to alter program 
publicity as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. However, the bill may encourage additional veterinarians and 
veterinary technicians to work or volunteer in local shelters. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 643/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Generally 
 
The LARPs operated by the State of Maryland provide loan repayment assistance in 
exchange for specific service commitments – mostly to ensure underserved areas and 
populations in the State have access to essential professionals. These programs include the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP, Maryland Dent-Care LARP, Maryland LARP for Physicians and 
Physician Assistants, Maryland LARP for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff, and 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents. There is also a program for 
farmers that has not received funding.  
 
Individuals must have received a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a 
college or university in the State or a school of law or have received a Resident Teacher 
Certificate from the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) after completing an 
approved alternative teaching preparation program. Except for the Maryland LARP for 
Police Officers and Probation Agents and the Maryland LARP for Farmers, they must also 
be employed in State or local government or in a nonprofit organization. For the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP, the Maryland Dent-Care LARP, and the Maryland LARP for 
Physicians and Physician Assistants, employment must also assist low-income, 
underserved residents or underserved areas in the State. For the Maryland LARP for 
Police Officers and Probation Agents, individuals must obtain employment as a 
police officer or probation agent in the State for at least 2 years. For the Maryland LARP 
for Farmers, individuals must have been a farmer for at least 5 years, but not more than 
10 years since obtaining the degree.  
 
The State’s LARP for Foster Care Recipients provides loan assistance repayment that is 
not based on any specific professional designation. Instead, the program assists in the 
repayment of higher education loans owed by foster care recipients with the goal of 
increasing higher education access. 
 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
The Janet L. Hoffman LARP is administered by the Office of Student Financial Assistance 
to assist in the repayment of any higher education loan owed by an individual who:   
 
 
either (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college 
or university in the State, a law school, or, for mental health professionals only, any 
accredited college or university or (2) receives a Resident Teacher Certificate from 
MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 643/ Page 3 
 
obtains eligible employment; 
 
receives an income less than the maximum eligible total income levels established 
by the office, including any additional sources of income; and 
 
satisfies any other criteria established.  
 
Eligible employment fields include lawyers, degree- or diploma-holding registered nurses, 
licensed clinical therapists, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, speech 
pathologists, teachers, and specified school health professionals. A licensed clinical 
alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or 
a licensed clinical professional counselor whose practice is located in a high-need 
geographic area of the State as determined by the Maryland Department of Health may 
receive assistance under the program. 
 
For the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, awards are determined by an applicant’s overall reported 
educational debt at the time of application. Award funds are distributed annually over a 
three-year period as long as the recipient remains eligible and continues to submit the 
required annual employment, lender, and tax documentation by the deadline. 
 
Spay and Neuter Grants Program 
 
Chapters 561 and 562 of 2013 established and Chapter 92 of 2022 subsequently extended 
the Spay/Neuter Fund through September 30, 2032. The fund has the purpose of reducing 
animal shelter overpopulation and cat and dog euthanasia rates by financing grants to local 
governments and animal welfare organizations for programs that most efficiently facilitate 
and promote the provision of spay and neuter services for cats and dogs in the State. The 
fund receives revenue from a fee imposed on each registered brand name or product name 
of dog or cat food. The current fee, which will remain in effect until the fund’s termination 
date, is $100. Fees are paid by the person registering the pet food, in accordance with 
Maryland Department of Agriculture guidelines. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding eligibility does not necessarily require additional 
spending; however, to make additional awards, an estimated $5,800 per award is necessary. 
In fiscal 2024, 85 awards totaling $493,500 were made under the Janet L. Hoffman LARP. 
Thus, average awards were approximately $5,800 per individual.  
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes approximately 
$4.1 million in funding for the program. Originally, $7.1 million was allocated for the 
program in fiscal 2025; however, the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes a $3.0 million reduction to the fiscal 2025 appropriation. In fiscal 2024, the 
program received $6.4 million. Any additional grants made beginning in fiscal 2026 may 
increase expenditures by approximately $5,800 per individual to the extent existing 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 643/ Page 4 
appropriated funds are insufficient to cover additional awards. Otherwise, individuals can 
be added to the Janet L. Hoffman LARP waiting list with no additional resources. 
 
MHEC advises enhancing the existing Maryland College Aid Processing System 
(MDCAPS) to include veterinarians under the Janet L. Hoffman LARP requires 
approximately $8,000 in one-time costs in fiscal 2026 to enhance MDCAPS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 900 and HB 1398 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 318 (Senator Lewis Young, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; University System of Maryland; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Baltimore, Charles, and Garrett counties; City of Laurel; 
Town of La Plata; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 28, 2025 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4