START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 699 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 699 
(Delegate Allen, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
General Provisions - Veterans Benefits - Honorable Discharge 
 
 
This bill, with respect to any State program of benefits, rights, or privileges applicable to a 
veteran under Maryland law, alters the definition of “honorable discharge” to include a 
discharge that is less than honorable if the Department of Veterans and Military Families 
(DVMF) determines an individual is eligible for State benefits based on the criteria 
established in 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 (“benefit eligibility based on character of discharge”). 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DVMF can offer State veterans’ benefits to specified veterans using existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially 
affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  With respect to any State program of benefits, rights, or privileges 
applicable to a veteran under Maryland law, “honorable discharge” includes discharge that 
is less than honorable (1) solely due to the sexual orientation or gender identity of the 
individual being discharged or (2) based on a statement or consensual act of the individual 
being discharged related to the individual’s sexual orientation or gender identity, if the 
statement or consensual act was prohibited by the military or naval service at the time of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 699/ Page 2 
discharge. A veteran must submit to the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families 
documentation that provides the basis for the veteran’s discharge. 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 9 of the State Government Article (Department of Veterans and Military 
Families) defines “veteran” as an individual who served on active duty in the armed forces 
of the United States, other than for training, and was discharged or released under 
conditions other than dishonorable. 
 
Generally, DVMF delivers services and programs to assist Maryland veterans, their 
families, and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in 
recognition for their service. DVMF assures the quality maintenance of veterans’ 
cemeteries and memorials to honor Maryland veterans. DVMF also manages  
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH), an assisted living and skilled nursing facility for 
veterans and their eligible spouses who are unable to care for themselves due to disability, 
advancing age, or who require nursing home care. Additionally, DVMF engages in public 
awareness and outreach to veterans, their families, and other stakeholders. 
 
Federal Veterans’ Benefits Eligibility Based on Character of Discharge 
 
Generally, for a veteran to receive federal veterans’ benefits, the veteran’s character of 
discharge must be considered other than dishonorable (e.g., honorable, under honorable 
conditions, and general), though veterans’ benefits are not payable where the former 
service member was discharged or released under the following conditions:  (1) as a 
conscientious objector who refused to perform military duty, wear the uniform, or comply 
with lawful orders of competent military authorities; (2) by reason of the sentence of a 
general court-martial; (3) resignation by an officer for the good of the service; (4) as a 
deserter; (5) as an alien during a period of hostilities, where it is affirmatively shown that 
the former service member requested his or her release; or (6) by reason of a discharge 
under other than honorable conditions issued as a result of an absence without official leave 
for a continuous period of at least 180 days, as specified. 
 
Individuals receiving an undesirable, bad conduct, or other than honorable discharge may 
be able to receive veterans’ benefits with a “compelling circumstances exception” after an 
examination of specified factors that may generally mitigate certain forms of misconduct 
or an absence without official leave. Those factors include (1) specified mental or cognitive 
impairments at the time of the prolonged absence or misconduct; (2) physical health, 
including physical trauma and any side effects of medication; (3) combat-related or 
overseas-related hardship; (4) sexual abuse/assault; (5) duress, coercion, or desperation; 
(6) family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties; or (7) age, education, 
cultural background, and judgmental maturity. However, a compelling circumstances 
exception is not applicable for discharges in lieu of trial, mutiny, or espionage, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 699/ Page 3 
An individual may also request a review of the discharge by a discharge review board. 
Generally, discharge review boards review the character, reason, and authority of a 
discharge of any service member discharged from active military service within the past 
15 years and are authorized to upgrade the discharge characterization under specified 
conditions. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DVMF advises that it can determine the discharge status of 
individuals affected under the bill and the basis for the discharge with existing budgeted 
resources. DVMF also advises that it can administer State veterans’ benefits within existing 
resources. However, DVMF advises that the programs it administers generally involve 
receipt of federal funds for affected veterans. Some individuals may already be able to 
receive a compelling circumstances exception or an upgraded discharge characterization 
and, therefore, be eligible for federal veterans’ benefits. However, DVMF may determine 
some individuals may qualify for State veterans’ benefits but not receive a compelling 
circumstances exception or an upgraded discharge characterization. As a result, DVMF 
may be unable to receive per diem reimbursement from the federal government for 
individuals affected under the bill who are housed at CHVH, or burial benefits for the 
Cemetery Program after an individual is buried. DVMF advises that the department can 
absorb those costs with general funds; however, an exact estimate of those costs is not 
available at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 491 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; U.S. Department 
of Veterans Affairs; U.S. Department of the Army; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3