START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 678 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 678 
(Delegate Spiegel, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Deaf Culture Digital Library - Funding and Budget Submission 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include a $450,000 mandated appropriation for the 
Maryland Deaf Culture Digital Library (DCDL) in the annual budget bill beginning in 
fiscal 2026. DCDL must submit its annual operating budget to the Maryland State Library 
Agency (MSLA) by June 1 each year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $49,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2026 due to the mandated appropriation, as discussed below. Funding in 
FY 2026 is discretionary. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
49,000 
Net Effect 
($49,000) 
($49,000) 
($49,000) 
($49,000) 
($49,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MSLA must establish DCDL as the primary information center on deaf 
resources for library customers and staff in the State. DCDL must conduct a needs 
assessment to identify and fill gaps in library services for deaf patrons; in coordination with 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 678/ Page 2 
the Governor’s Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, develop and provide sensitivity 
training for State and county library staff; develop a website for specified purposes; in 
coordination with MSLA, develop deaf-related programs and materials and share them 
with libraries in the State; and develop specified partnerships, collaborations, and alliances 
with specified government and other entities. 
 
DCDL must also form a DCDL Advisory Board, with the majority of its members being 
deaf or hard-of-hearing individuals, and must develop a DCDL “Friends of the Library” 
group to promote community involvement, advocacy, and funding for the DCDL. The lead 
employee or coordinator who manages the DCDL must be deaf or hard of hearing and 
knowledgeable and experienced concerning issues affecting deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill establishes a $450,000 mandated appropriation 
beginning in fiscal 2026, the fiscal 2026 State budget as introduced includes $401,000 in 
general funds for DCDL. This analysis assumes ongoing funding at the fiscal 2026 
budgeted level ($401,000) in the out-years absent the bill. Based on this assumption, 
funding for DCDL is expected to increase by $49,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026 to 
fully meet the $450,000 mandated appropriation established by the bill. Although this 
analysis assumes funding mandated by the bill is appropriated in fiscal 2026, actual funding 
for that year is discretionary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 358 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Library Agency; Department of Budget and 
Management; Deaf & Hard of Hearing; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2