START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 619 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 619 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Sales Between Cannabis Businesses and Cannabis Nurseries 
- Exemption 
 
 
This bill exempts from sales and use tax the sale of cannabis between a licensed cannabis 
business and a registered cannabis nursery. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. It is assumed that the bill is largely clarifying in nature and does not 
affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None, given the assumption discussed above. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None, given the assumption discussed above. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established a 9% sales and use 
tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis. The sales and use tax does not apply to the sale of 
cannabis between cannabis businesses that are licensed under Title 36 of the Alcoholic 
Beverages and Cannabis Article. 
 
Chapter 241 of 2024 subsequently extended certain existing registration requirements for 
businesses that provide services to cannabis licensees (such as transporters, security guard 
agents, and waste disposal companies) to apply to cannabis nurseries, which are defined as 
businesses that provide cannabis seeds, seedlings, immature plants, or clones to a cannabis 
business. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 619/ Page 2 
The Comptroller’s Office does not believe that the regulation of cannabis nurseries by 
registration rather than license was intended to impose the sales and use tax on sales 
between licensed cannabis businesses and registered cannabis nurseries. The fiscal and 
policy note for Chapter 241 also did not assume any sales and use tax revenues from the 
sale of cannabis between such businesses. Thus, the bill conforms the sales and use tax 
exemption for business-to-business transactions accordingly. The Maryland Cannabis 
Administration advises that it has not registered any cannabis nurseries to date. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland 
Cannabis Administration; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2