START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 646 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 646 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded 
Reentry Services - Extension of Report Deadline and Task Force 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date for the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of 
Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services from June 30, 2026, to June 30, 2027. 
In addition, the bill extends the deadline for the submission of the required report of the 
task force from December 31, 2025, to October 31, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Extending the task force by one year – and extending the deadline for the 
required report – does not materially affect State operations or finances. Any additional 
expense reimbursements for task force members and staffing costs for the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 936 and 937 of 2024 established the Task Force on the Creation 
of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by DPSCS. 
The task force must (1) identify and assess the reentry services that exist in the State; 
(2) identify gaps in reentry services currently provided in the State; (3) assess the markers 
of successful reentry; (4) ensure that the recommendations of the task force equally 
consider returning citizens regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan to establish a Division 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 646/ Page 2 
of Returning Citizens within DPSCS for specified purposes; and (6) develop a plan to 
expand specified services for individuals in the State after release from incarceration. Task 
force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses, as specified. By December 31, 2025, the task force must submit a report of its 
findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. The Acts terminate June 30, 2026.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 811 (Senator James) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2