START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 603 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 603 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Earned Income Tax Credit - Notice of Eligibility - Alteration 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Comptroller to provide by electronic means certain required notice 
to employers in the State regarding the earned income tax credit. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office may decrease due to 
cost savings beginning in FY 2026. In FY 2026, cost savings are likely offset by one-time 
programming costs; in the out-years, general fund expenditures may decrease by more than 
$100,000 annually. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  By December 31 annually, an employer must provide 
specified electronic or written notice to an employee who may be eligible for the federal 
and/or Maryland earned income tax credit. The Comptroller must prepare such notice and 
mail the notice to all employers in the State. Under the bill, the Comptroller may provide 
this notice to employers by mail or by electronic means.  
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that it incurs about $140,000 in mailing 
costs annually to mail the aforementioned notice to employers in the State, many of which 
are returned undelivered. The bill allows the Comptroller’s Office to realize cost savings 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 603/ Page 2 
and reach more employers by providing such notice electronically via Maryland Tax 
Connect, the Comptroller’s new integrated tax system. The Comptroller’s Office further 
advises that businesses without electronic means of communication would still be 
contacted by mail.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office may 
decrease due to cost savings beginning in fiscal 2026. In fiscal 2026, cost savings are likely 
offset by one-time programming costs; in the out-years, however, general fund 
expenditures may decrease by more than $100,000 annually. As noted above, the 
Comptroller’s Office currently spends about $140,000 annually on the required mailings 
to Maryland employers.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 663 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2