START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 602 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 602 
(Delegates Hutchinson and Adams) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Nursing - Advanced Practice Nursing Licensure and Specialty 
Certification - Reciprocity Discussions (Maryland Border States Advanced 
Practice Nursing Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Nursing (MBON) to hold discussions with the 
state nursing licensing boards for Delaware, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, and 
the District of Columbia to pursue reciprocity agreements for advanced practice nursing 
licensure and specialty certification. By November 1, 2025, and each November 1 
thereafter for the next four years, MBON must submit a report regarding the discussions to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. To the extent additional staff is required, MBON special fund expenditures 
increase accordingly, as discussed below. Any impact on MBON special fund revenues is 
anticipated to be minimal, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MBON must prioritize collaboration with each specified jurisdiction to 
facilitate the establishment of mutual and reciprocal licensure recognition arrangements in 
order to (1) increase access to qualified advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs); 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 602/ Page 2 
(2) enhance licensure portability; and (3) provide ease of telehealth access in the State and 
surrounding jurisdictions. 
 
The annual report must include (1) the status of reciprocity discussions with each specified 
jurisdiction; (2) any agreements reached and the terms, if any; (3) any challenges 
encountered during negotiations; and (4) recommendations for legislative or regulatory 
changes necessary to facilitate reciprocity of nursing licenses.  
 
Current Law:  Chapters 32 and 33 of 2024 authorize any health occupations board (that 
did not otherwise have statutory authority to do so) to adopt regulations establishing 
reciprocity for individuals who are licensed or certified in another State that also offers 
similar reciprocity to individuals licensed or certified by the board. MBON did not have 
statutory authority to issue a license by reciprocity prior to Chapters 32 and 33. However, 
since 1999, Maryland has participated in the Nurse Licensure Compact, which authorizes 
an individual to practice as a registered nurse (RN) or a licensed practical nurse in a remote 
state. 
 
In Maryland, an individual must be licensed as an RN and certified as an APRN by MBON 
to practice as a nurse practitioner, nurse anesthetist, nurse midwife, or clinical nurse 
specialist. The requirement does not apply to (1) a student enrolled in a graduate level 
accredited program for advanced practice registered nursing while practicing advanced 
practice registered nursing in that program or (2) an individual permitted to practice 
advanced practice registered nursing under rules and regulations adopted by MBON. 
 
State Revenues:  To the extent that the State enters into reciprocity agreements with 
another state under the bill, MBON special fund revenues may decrease as APRNs who do 
not reside in the State but chose to be licensed and certified by MBON are no longer 
required to hold a Maryland license. Currently, each new applicant for an APRN license in 
Maryland must pay a $100 RN license fee and a $50 certification fee; each additional initial 
advanced practice certification is $25. On a biannual basis, each APRN must pay $110 to 
renew their license, as well as $26 for fees assessed by the Maryland Health Care 
Commission and $10 for each advanced practice certification renewal. 
 
State Expenditures:  Existing MBON staff can likely hold discussions and pursue 
reciprocity agreements with the specified state nursing licensing boards and complete the 
required annual reports. However, MBON advises that there are current staff vacancies, 
and the recruitment process for additional staff is lengthy. Therefore, additional contractual 
staff may be required to assist with the bill’s requirements or backfill existing staff 
responsibilities. MBON advises that special fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$90,000 for a salary and one time start-up costs associated with one full-time contractual 
health policy analyst during the first fiscal year additional staff resources are required. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 602/ Page 3 
MBON is special funded; typically, all board operations are paid with special funds 
generated through fee revenues. Costs associated with MBON infrastructure operations 
shifted to the Maryland Department of Health in fiscal 2023 and continue through 2025; 
therefore, beginning July 1, 2025, all MBON expenditures are special funded. Any 
expenditures associated with the bill will be covered by the Board of Nursing Fund. 
 
Additional Comments:  As of January 2025, Delaware is one of four states to have enacted 
APRN Compact legislation. Maryland considered legislation to enact the APRN Compact 
in 2022, 2023, and 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 407 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3