START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 634 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 634 
(Delegates Wims and Mireku-North) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Income Tax Reconciliation Program - Established (Maryland Fair 
Taxation for Justice-Involved Individuals Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes an Income Tax Reconciliation Program administered by the 
Comptroller to allow justice-involved individuals who are unable to file a State income tax 
return while incarcerated to establish installment payment plans and receive a waiver of 
accrued interest and penalties for tax years 2025 through 2029, as specified. The 
Comptroller must collaborate with the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services to develop a related awareness campaign and adopt program regulations, which 
may include income eligibility limits. The Comptroller must report to the 
General Assembly on the impact of the program by December 1, 2026, and each 
December 1 thereafter. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in 
FY 2026 due to forgone interest and penalty collections. The Comptroller’s Office can 
administer the program with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2026 
due to forgone interest and penalty collections. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Justice-involved individual” means an individual who is convicted of or 
pleads guilty to a crime and is currently serving or, within the immediately preceding 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 634/ Page 2 
2 years, has been released after serving a term of imprisonment of 6 months to 10 years in 
a State or federal correctional facility. 
 
For tax years 2025 through 2029, a justice-involved individual who receives a notice of 
assessment of income tax due for a tax year during which the individual is incarcerated 
may apply to the Comptroller for an installment payment plan. If the Comptroller 
determines that the justice-involved individual is eligible for the program, the Comptroller 
must establish an installment payment plan that allows the individual to pay the unpaid 
income tax over a period of up to 10 years and waive any interest and penalties that accrue 
on the unpaid income tax due. 
 
Current Law:  In general, interest is assessed on overdue income tax at a statutorily 
specified rate (9.0% for calendar year 2023 and beyond) or a rate equal to 3 percentage 
points above the average prime rate during the preceding fiscal year – whichever is greater. 
Failure to pay income tax when due is also subject to a penalty of up to 10.0% of the unpaid 
tax. A tax collector may waive interest or penalties on unpaid tax for reasonable cause. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease by indeterminate amounts beginning in fiscal 2026 due to forgone interest and 
penalty collections on overdue income tax. At this time, it is unknown how many 
individuals will potentially be eligible and apply for installment plans under the bill, the 
amount of their unpaid income tax, and the length of resulting installment plans; thus, the 
precise effect on State and local revenues cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 295 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 20, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2