START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 681 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 681 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Support - Driver's License Suspension for Arrearages and Court Orders 
 
 
This bill generally exempts an obligor whose individual income for the current year is at 
or below 250% of the federal poverty guidelines from provisions requiring the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA) to suspend the obligor’s license or privilege to drive in the 
State if the obligor is out of compliance with a child support order and specified conditions 
are met. However, this exemption does not apply if the obligor has been judicially 
determined to be “voluntarily impoverished” under State law. For purposes of the bill, to 
determine the income of an obligor, the Child Support Administration (CSA) may consider 
(1) the income of the obligor at the time the most recent child support order was entered or 
(2) information on the obligor’s income provided by the obligor or an employer of the 
obligor. The bill also requires the court, after establishing a child support order, to send a 
copy of the guideline calculation and the order to CSA. Finally, the bill extends, from 
60 to 120 days, the period during which the holder of a noncommercial license may be out 
of compliance with a child support order before CSA notifies MVA to begin the process to 
suspend the obligor’s license.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in general and federal fund expenditures for 
the Department of Human Services (DHS) beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below, 
including one-time programming costs of $125,000 in FY 2026 only. Federal fund 
matching revenues increase correspondingly to any increase in federal fund expenditures. 
Potential general fund expenditures for the Judiciary. General fund revenues likely 
decrease minimally due to fewer citations issued to individuals for driving with a 
suspended license.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant operational impact on the circuit courts, as discussed 
below.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 681/ Page 2 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Calculation of Child Support Obligation 
 
In a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite or permanent, 
the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child support obligation 
is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The current schedule uses 
the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and the number of children 
for whom support is required to determine the basic child support obligation. Adjusted 
actual income, which is the basis for determining the basic child support obligation, is 
calculated from actual income minus preexisting reasonable child support obligations 
actually paid and, except as specified, alimony or maintenance obligations actually paid.  
 
Driver’s License Suspensions 
 
Statute establishes procedures by which the MVA is generally required to suspend an 
individual’s noncommercial driver’s license after receiving notice from CSA that the 
individual is at least 60 days out of compliance with the most recent court order in making 
child support payments (120 days for commercial licenses). Before providing any 
information to MVA, however, CSA must send written notice of the proposed suspension 
action to an obligor, including notice of the obligor’s right to request an investigation on 
any of the following grounds:  (1) the information regarding the reported arrearages is 
inaccurate; (2) suspension of the obligor’s license or privilege to drive would be an 
impediment to the obligor’s current or potential employment; or (3) suspension of the 
obligor’s license or privilege to drive would place an undue hardship on the obligor because 
of the obligor’s inability to comply with the court order or a documented disability resulting 
in a verified inability to work. An obligor may appeal the results of an investigation to the 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). If, after an investigation (or appeal), CSA finds 
that one of the circumstances specified above exists, CSA may not send any information 
about the obligor to MVA.  
 
CSA is also prohibited from sending any information about an obligor to MVA if (1) CSA 
reaches an agreement with the obligor regarding a scheduled payment of child support 
arrearages (or a court issues an order for a scheduled payment) and (2) the obligor is 
complying with the agreement (or court order).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 681/ Page 3 
If CSA – after the above procedural requirements are satisfied – notifies MVA of an 
obligor’s noncompliance, MVA must suspend an obligor’s license or privilege to drive and 
may issue a work‐restricted license or work‐restricted privilege to drive. Prior to the 
suspension, MVA must send written notice of the proposed action to the obligor, including 
notice of the obligor’s right to contest the accuracy of the information. However, the 
challenge must be limited to the issue of mistaken identity. Similarly, an obligor may 
appeal a decision of MVA to suspend the license/privilege to drive; the issue at such a 
hearing must be limited to that of mistaken identity.  
 
An obligor’s license (or privilege) to drive may be reinstated if (1) the arrearages are paid 
in full; (2) the obligor has demonstrated good faith by paying the ordered amount of support 
for six consecutive months; (3) the obligor is a participant in full compliance in an 
employment program sponsored by CSA; or (4) CSA finds that one of the aforementioned 
grounds – those for which an obligor may initially request an investigation prior to 
suspension exist. If notified by CSA that one of these circumstances is applicable, MVA 
must reinstate the license; MVA must also reinstate the license if it receives a court order 
to do so. CSA may request for MVA to expunge a record of suspension if an obligor is 
enrolled in and compliant with an approved employment program or the information 
reported by CSA that led to the suspension was inaccurate.  
 
Voluntary Impoverishment 
 
Under§ 12‐204 of the Family Law Article, “voluntarily impoverished” means that a parent 
has made the free and conscious choice, not compelled by factors beyond the parent’s 
control, to render the parent without adequate resources.  
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Department of Human Services 
 
DHS advises that it requires 29 caseworkers to determine the obligors excluded under the 
bill, at an annual cost of approximately $2.0 million. While acknowledging that the volume 
of potentially impacted cases (more than 20,000 individuals had licenses suspended due to 
child support noncompliance in fiscal 2023) is likely high enough that any extra work or 
departure from routine processing methods is not fully absorbable, the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees that 29 positions, as indicated by DHS, are required.  
 
CSA must already provide written notice to an obligor and give the individual a reasonable 
opportunity to request an investigation prior to supplying information to MVA; procedures 
could likely be developed to alert an obligor whose income may be at or below 250% of 
the federal poverty level to supply necessary information to CSA – and for CSA to 
determine the obligor’s income as specified in the bill – in order to prevent a referral to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 681/ Page 4 
MVA. DLS notes that the information provided by the courts likely helps facilitate the 
process in some cases, particularly when the information that has been sent by the court for 
a particular obligor is relatively recent. A specific estimate of costs depends on procedures 
ultimately developed by CSA; however, it is assumed that the bill’s requirements can be 
handled more efficiently and with fewer resources than estimated by DHS. For illustrative 
purposes only, for every additional caseworker needed, expenditures increase by $49,000 
in fiscal 2026 (which reflects the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date) and approximately 
$73,000 annually thereafter, of which 34% is supported by general funds, and 66% is 
supported by federal funds.  
 
In fiscal 2026 only, DHS reports reprogramming is necessary in order to implement the 
bill’s changes. Thus, State expenditures increase by $125,000 in fiscal 2026 for that 
purpose (of which 34% is general funds; 66% is federal funds).  
 
DHS receives federal incentive funds for performance measures related to its child support 
enforcement efforts. Performance measures include payments on arrears and total 
collections, both of which may be impacted by the bill to the extent that obligors’ payment 
habits change as a direct result of no longer being subject to license suspension. However, 
because license suspension is not the only enforcement tool available to CSA and an 
obligor may continue to attempt to comply with a child support order even without the 
possibility of license suspension, any impact on such federal incentive funds solely 
attributable to the bill is not anticipated to be material.  
 
Judiciary and Circuit Courts 
 
The bill has a significant operational impact on the Judiciary and the circuit courts. Under 
the bill, the courts are required to send specified documentation after establishing a child 
support order (regardless of whether CSA is involved in the case). The Judiciary notes that 
under current practice, it electronically provides all child support orders in cases involving 
CSA/local child support offices through the Maryland Electronic Courts system; for 
context, there were approximately 8,200 dispositions in such cases in fiscal 2024. 
According to information provided by the Judiciary, the bill requires courts to provide child 
support orders for potentially more than 50,000 additional cases per year, in addition to the 
guideline calculations in all cases (the guidelines are not currently provided, even for  
CSA‐involved cases). Accordingly, general fund expenditures likely increase, at least 
minimally, to account for additional clerical work generated by the bill.  
 
Other Agencies 
 
The bill does not materially affect MVA, OAH, or the Office of the Attorney General.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 681/ Page 5 
Fine Revenues and Reinstatement Fees 
 
The bill also affects general fund revenues. Because the bill repeals the possibility of a 
license suspension due to nonpayment of child support for certain individuals (and allows 
all obligors with noncommercial driver’s licenses additional time to become compliant 
prior to a potential license suspension), the number of citations issued to individuals driving 
with a suspended driver’s license is likely to decline. An individual convicted of driving 
with a license that is suspended due to nonpayment of child support is subject to a fine of 
up to $500, may not prepay the fine, and must appear in court. Additionally, three points 
are assessed against the person’s license.  
 
In fiscal 2023 (the last year readily available), MVA suspended approximately 
20,500 licenses due to child support noncompliance. MVA previously advised that it does 
not charge a fee for a driver’s license reinstatement if a person shows they are in 
compliance after a suspension. Therefore, Transportation Trust Fund revenues are not 
materially affected by the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 139 of 2024; SB 164 and HB 326 of 2023; and SB 884 and HB 1293 
of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 15 (Senator Watson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Human Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5