START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 675 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 675 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Rape Kit Testing - Tracking Program and Grant Fund 
 
 
This bill makes changes to the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund and the Sexual Assault 
Evidence Collection Kit Tracking Program. The bill (1) expands the stated purpose and 
authorized uses of the fund to include, among other things, providing funding to the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to assist law enforcement agency investigations of 
crimes involving sexual assault evidence collection kits collected before a certain date that 
have not been tested; (2) alters the requirements of the Executive Director of the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) regarding the distribution of 
funds; (3) authorizes grant awards to be made for a period of up to 36 months; and 
(4) prohibits the fund from being used to support the Sexual Assault Evidence Collection 
Kit Tracking Program. The bill also extends the deadline, from December 31, 2025, to 
March 31, 2026, for a law enforcement agency or a person, including a health care provider, 
forensic laboratory, or State’s Attorney, to submit specified information related to sexual 
assault evidence collection kits to the tracking program.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for GOCPP increase beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent additional funds are disbursed due to the bill’s changes, as discussed below. 
Grant revenues (and corresponding expenditures) for OAG increase beginning in FY 2026. 
The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State finances, though the 
Department of State Police (DSP) may benefit from the bill’s changes, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local law enforcement agencies benefit from any assistance provided by 
OAG under the bill and the authorization for grant awards to be made for a period of up to 
36 months. Local entities also benefit from the extended reporting deadline. The bill is not 
otherwise anticipated to materially affect local government finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 675/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the stated purpose of the fund to include providing 
funding to (1) law enforcement agencies to pay for testing of sexual assault evidence 
collection kits by forensic laboratories, including equipment, supplies, personnel, and 
outsourcing (consistent with the existing authorized use of the fund under current law); 
(2) OAG to assist law enforcement agency investigations of crimes involving sexual 
assault evidence collection kits that were collected before October 1, 2020, and have not 
been tested; (3) the federally recognized State sexual assault coalition for a statewide sexual 
assault victim notification hotline and related personnel to provide victims of sexual assault 
with advocacy, support, information about untested rape kits, information about navigating 
the Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Tracking Program, and victims’ rights information; and 
(4) peer-to-peer telehealth programs. 
 
The fund may be used only for the stated purposes of the fund (as expanded by the bill). 
The bill makes related conforming changes. 
 
The Executive Director of GOCPP must (1) ensure that funds are distributed to OAG and 
the federally recognized State sexual assault coalition each fiscal year until all sexual 
assault evidence collection kits collected before October 1, 2020, have been tested, or it 
has been determined that testing is not required, as specified, and (2) unless the 
appropriation to the fund is reduced or funding has been awarded from the National Sexual 
Assault Kit Initiative (SAKI) for the same purpose, ensure that funds distributed pursuant 
to this provision are not less than the amount distributed for the prior fiscal year. The bill 
also authorizes the executive director to make a grant from the fund for a period of up to 
36 months. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund 
 
Chapters 508 and 509 of 2019 established the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund, a special fund 
administered by the Executive Director of GOCPP, with the stated purpose to provide 
law enforcement agencies with funding to pay for testing of sexual assault evidence 
collections kits by forensic laboratories. The executive director must (1) establish and 
publish procedures for the distribution of funding to law enforcement agencies; (2) ensure 
each jurisdiction in the State that has a forensic laboratory is able to access the fund; 
(3) consider the number of sexual assault incidents that were investigated by a 
law enforcement agency in the prior fiscal year when distributing funding; and (4) submit 
an annual report on the distribution of funding to the General Assembly by 
September 1 each year. The most recent annual report can be found here. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 675/ Page 3 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any 
other money accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may only be used for equipment, 
supplies, personnel, and outsourcing necessary for the testing of sexual assault evidence 
kits in forensic laboratories; however, the fund may be used for equipment, supplies, 
personnel, and outsourcing necessary for the testing of sexual assault evidence collection 
kits collected before or after the establishment of the fund. 
 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. Money 
expended from the fund for testing of sexual assault evidence collection kits is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for testing of sexual assault evidence collection kits. The fiscal 2026 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $3.5 million for the fund. 
 
Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kit Tracking Program 
 
Chapters 704 and 705 of 2023 established the Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kit 
Reporting Program (also referred to as the tracking program or tracking system). 
Administered by GOCPP, the reporting program tracks the location, status, and chain of 
custody of sexual assault evidence collection kits. The reporting program must (1) track 
the location, status, and chain of custody of sexual assault evidence collection kits in the 
State; (2) receive information relating to the location, status, and chain of custody from any 
law enforcement agency or person with control or possession of a kit; and (3) allow for a 
victim or a victim’s representative to track the location, status, and chain of custody of a 
kit containing samples taken from the victim. 
 
Beginning October 1, 2023, a law enforcement agency or any person that has control or 
possession of a sexual assault evidence collection kit, including a health care provider, 
forensic laboratory, or State’s Attorney, must (1) report location, status, and chain of 
custody information to the reporting program in a manner required by GOCPP and 
(2) comply with all regulations developed by GOCPP under the reporting program. A law 
enforcement agency or a person that had control or possession of a sexual assault evidence 
collection kit before October 1, 2023 – or has control or possession of a kit on or after 
October 1, 2023 – must report location, status, and chain of custody information to the 
reporting program by December 31, 2025. 
 
Sexual Assault Forensic Exams Conducted through Peer-to-Peer Telehealth 
 
Chapters 832 and 833 of 2024 require, among other things, specified health care providers 
to provide sexual assault forensic exams conducted through peer-to-peer telehealth without 
charge to victims and makes those services eligible for reimbursement by the 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 675/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures from the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund 
within GOCPP increase to the extent additional funds are disbursed due to the bill’s 
expansion of the authorized uses of the fund. However, a reliable estimate of any increase 
in special fund expenditures cannot be made, as the amount of funding provided to OAG, 
to the Maryland Coalition Against Sexual Assault (the federally recognized State sexual 
assault coalition), and to support peer-to-peer telehealth programs cannot be predicted in 
advance. For context, however, GOCPP advises that the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund 
typically carries a significant fund balance between fiscal years. For example, at the end of 
fiscal 2024, the fund balance totaled $3,975,666. Accordingly, it is likely that GOCPP 
disburses additional funding under the bill rather than redirecting grant awards from 
currently eligible recipients. 
 
The bill’s authorization for GOCPP to award grants for a period of up to 36 months does 
not necessarily result in an increase in spending from the fund in any given year, though 
depending on how GOCPP chooses to make grant awards under this new authorization, it 
could. (Currently, grant awards are made for a period of 12 months.) 
 
As a targeted recipient of funding under the bill, OAG grant revenues (and corresponding 
expenditures) increase due to the receipt of funding from the fund to assist law enforcement 
agencies with their investigations of crimes involving sexual assault evidence collection 
kits that were collected before October 1, 2020, and have not been tested. As noted above, 
a reliable estimate of any such increase cannot be made in advance. 
 
OAG advises that it currently uses funds from the federal fiscal 2021 SAKI award of 
$2.5 million to hire investigators to assist law enforcement agencies with the investigation 
of cases involving sexual assault evidence collection kits. According to GOCPP, as of 
February 2025, approximately $1.9 million remained available for use. To the extent future 
SAKI awards are eliminated, OAG advises that – under the bill – it will use the funding 
provided from the Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund to supplant the loss of federal funds. OAG 
further advises that if the State continues to receive future SAKI awards, it will use the 
funding provided under the bill to hire additional contractual investigators to assist law 
enforcement agencies. 
 
Under current law, law enforcement agencies are eligible for funding from the Rape Kit 
Testing Grant Fund to pay for testing of sexual assault evidence collection kits by forensic 
laboratories. Given the significant fund balance that typically exists between fiscal years, 
it is assumed that the bill does not result in a material decrease in grant funding provided 
to DSP for the testing of sexual assault evidence collection kits. In fact, DSP may benefit 
from the bill’s authorization for GOCPP to award grants from the fund for a period of up 
to 36 months. DSP also benefits from the extended deadline for reporting specified 
information to the Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kit Tracking Program. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 675/ Page 5 
GOCPP can implement the bill’s changes with existing staff.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local law enforcement agencies benefit from any assistance provided 
by OAG with respect to investigations of crimes involving sexual assault evidence 
collection kits that were collected before October 1, 2020, and have not been tested. Local 
law enforcement agencies and State’s Attorneys’ offices also benefit from the extended 
deadline for reporting specified information to the Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kit 
Tracking Program. 
 
Under current law, local law enforcement agencies are eligible for funding from the 
Rape Kit Testing Grant Fund to pay for testing of sexual assault evidence collection kits 
by forensic laboratories. To the extent that grant awards made to support the expanded uses 
of the fund under the bill displace any funding that would otherwise be awarded to local 
law enforcement agencies, local grant revenues (and corresponding expenditures) 
decrease. However, given the significant fund balance that typically exists between 
fiscal years, it is assumed that the bill does not result in a material decrease in grant funding 
provided to local law enforcement agencies. In fact, local law enforcement agencies may 
benefit from the bill’s authorization for GOCPP to award grants from the fund for a period 
of up to 36 months. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 669 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Talbot counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5