START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 601 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 601 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Small Business Guaranty Fund - Alterations 
 
   
This bill authorizes the Maryland Small Business Development Financing Authority 
(MSBDFA) to provide a guaranty under its Long-term Guaranty Program through (1) an 
irrevocable letter of credit; (2) an official treasurer’s check; (3) funds on deposit in an 
escrow or other depository account; or (4) any other legal instrument promising a financial 
institution restitution or reimbursement for its loan losses, within the limits of the guaranty. 
The terms and conditions governing the above options may not be so onerous as to 
discourage the financial institution from offering the loan. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MSBDFA are likely not materially affected, 
as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. Program activity is limited. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MSBDFA provides financing options for small businesses that are not able 
to qualify for financing from private lending institutions or are owned by socially and 
economically disadvantaged persons. Subject to specified conditions, the Department of 
Commerce may (and does) contract for and engage the services of some or all of the 
MSBDFA staff to administer the authority’s programs. MSBDFA has four programs:   
the Contract Financing Program; the Long-term Guaranty Program; the Surety Bond 
Program; and the Equity Participation Investment Program. Each program has a dedicated 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 601/ Page 2 
special fund in statute; however, in practice, the programs are jointly administered through 
one fund.  
 
Under the Long-term Guaranty Program, MSBDFA may guarantee up to 80% of the 
principal and interest of a long-term loan of up to $2.0 million made by a financial 
institution for working capital, refinancing existing debt, equipment, making necessary 
improvements to real property, or acquiring real property. Guarantees under the program 
are subject to various specified requirements, including that the loan term be no longer than 
10 years; MSBDFA may only approve a guaranty if the authority determines the loan will 
have a substantial economic impact.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MSBDFA are likely not materially 
affected, as activity under the Long-term Guaranty Program is historically quite limited. 
Commerce advises that it has not guaranteed a loan under the program since fiscal 2020. 
Currently, when a loan is guaranteed through the program using its fund balance, 
Commerce keeps a portion of the loan amount, about 5% to 10%, in reserve. The bill’s 
changes to allow for other legal instruments to provide a guaranty (options one through 
three described above) do not materially affect this existing process, although there are 
minor related administrative costs associated with new options, compared to existing 
practice (allowed under option four described above). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1008 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; State Treasurer’s Office; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 17, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2