START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 664 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 664 
(Delegate Terrasa) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Licensed Direct-Entry Midwives - Disciplinary Actions 
 
 
This bill clarifies the actions that the State Board of Nursing (MBON) may take if an 
applicant to practice direct-entry midwifery or a licensed direct-entry midwife violates a 
ground for discipline. MBON may deny or grant a license (including a license subject to a 
reprimand, probation, or suspension) to an applicant, reprimand a license, place a licensee 
on probation, or suspend or revoke the license of a licensee. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has no fiscal or operational impact on MBON. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, an individual must be licensed as a certified nurse-midwife by 
MBON to practice nurse midwifery in the State or licensed as a direct-entry midwife by 
MBON to practice direct-entry midwifery in the State. 
 
Direct-entry midwifery refers to an educational path that does not require prior nursing 
training to enter the profession. “Practice direct-entry midwifery” means providing 
maternity care that is consistent with a midwife’s training, education, and experience as 
well as identifying and referring patients who require medical care to an appropriate health 
care provider. “Practice direct-entry midwifery” includes (1) providing the necessary 
supervision, care, and advice to a patient during a low-risk pregnancy, labor, delivery, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 664/ Page 2 
postpartum period and (2) newborn care that is consistent with national direct-entry 
midwifery standards and based on the acquisition of clinical skills necessary for the care 
of pregnant women and newborns, including antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum 
care. 
 
A licensed direct-entry midwife may not assume or continue to care for a patient and must 
arrange for the orderly transfer of care to a health care practitioner for a patient who is 
already under the care of a direct-entry midwife if any of 34 specific disorders or situations 
are found to be present at the initial interview or occur as prenatal care proceeds. These 
conditions include previous uterine surgery, including a cesarean section or myomectomy. 
 
If a patient is determined to have any of 21 specified conditions present during prenatal 
care, a licensed direct-entry midwife must consult with a health care practitioner and 
document the consultation, any recommendations, and the discussion of the consultation 
with the patient. 
 
Disciplinary Actions 
 
Subject to specified hearing provisions, MBON may deny a license to an applicant, 
reprimand a licensee, place a licensee on probation, or suspend or revoke a license if the 
applicant or licensee violates any one of 28 specified disciplinary grounds, including: 
 
 
fraudulently or deceptively obtains, attempts to obtain, or uses a license; 
 
is disciplined by specified authorities or convicted or disciplined by a court for an 
act that would be grounds for disciplinary action in Maryland; 
 
is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a crime involving 
moral turpitude; 
 
knowingly does any act that has been determined to exceed the scope of practice 
authorized to the individual; 
 
is grossly negligent in the practice of direct-entry midwifery; 
 
is habitually intoxicated, or is addicted to, or habitually abuses, any narcotic or 
controlled dangerous substance; 
 
fails to cooperate with a lawful investigation conducted by MBON; 
 
engages in conduct that violates the professional code of ethics; 
 
is professionally incompetent; 
 
practices direct-entry midwifery without a license, before obtaining or renewing a 
license, including any period when the license has lapsed; or 
 
performs an act that is beyond the licensee’s knowledge and skills. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 664/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3