START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 674 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 674 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Dismembering or Burying Human Remains With Intent to 
Conceal a Crime 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person, with the intent to conceal a crime, from knowingly and 
willfully dismembering, destroying, removing, burying, disposing of, or obliterating by 
any means any portion of human remains. The bill also prohibits a person from aiding or 
abetting another person in committing such an act. A violator is guilty of a felony and, on 
conviction, is subject to imprisonment for up to five years. A sentence imposed for this 
crime may be consecutive to or concurrent with any other sentence imposed for any other 
crime based on the act establishing the violation of these provisions. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in incarceration expenditures due to the bill’s 
penalty provision. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect State finances and 
operations, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 674/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Among other things, § 5-514 of the Health-General Article prohibits an 
individual from burying or disposing of a body except (1) in a family burial plot or other 
area allowed by a local ordinance; (2) in a cemetery or a crematory; (3) in a reduction 
facility; (4) by donating the body to medical science; or (5) by removing the body to another 
state for final disposition in accordance with the laws of the other state. Violators are guilty 
of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to one year and/or a 
$5,000 maximum fine.  
 
Under § 10-402 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not remove or attempt to remove 
human remains from a burial site unless (1) authorized to do so for the purpose of 
reinterring the remains in the same burial site or another burial site within the boundary of 
the same permanent cemetery or (2) a State’s Attorney with jurisdiction has authorized the 
action to ascertain the cause of death, to determine if the human remains were interred 
erroneously, for the purpose of reburial, or for medical or scientific examination or study. 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to five years 
and/or a $10,000 maximum fine. 
 
State and Local Expenditures:  This estimate assumes that the bill applies to a limited 
number of cases. Given that the bill applies to specified acts committed with the intent to 
conceal a crime, cases to which the bill applies likely involve charges for other existing 
criminal offenses. To the extent individuals are prosecuted and convicted of this new 
offense and serve additional incarceration time under the offense’s five-year maximum 
incarceration penalty, general fund incarceration expenditures may increase minimally. 
Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect State and local finances and 
operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 394 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 674/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3