START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 691 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 691 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Tax Relief and State Personnel Equality for Service Members Act 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the General 
Provisions, Local Government, State Government, State Personnel and Pensions, 
Tax-General, and Tax-Property Articles of the Maryland Code, primarily by reference to 
definitions in the U.S. Code. While numerous alterations within the bill represent only 
stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. These changes generally make 
certain provisions (e.g., reemployment/reinstatement rights, income tax abatement, 
property tax relief, etc.) more broadly applicable to additional service members. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025. Provisions related to income tax subtraction modifications 
and abatements apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2024; provisions 
related to property tax relief apply to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that this bill applies in a limited number of cases, State 
finances are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, local 
finances are not materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the 
State Government Article (specifically, § 9-901). This includes the definition of “military 
family” as well as all terms found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse 
and dependent children of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or 
adoption.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 691/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 691/ Page 3 
Expanded Eligibility for Privileges and Benefits 
 
Numerous statutory provisions related to personnel and taxation explicitly extend certain 
benefits or privileges to individuals who meet certain requirements, generally related to 
military service. The bill generally expands certain provisions to apply more broadly, some 
of which are further described below. 
 
Personnel Provisions  
 
Under current law, returning veterans who are State employees are granted specified rights 
regarding reemployment and reinstatement; the definition of “returning veteran” is limited 
to an individual who left State employment to perform military service in the armed forces 
of the United States and who seeks reinstatement to State employment. Generally, regular 
State employees who leave to perform military service in the armed forces of the 
United States are entitled to reinstatement if (1) the nature and length of military service 
meets requirements under federal law; (2) the veteran either received a certificate of 
satisfactory completion of military service or was released from service under honorable 
conditions, as specified; and (3) the returning veteran applies for reinstatement within 
90 days (or 31 days for returning reservists). Members of a reserve component of the armed 
forces are similarly eligible, as specified. Counties, municipalities, and other specified local 
governmental entities must give employees who return from military service in the armed 
forces of the United States the same reemployment rights as provided to State employees.  
 
The bill expands the definition of “returning veteran” to mean an individual who left State 
employment to serve in the uniformed services, thereby expanding specified reemployment 
and reinstatement rights (State and local) to veterans of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Public Health Service (PHS).  
 
Under current law, a local government may exempt war veterans younger than age 55 from 
any age limitation or requirement in hiring. The bill allows local governments to also 
exempt health emergency veterans younger than age 55 from any age limitation or 
requirement. It defines “health emergency” as (1) a national emergency, an emergency, or 
a major disaster declared by the President of the United States under specified authority;  
(2) a public health emergency declared by the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human 
Services; or (3) a catastrophic health emergency declared by the Governor. 
 
Income Tax Provisions 
 
Under current law, a tax collector may abate the income tax, interest, penalties, or charges 
related to the tax if the tax collector determines that collection of the tax is not warranted 
because of the administration and collection costs involved. The income tax must be abated 
in the case of any individual who dies in active service as a member of the armed forces of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 691/ Page 4 
the United States if such death occurs while serving in a combat zone or as a result of 
wounds, disease, or injury incurred while serving. The income tax must also be abated if 
the individual dies while a military or civilian employee of the United States, if the death 
occurs as a result of wounds or injury incurred outside the United States in a terroristic or 
military action while the individual was a military or civilian employee of the 
United States. 
 
The bill requires the income tax to be abated (1) for deceased members of the uniformed 
services (including NOAA and PHS) and (2) if the death occurs while (or as a result of) 
serving in a public health emergency response area, as defined. The bill also makes 
conforming changes. 
 
Property Tax Relief 
 
Under current law, renters who are permanently and totally disabled and who qualify for 
benefits under any federal act for members of the United States armed forces are eligible 
for certain forms of property tax relief from the State and local governments. Among other 
changes, the bill extends eligibility for certain State and local property tax relief to disabled 
renters who qualify for benefits under any federal act for all service members, which 
includes NOAA, PHS, and a reserve component of the uniformed services.  
 
Other Provisions  
 
Among other provisions, the bill also repeals multiple references to reserve components of 
the armed forces of the United States and instead references reserve components, which 
includes the reserve component of PHS. This affects, for example, eligibility for a 
subtraction modification for military pay from the State income tax.  
 
In addition, the bill harmonizes a sales and use tax exemption for nationally organized and 
recognized organizations of veterans of the armed forces of the United States that are 
qualified as tax exempt to apply to any such tax-exempt organizations of veterans, as 
defined above. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Although the definition changes in the bill expand access to 
various State and local benefits and privileges to certain members of PHS, NOAA, and the 
National Guard, these changes represent a small number of people. In some cases, the bill 
extends benefits or privileges only to disabled members of these services, which is an even 
smaller population.  
 
In January 2020, the latest date for which information is readily available, there were an 
estimated 2,200 PHS officers living in Maryland, with about 1,500 on active duty and 
700 retired. As of September 2024, there are 53 NOAA officers in the State, and as of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 691/ Page 5 
January 2025, about 6,000 National Guard members in Maryland. Compared to the  
321,000 veterans living in Maryland who are already covered by these programs, this 
change is very small and can be absorbed by any affected agency’s or local government’s 
existing funds.  
 
Additional Comments:  Under additional definitions under 38 U.S.C. § 101, “active 
military, naval, air, or space service” includes full-time duty in a reserve component of the 
armed forces, full-time duty as a commissioned officer of the Regular or Reserve Corps of 
PHS or commissioned officer corps of NOAA, and service as a cadet or midshipman at a 
service academy (Military, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Naval academies).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 278 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Budget and Taxation and 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Comptroller; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, 
Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery 
County Public Schools; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5