START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 655 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 655 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Wicomico County - Alcoholic Beverages - Temporary To-Go Event Permit and 
Class C Per Diem Municipal To-Go Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
   
This bill establishes, in Wicomico County, a Class C per diem municipal to-go beer, wine, 
and liquor (BWL) license and a related temporary to-go event permit. The bill authorizes 
the Wicomico County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to 
municipalities in the county, and authorizes the license holder to allow beer, wine, and 
liquor sold by the holder of a temporary to-go event permit to enter a designated special 
event area described in the license for a period not exceeding seven consecutive days, as 
specified. The bill also authorizes the board to issue a to-go event permit to the holder to a 
Class B BWL license located within or immediately adjacent to a special event area 
identified in and for use in conjunction with a Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL 
license. The board must establish regulations for the license and permit, as specified. The 
fee for the Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL license is $45 per day, and the fee for 
the temporary to-go event permit is $20 per day. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Wicomico County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent 
Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL licenses and temporary to-go event permits are 
issued. Wicomico County can handle the monitoring of any additional licenses or permits 
issued using existing resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 655/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Class C Per Diem Municipal To-go BWL license – Required Regulations  
 
The board must adopt regulations related to the issuance of and requirements for a 
Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL license, including regulations related to (1) the 
designation of a special event area; (2) the hours of sale; (3) age verification requirements; 
(4) the use of specified to-go cups; (5) advertising, posting of notice, and public hearing 
requirements for the license and any associated temporary to-go event permit; and 
(6) public safety and event security requirements.  
 
Temporary To-go Event Permit 
 
The temporary to-go event permit authorizes the holder to sell at retail beer, wine, and 
liquor in approved to-go cups that may be carried outside the licensed established of the 
Class B license and into the designated special event area. The permit holder must be 
responsible for complying with all applicable laws and regulations. 
 
The board must adopt regulations related to the issuance of and requirements for the permit, 
including regulations related to (1) the designation of a special event area; (2) the hours of 
sale; (3) age verification requirements; (4) the use of specified to-go cups; and 
(5) advertising, posting of notice, and public hearing requirements for the temporary to-go 
event permit.  
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Wicomico County Board of License Commissioners is 
authorized to issue a Class B BWL license to hotels that meet specified room and seating 
requirements and to restaurants that meet specified seating requirements and have average 
daily receipts from the sale of food exceeding the average daily receipts from the sale of 
alcoholic beverages. The license holder may purchase liquor for retail sale from the county 
dispensary or from a licensed wholesaler, but the license holder cannot be charged more 
than 15% above the wholesale operating cost to the county dispensary. The annual fee is 
$1,980 for hotels and $1,320 for restaurants.  
 
The board may issue a wine permit to the holder of a Class B BWL license for use by a 
restaurant that meets specified hours of operations and menu requirements, in addition to 
having an area used for the preparation and consumption of food and beverages that is at 
least 80% of the area of the premises. The wine permit authorizes the license holder to sell, 
at retail, at the place described in the license (1) beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption and (2) wine for off-premises consumption. The term for the wine permit is 
the same as the term of the Class B license. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 655/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Wicomico County revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2026, to the 
extent the board issues Class C per diem municipal to-go BWL licenses and temporary 
to-go event permits. The number of municipalities that will apply for a license under the 
bill is unknown, and any related permits are dependent on where the license is issued and 
if any Class B BWL license holders choose to apply for a permit. Therefore, any potential 
increase in Wicomico County license and permit fee revenues under the bill cannot be 
reliably estimated. Wicomico County can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 798 (Wicomico County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3