START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 618 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 618 
(Delegate Patterson) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Lottery - Internet Sales of Subscription Plans - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) to establish a 
system or program that allows an individual to purchase a subscription to play 
multijurisdictional or jackpot lottery games through an electronic device that connects to 
the Internet, such as a personal computer or mobile device. SLGCA may allow a licensed 
agent to sell a voucher that an individual may use to fund the purchase of a subscription. 
SLGCA must report to specified committees of the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2026, on State lottery subscription sales as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2026 as 
the availability of Internet subscription plans is not expected to significantly increase 
subscription plan participation or overall sales of lottery tickets in the State. For example, 
if lottery subscriptions increase by 500 subscriptions, after accounting for lottery 
commissions, general fund revenues increase by approximately $95,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2026. SLGCA can implement the bill with existing resources.  
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  SLGCA must pay the commission rate under current law to a licensed 
agent that sells a subscription voucher. SLGCA must also pay a licensed agent the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 618/ Page 2 
commission rate under current law for the renewal of a subscription that was originally 
funded by a voucher sold by the licensed agent and is renewed before the subscription’s 
expiration for a period of 24 months from the date of the first renewal. 
 
The bill defines subscription as a method of playing a multijurisdictional or jackpot lottery 
game by which an individual submits to SLGCA an application to play a game using the 
same game data for a specified number of consecutive drawings and payment for the 
drawings. 
 
Current Law:  SLGCA may not allow the establishment of any system or program that 
allows a person to purchase a State lottery ticket through an electronic device that connects 
to the Internet, such as a personal computer or mobile device.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SLGCA currently offers State lottery subscriptions for Mega Millions, 
Powerball, Multi-Match, and Cash4Life games. Subscription players do not currently 
represent a significant source of revenue for the State Lottery. SLGCA reports it had 
approximately 6,000 active subscriptions as of December 2024. While there could be an 
influx of additional subscribers should online subscriptions be allowed, it is not likely to 
significantly increase the overall lottery player base or State revenues. Thus, general fund 
revenues increase, likely minimally, beginning in fiscal 2026. For example, if subscriptions 
increase by 500 from vouchers sold by licensed agents, general fund revenues increase by 
approximately $122,000, less approximately $27,000 of commissions to lottery retailers; 
the net effect is general fund revenues increase by approximately $95,000. 
 
Currently, a subscription player must print a State Lottery subscription application from 
the Lottery’s website and mail the completed application to SLGCA, along with a check, 
for processing. Following review of the application and payment, SLGCA then activates 
the player’s subscription, and the player receives an email that the subscription has been 
activated for the requested number of drawings. SLGCA anticipates that the institution of 
Internet-based subscriptions may alleviate some staff time and processing costs. However, 
implementation of Internet subscription plans would require software upgrades, with 
associated nominal costs. Therefore, SLGCA can implement the bill, and report to the 
General Assembly as specified, with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 566 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 618/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3