START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 658 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 658 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Judiciary and Ways and Means 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Juvenile Services Education Board - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the Juvenile Services Education Board by (1) staggering the terms of 
appointed members; (2) imposing a two consecutive term limit on appointed members 
(members appointed after a term begins remain eligible for reappointment to 
two consecutive full terms); (3) authorizing the Secretary of Higher Education and the 
State Superintendent of Schools to each assign a designee to serve on the board; 
(4) reducing the number of required meetings from once per month to 10 times per year 
and not more than once per month; and (5) authorizing a majority of members, the chair of 
the board, or the Secretary of Juvenile Services to call special meetings of the board that 
do not count toward the monthly limit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and does not directly affect State 
finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The terms of the two longest serving appointed members serving on 
June 30, 2025, must terminate on that date. The term of the longest serving appointed 
member on each of June 30, 2026, 2027, and 2028 must terminate on that date. In the case 
of a tie for longest serving appointed member on any specified date, a randomized lottery 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 658/ Page 2 
must determine which member’s term will end from among those longest serving members 
on the date in question. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 147 of 2021 transferred the Juvenile Services Education Program 
from the Maryland State Department of Education to the Department of Juvenile Services 
(DJS) and established the Juvenile Services Education Board to oversee the program. 
Through the program, DJS oversees and provides comprehensive educational services to 
all juveniles placed in a DJS-operated detention and residential facility.  
 
The Juvenile Services Education Board must meet publicly in the State at least once a 
month at the times determined by a majority of the members then serving, the board chair, 
or the Secretary of Juvenile Services. The board consists of; 
 
 
the Secretary of Juvenile Services;  
 
the Secretary of Higher Education;  
 
the State Superintendent of Schools;  
 
the Attorney General of the State, or the Attorney General’s designee;  
 
an educator employed by the State who is engaged in the education of juveniles 
residing in a residential facility and who must be elected by the educators employed 
by DJS;  
 
a representative of the Public School Superintendents’ Association of Maryland, 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate; and 
 
five members appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
 
Appointed members serve for a term of four years until a successor is appointed and 
qualifies. The appointed members of the board must possess a high level of knowledge and 
expertise in specified areas. An appointed member who is appointed after a term begins 
serves only for the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
To the extent practicable, the Governor must fill any vacancy for an appointed member on 
the board within 60 days of the vacancy. The Governor may remove an appointed member 
only for cause. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 658/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3