START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 672 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 672 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
School Health and Wellness Personnel Assessment and Maryland Council on 
Advancement of School-Based Health Centers 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) to conduct an annual assessment of the “school health 
and wellness personnel” workforce in the State, as specified. MDH and MSDE must jointly 
submit a report to the General Assembly on the findings of the assessment and publish the 
report on each agency’s website by December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter. The bill 
also adds a school nurse member, nominated by the Maryland Association of School Health 
Nurses, to the Maryland Council on Advancement of School-Based Health Centers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. MDH general fund expenditures increase by 
$61,700 in FY 2027 for a part-time position to work with MSDE to perform the survey and 
generate a wellness personnel workforce assessment annually. Future years reflect 
elimination of one-time costs, inflation, and ongoing expenses. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
61,700 
57,700 
60,300 
62,900 
Net Effect 
$0 
($61,700) 
($57,700) 
($60,300) 
($62,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems and local health departments (LHDs) can gather and 
report information on school health and wellness personnel with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 672/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “School health and wellness personnel” includes counselors, dental 
hygienists, occupational therapists, occupational therapy assistants, physical therapists, 
school counselors, school psychologists, school social workers, and speech-language 
pathologists. 
 
The assessment of school health and wellness personnel must (1) identify the ratio of 
school health and wellness personnel to students and schools by jurisdiction; (2) obtain 
information from each local school system and LHD regarding vacancy rates for each type 
of provider of school health and wellness services; and (3) obtain feedback from each local 
school system, LHD, associations of school health and wellness professionals, and other 
stakeholders on strategies to improve the recruitment and retention of school health and 
wellness personnel. 
 
Current Law:  MSDE advises that the agency collects staffing information on some school 
health and wellness personnel through the Maryland Report Card. Additionally, MSDE’s 
Staff and Student Publications provide some detail on the types of health and wellness 
personnel employed in public schools. 
 
School-based Health Centers 
 
School-based health centers (SBHCs) are health centers located in a school or on a school 
campus that provide on-site comprehensive preventive and primary health services. 
Services may also include behavioral health, oral health, ancillary, and supportive services. 
Chapters 605 and 606 of 2021 require the Governor to transfer administration of 
SBHC grants and any related functions from MSDE to the Bureau of Maternal and 
Child Health within MDH by July 1, 2022. According to MDH’s fiscal 2023 School-based 
Health Centers Report, for the 2022-2023 school year, there were 96 SBHCs operating 
across 17 local jurisdictions. 
 
Maryland Council on Advancement of School-Based Health Centers 
 
The Maryland Council on Advancement of School-Based Health Centers must develop 
specified policy recommendations to improve the health and educational outcomes of 
students who receive services from SBHCs and report its findings and recommendations 
by December 31 of each year. The Maryland Community Health Resources Commission 
must provide staff support for the council but may seek the assistance of organizations with 
relevant expertise to provide additional staffing. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that the agency requires one regular part-time (50%) 
education program specialist to coordinate with MDH, perform data collection and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 672/ Page 3 
analysis, and prepare the final report annually. MSDE further advises that, although the 
agency collects some staffing information on some school health and wellness personnel 
through its annual Maryland Report Card, vacancy rates, retention, and feedback from local 
school systems and LHDs are not part of any currently available data. 
 
MDH similarly advises that existing resources are not sufficient to conduct the survey and 
generate an annual report, as completion of the report requires a cross-agency workgroup 
and additional data collection efforts. MDH anticipates that the agency requires one regular 
full-time coordinator and two regular part-time analysts to coordinate with MSDE, local 
school systems, and LHDs and to collect, interpret, and analyze the needed data. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that, although there are likely meaningful 
additional data collection and analysis tasks, given the partially existing data on school 
health and wellness professionals and the combined existing resources of MSDE and 
MDH, one additional part-time (50%) health policy analyst position in MDH is likely 
sufficient to conduct the survey and generate the additional annual report. 
 
Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $61,695 in fiscal 2027, which 
assumes hiring of one part-time (50%) health policy analyst (effective July 1, 2026) to 
coordinate with MSDE, local school systems, and LHDs to establish processes for annual 
data collection; collect data; and analyze and present findings by December 1 annually. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$54,597 
Operating Expenses 
7,098 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$61,695 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a part-time salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MDH and MSDE can publish the annual assessment on their respective websites with 
existing resources. Any additional expense to add a school nurse member to the 
Maryland Council on Advancement of School-Based Health Centers is assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 486 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 672/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4