START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 616 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 616 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Destroying Funerary Objects and Cemetery Elements - Statute 
of Limitations and Prohibition 
 
 
This bill expands existing prohibitions against willfully destroying, damaging, defacing, or 
removing specified objects, structures, or features in a cemetery under § 10-404 (a) of the 
Criminal Law Article. Under the bill, a person may not engage in any of these acts with 
respect to any other part of the grounds of a cemetery. The bill correspondingly expands 
an existing exception to allow for the removal of part of the grounds of the cemetery for 
the purpose of repair or replacement. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
the existing penalty of imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of 
$10,000. The bill also extends the statute of limitations to prosecute a person for a violation 
of § 10-404 (a) or (b) of the Criminal Law Article relating to the destruction of funerary 
objects and other elements of a cemetery from within one year after the offense was 
committed to within three years after local authorities in fact knew or reasonably should 
have known of the violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 616/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 10-404(a) of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not willfully 
destroy, damage, deface, or remove (1) an associated funerary object or another structure 
placed in a cemetery or (2) a building, wall, fence, railing, or other work, for the use, 
protection, or ornamentation of a cemetery. However, removing a funerary object or a 
building, wall, fence, railing, or other object from a cemetery is not prohibited if done 
(1) for the purpose of repair or replacement and (2) at the request of or with the permission 
of heirs or descendants of the deceased or the owner or manager of the cemetery. 
 
An “associated funerary object” means an item of human manufacture or use that is 
intentionally placed with human remains at the time of interment in a burial site or after 
interment, as part of a death ceremony of a culture, religion, or group. An associated 
funerary object includes a gravestone, monument, tomb, or other structure in or directly 
associated with a burial site. 
 
A person who violates § 10-404(a) is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by 
imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of $10,000. Additionally, a 
violator must pay for the restoration of any damaged or defaced real or personal property 
in a cemetery to the owner of the property or the owner of the cemetery. 
 
Under § 10-404(b) of the Criminal Law Article, a person is prohibited from willfully 
destroying, damaging, or removing a tree, plant, or shrub in a cemetery, unless engaged in 
normal maintenance of a cemetery or burial site. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, 
which is punishable by imprisonment for up to two years and/or a maximum fine of $500. 
 
A prosecution for a violation of § 10-404 (a) or (b) of the Criminal Law Article must be 
instituted within one year of when the offense was committed (the general statute of 
limitations for a misdemeanor). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  According to the Maryland Sentencing Guidelines Database,  
zero individuals were sentenced under § 10-404(a) or (b) in the State’s circuit courts during 
fiscal 2024. During fiscal 2024, the Division of Corrections conducted zero intakes and the 
Division of Parole and Probation opened two supervision cases for violations of § 10-404. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 593 of 2024. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 616/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 421 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing 
Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3