START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 716 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 716 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Housing and Community 
Development) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher 
Program Eligibility - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill makes changes to the Department of Housing and Community 
Development’s (DHCD) administration of the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher 
Program (State program). It includes DHCD in the definition of “public housing agency” 
(PHA), authorizes a PHA to administer the State program in accordance with its local 
administrative plan, and authorizes DHCD to use a project-based structure for up to 100% 
of its authorized voucher units to administer the State program, including in political 
subdivisions without a local administrator under the federal Housing Choice Voucher 
Program (HCVP). The bill makes further changes to the eligibility criteria, inspection 
frequency, and State assistance to local PHAs under the State program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes are not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
Overall funding for the program is unchanged. 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues increase due to an increase in State funding distributed to 
PHAs to help defray administrative costs. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHCD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 716/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Voucher and Housing Assistance Prioritization and Eligibility 
 
The bill requires each PHA to prioritize vouchers and housing assistance payments for 
families that include members listed below, repealing a requirement that each PHA equally 
prioritize these families: 
 
 
a child who is younger than age 18; 
 
a foster child between age 18 and age 24; 
 
a military veteran; 
 
an individual experiencing homelessness; 
 
a disabled individual; or 
 
an elderly individual. 
 
The bill specifies that the PHA’s determination of the percentage of monthly adjusted gross 
income a family is expected to pay for rent and utilities must be made by the PHA at the 
time the family initially receives assistance under the program, except as otherwise 
provided in HCVP. 
 
Unit Inspections 
 
The bill modifies unit inspection requirements by mandating that a PHA conduct an initial 
inspection and periodic inspections thereafter (rather than an annual inspection). After the 
initial inspection, inspections must occur at least biennially in accordance with the PHA’s 
administrative plan. The bill also modifies the housing quality standards for rental units to 
include additional specified federal standards, as applicable. 
 
State Assistance to Local Public Housing Agencies 
 
The bill alters the requirement that DHCD distribute 6% of the amount appropriated to the 
State program each year to local PHAs to help defray staffing expenses related to the 
administration of the federal and State program. Under the bill, of the amount appropriated 
to the State program, DHCD must distribute the federal de minimis rate of the PHA’s 
modified total direct costs as set by the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development (HUD) or 15% of the mandated appropriation for the State Program, 
whichever is greater. (The federal de minimis rate is currently 15%.) 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 716/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Housing Choice Voucher Program 
 
State and local governments administer several federal programs that provide rental 
subsidies for low-income tenants. The largest program is HCVP, which is administered 
primarily at the local level. At the State level, DHCD administers the program for 
jurisdictions that do not receive a direct allocation from HUD. 
 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program 
 
The purpose of the State program is to provide vouchers and housing assistance payments 
for low-income families that are currently on a waiting list under HCVP for housing in 
units approved by DHCD or a PHA. In general, the program must be administered in 
accordance with federal guidelines for HCVP. 
 
DHCD administers the State program and issues vouchers and housing assistance payments 
in political subdivisions without a PHA. Political subdivisions with PHA-administrators 
under HCVP must administer the State program and issue vouchers and housing assistance 
payments to those eligible for vouchers under HCVP but who are not currently receiving 
vouchers. 
 
The Governor must include an appropriation of $10.0 million in the annual budget bill for 
fiscal 2025, 2026, and 2027 to DHCD for the program. For fiscal 2028 and each fiscal year 
thereafter, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation sufficient 
to fund at least the same number of vouchers issued in the prior fiscal year. 
 
DHCD must distribute 6% of the amount appropriated for the State program each year to 
PHAs to help defray staffing expenses related to the administration of HCVP and the State 
program. 
 
Project-based Contract Administration 
 
DHCD administers “project-based” rental assistance, where the subsidy is tied to the rental 
unit rather than the tenant, for the whole State under a contract with HUD. The State is 
responsible for reviewing the property owner’s records, ensuring the housing assistance 
payments are made to the property in accordance with federal rules, reviewing requests for 
rent increases, responding to tenant complaints, and performing physical inspections of the 
properties. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 716/ Page 4 
Eligibility and Prioritization 
 
To be eligible for a housing assistance payment under the State program, a family must 
(1) reside in the State; (2) be on the waiting list for the federal program; and (3) meet 
low-income eligibility limits under HCVP or income requirements as determined by the 
PHA. 
 
DHCD and each PHA must equally prioritize vouchers and housing assistance payments 
for families that meet specified demographic criteria. When an offer of assistance is made, 
a family has 30 days to provide documentation to verify their income with DHCD or the 
PHA. 
 
Payment Standards 
 
DHCD or a PHA must calculate payment standards and housing assistance payments under 
the State program in accordance with guidelines for HCVP. A family assisted under the 
State program must be expected to pay no more than 30% of its monthly adjusted gross 
income for rent and utilities, as determined by DHCD or the PHA. 
 
Housing assistance payments for a family must continue for up to five years or until an 
HCVP voucher becomes available, whichever occurs first. 
 
Inspection Requirements 
 
DHCD or a PHA must conduct annual inspections of each unit rented using housing 
assistance payments to ensure the continued compliance with specified federal housing 
quality standards. Inspections must occur on or before the initial lease date and annually 
thereafter. 
 
Federal De Minimis Rate 
 
Under federal regulations, the current federal de minimis rate is 15% of a PHA’s modified 
total direct costs. 
 
Reporting 
 
By December 30, 2024, and annually thereafter, DHCD and each political subdivision with 
a PHA must report to the Governor and the General Assembly specified information 
relating to the program. 
 
Background:  DHCD advises that the current 6% cap on the amount of funding DHCD 
must provide to PHAs to help defray their administrative costs has proven to be inadequate. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 716/ Page 5 
DHCD believes increasing the cap to the federal de minimis rate (currently 15% of a PHA’s 
modified total direct costs) will provide sufficient resources to PHAs to adequately 
implement the State program, while maintaining the 6% floor in the event of changes to 
the federal rate. 
 
DHCD further advises that the inspection standards included in the bill are meant to align 
current practice with standards currently used by HUD. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; Howard 
and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 716/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Housing and Community Development - Statewide Rental Assistance 
Voucher Program Eligibility - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 716 
  
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Chuck Cook 
  
 
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
x__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation contains a number of technical fixes to the State Rental Assistance Voucher 
program that are not expected to have significant impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 6