START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 784 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 784 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Alterations 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a license 
in or approve the transfer of a license to a location in the 46th alcoholic beverages district, 
as specified, if the license holder has received a letter of support from the place of worship 
or school that is within the bounded area and has entered into a memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) with a community association that is within the bounded area. The 
bill also (1) extends the date through which multiple licenses in the 46th alcoholic 
beverages district must be considered unexpired for the purpose of completing a transfer; 
(2) authorizes the board to waive a requirement for a license holder within a specified area 
to maintain average daily receipts from the sale of food that are at least 40% of total daily 
receipts; and (3) expands a certain requirement for an MOU to apply to any alcoholic 
beverages license in Baltimore City. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and provisions 
related to the extension of specified licenses for the purpose of transfer terminate 
June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 784/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the board to waive the requirement that an 
establishment must have average daily receipts from the sale of food that are at least 40% 
of its total daily receipts for a restaurant operated in the area bounded by South Eden Street 
on the west, Bank Street on the north, South Spring Street on the east, and Eastern Avenue 
on the south.  
 
Expiration of Licenses for Purpose of Transfer 
 
The bill extends the date, from July 1, 2025, to July 1, 2028, through which a Class B 
license issued for a premises in the 3500 block of Boston Street must be considered 
unexpired for the purpose of completing a transfer of ownership and a transfer of location 
to a premises in the 3600 block of Boston Street. 
 
The bill requires a Class D six-day beer, wine, and liquor license issued for a premises on 
the 200 block of East Lexington Street to be considered unexpired until the end of 
June 30, 2026, for the purpose of completing a transfer of ownership at the same location, 
provided the license holder received a letter of support from the Downtown Partnership of 
Baltimore.  
 
The bill also requires five Class B beer, wine, and liquor licenses issued for restaurants at 
Harborplace that expired between January 1, 2021, and January 1, 2025, to be considered 
unexpired until the end of June 30, 2030, for the purpose of completing a transfer of 
ownership at the same location. The most recent license holder must retain liability for any 
unpaid personal property taxes due to Baltimore City or to the State. The board may not 
(1) require the Class B beer, wine, and liquor licenses to have a minimum capital 
investment or to maintain a minimum or maximum seating amount; (2) authorize the 
transfer of a license to another location; and (3) require the most recent license holder to 
complete a Transfer Authorization or Affidavit of Compliance to complete a transfer of 
ownership. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a restaurant in Baltimore City must have average daily receipts 
from the sale of food that are at least 40% of its total daily receipts. 
 
Conditions on the Issuance or Renewal of Specified Licenses 
 
If a community association and an applicant for the issuance or renewal of a Class B, a 
Class B-D-7, or a Class D alcoholic beverages license have entered into an MOU, the board 
may make the issuance or renewal of the license conditional on the substantial compliance 
of the applicant with the MOU. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 784/ Page 3 
Distance Restriction from Place of Worship or School 
 
Generally, in the 46th alcoholic beverages district, a new license may not be issued for, 
and an existing license may not be moved to, an establishment that is within 300 feet of the 
nearest point of the place of worship or school unless the license holder has received a 
letter of support from a place of worship or school that is within the bounded area, as 
specified.  
 
Expiration, Transfer, and Conversion of Licenses 
 
Chapters 1026 and 1027 of 2024 required a Class B license for a premises in the 3500 block 
of Boston Street to be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, for the purpose of 
completing a transfer of ownership and a transfer of location to a premises in the 
3600 block of Boston Street.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 662 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3