START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 788 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 788 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee, et al.) (By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Judiciary Department - Commission on Judicial Disabilities - Temporary 
Appointment 
 
 
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, authorizes the chair of the Commission on Judicial Disabilities to take 
specified actions in the event of a member’s recusal or disqualification, or the expiration 
of a member’s term without a replacement. Specifically, the chair may (1) recall a former 
member to serve as a temporary substitute member or (2) request that the Governor appoint 
a temporary substitute member or extend a current member’s term. On request of the chair 
of the commission, the Governor may appoint a temporary substitute member for a 
specified period of time or extend a current member’s term until a replacement is 
appointed. Any temporary substitute member is subject to the same qualifications that were 
applicable to the member for whom the substitute is temporarily appointed, and if the 
member is a judge or an attorney, must be a member in good standing of the Maryland Bar. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, the Commission 
on Judicial Disabilities experiences operational efficiencies; there is otherwise no material 
impact on State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 788/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities – Generally 
 
As authorized under §§ 4A and 4B of Article IV of the Maryland Constitution, the 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities investigates complaints against judges in the State 
courts and recommends disciplinary action to the Supreme Court of Maryland, as 
appropriate.  
 
Membership:  The commission is composed of 11 members who are appointed by the 
Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. Of the members, in addition to being 
residents of the State:   
 
 
3 must be judges, as specified;  
 
3 must be appointed from those persons who are admitted to practice law in the 
State, as specified; and 
 
5 must represent the public and not be active or retired judges, not be a person 
admitted to practice law in the State, and not have a financial relationship with or 
receive compensation from a judge or a person admitted to practice law in the State.  
 
Terms and Compensation:  The term of office of each member is four years beginning on 
January 1 following the expiration of the member’s predecessor’s term. A member may 
not serve more than two four‐year terms, or for more than a total of ten years if appointed 
to fill a vacancy.  
 
Following the expiration of a member’s term, other than an automatic termination 
(disqualification) as specified in the Maryland Constitution, the commission may conduct 
business in the ordinary course with that member continuing to serve, until such time as 
the Governor appoints a replacement.  
 
A member of the commission may not receive compensation for the member’s services but 
is entitled to reimbursement for any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of 
the member’s duties.  
 
Recusal by a Member:  Under Maryland Rule 18‐411, a member of the commission must 
not participate as a member in any discussion, disposition, or proceeding in which (1) the 
member is a complainant; (2) the member’s disability, impairment, or sanctionable conduct 
is in issue; (3) the member’s impartiality might reasonably be questioned; (4) the member 
has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts involved in the proceeding; or (5) the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 788/ Page 3 
recusal of a judicial member would otherwise be required by the Maryland Code of Judicial 
Conduct.  
 
Disqualification of a Member:  Under the Maryland Constitution, a member’s membership 
automatically terminates, as applicable, if the member (1) who is appointed from among 
judges in the State ceases to be a judge; (2) who is appointed from among those admitted 
to the practice of law becomes a judge; (3) who is representing the public becomes a judge 
or is admitted to the practice of law in the State or has a financial relationship with or 
receives compensation from a judge or a person admitted to practice law in the State; or 
(4) ceases to be a resident of the State.  
 
Vacancies:  Any vacancies on the commission must be filled for the unexpired term by the 
Governor in the same manner as for making of appointments to the commission and subject 
to the same qualifications which were applicable to the person causing the vacancy.  
 
Quorum in a Proceeding:  Under Maryland Rule 18‐411, a majority of the members of the 
commission constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, as long as at least 
one judge, one attorney, and one public member are present. If, by reason of vacancies or 
recusals, the quorum in a particular proceeding does not include at least one judge, 
one attorney, and one public member, the Supreme Court of Maryland, only with the 
written consent of the judge who is the subject of the proceeding, may designate a judge, 
including a senior judge, an attorney, or a member of the public to serve as a substitute 
member of the commission, for purposes of a quorum in that proceeding.  
 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities – Workload 
 
According to the commission’s annual report for fiscal 2024, 396 complaints were filed 
with the commission, an increase of 18% from fiscal 2023 and 34% from fiscal 2022. The 
Judiciary reports that 301 complaints were filed in the first 5 months of fiscal 2025, or an 
average of 60 complaints per month. If the same rate of monthly complaints continues, the 
number of complaints for fiscal 2025 may be as high as 720 (an 82% increase from 
fiscal 2024). The proposed constitutional amendment is aimed at positioning the 
commission to better accommodate its increasing workload by allowing members to serve 
on a temporary basis so that vacant member positions are not left unfilled.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced during the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 788/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 619 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4