START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 707 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 707 
(Delegate Wilkins, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Licenses, Identification Cards, and Moped Operator's Permits - 
Notation of Nonapparent Disability (Eric's ID Law) 
 
 
This bill requires an initial and renewal application for a license, identification card, or 
moped operator’s permit to allow an applicant to choose to indicate on the document that 
the applicant has a “nonapparent disability,” which includes (1) developmental disabilities 
and (2) intellectual disabilities. The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) must ensure 
that the relevant credential of an applicant who has indicated a nonapparent disability on 
an application includes a notation on the bottom of the credential. MVA must also conduct 
certain public outreach efforts on the availability of the notation (including notifying 
specified individuals the notation may be removed). The bill prohibits MVA from charging 
a fee for the notation – including for the issuance of a corrected document if no other 
corrections are made. The bill also prohibits MVA from making certain disclosures related 
to the notation. The Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC), in 
consultation with the Department of State Police and other interested stakeholders, must 
implement training concerning interactions with individuals who have a nonapparent 
disability notation on their credential. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase, potentially 
significantly, beginning in FY 2026, due to one-time vendor costs and credential changes, 
as discussed below. MPTSC can conduct the required training with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local law enforcement activities are not anticipated to be materially 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 707/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MVA must consult with developmental disability and intellectual 
disability advocacy groups with respect to the design of the nonapparent disability notation. 
Moreover, MVA must establish public outreach efforts to educate the general public on the 
availability of the nonapparent disability notation. MVA must also notify an individual 
with a nonapparent disability notation who turns 18 years of age that the individual may 
request that the notation be removed. Furthermore, MVA must delete any record of an 
individual’s nonapparent disability notation upon request by the individual at any time. 
 
MVA is prohibited from: 
 
 
requiring an applicant for the credential to provide proof of the applicant’s 
nonapparent disability; 
 
denying an application for a credential because the nonapparent disability selected 
does not match the nonapparent disability indicated on another document associated 
with the applicant; 
 
disclosing, for any use without a court order, information related to an applicant’s 
indication of a nonapparent disability or request to remove an indication, except as 
noted below; or 
 
using information disclosed by a person as a basis for referring the person to the 
Medical Advisory Board. 
 
MVA may make information available to (1) a court; (2) a criminal justice agency; (3) a 
driver licensing authority; (4) the applicant; (5) the applicant’s attorney; (6) any third party 
designated by the applicant; or (7) the Child Support Administration within the Department 
of Human Services. 
 
Current Law:  MVA issues driver’s licenses and identification cards to eligible applicants. 
Licenses and identification cards may include certain designations on them, such as 
specifying whether a person is an organ donor or a veteran. 
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase by $75,000 for one-time vendor costs in 
fiscal 2026 to redesign and update credential templates, as required by the bill. The 
estimated cost per credential change (i.e., to produce and distribute the relevant credential) 
is $1.39 in fiscal 2026. 
 
The exact number of individuals who may request the nonapparent disability notation is 
unknown, but MVA advises that several hundred thousand individuals may qualify and 
seek the notation. While the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) agrees that the 
number of eligible individuals may be significant, DLS notes an exact estimate cannot be 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 707/ Page 3 
determined without experience under the bill. A significant portion of eligible individuals 
may choose to have the designation added immediately once the bill takes effect, while a 
smaller portion may request the notation upon renewal in later years or may choose not to 
obtain a notation. For illustrative purposes only, for every 50,000 credential holders who 
request the notation, TTF expenditures increase by $69,500; this amount may be higher in 
later years due to expected growth in production/distribution costs. 
 
Additional Comments:  MPTSC advises that all law enforcement officers receive training 
in police academies and mandatory in-service training on interacting with people who have 
a nonapparent disability, including identifying indicators of intellectual and developmental 
disabilities, how to deescalate and resolve situations involving such individuals, and how 
to exercise ethical leadership when encountering people with such disabilities. 
 
In addition, individuals with developmental disabilities may obtain a Voluntary 
Developmental Disability Disclosure Card from MVA. The card was designed to facilitate 
more effective communication between law enforcement officers and individuals with 
developmental disabilities. The card is blue – for easy recognition – and the size of a 
driver’s license. It includes space for an individual to provide details on their particular 
developmental disability as well as a message to law enforcement officers on how best to 
interact with the individual. The card is available, upon request, at the information desk of 
any of MVA’s 24 branches statewide – to customers, parents or guardians, and 
organizations for distribution. MVA does not ask for any explanation or proof of disability 
to obtain the card. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1096 and HB 1456 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 618 (Senator Smith, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of 
Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 707/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4