START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 722 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 722 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Report on Oversight of Substance Use 
Disorder Treatment Programs and Recovery Residences 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), by December 1, 2025, and 
December 1, 2026, to report to specified committees of the General Assembly on the 
revision to Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.63), and improvements to oversight of 
substance use disorder (SUD) treatment programs and procedures for the certification and 
oversight of recovery residences. The reports must include, to the extent authorized by law, 
an analysis of how regulatory revisions and other changes will prevent specified incidents, 
including patient relapse and death while enrolled in an SUD program and housed in 
provider-owned buildings. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can likely handle the bill’s reporting requirements with existing 
budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.63.03) specify the accreditation-based 
licensure criteria for several substance-related disorder treatment programs ranging from 
outpatient treatment level 1 programs that provide treatment for less than 9 hours a week 
for adults (or 6 hours for minors) to individuals who are able to function in their usual 
environment to residential-intensive (American Society of Addiction Medicine or ASAM 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 722/ Page 2 
Level 3.7) programs that provide medical monitored, intensive treatment in an intermediate 
residential care facility for a minimum of 36 hours of therapeutic services per week on a 
planned regimen of 24-hour evaluation, care, and treatment that meets the requirements for 
withdrawal management services. Substance-related disorder treatment programs located 
in a State or local correctional facility must also meet the specified requirements and obtain 
a license before operating. 
 
ASAM Levels of Care classify treatment services for substance-related disorder treatment. 
There are five broad levels of care and subsets within these levels to represent gradations 
of intensity of services and certain benchmarks:   
 
 
Level 0.5:  early intervention; 
 
Level 1.0:  outpatient services; 
 
Level 2.0:  intensive outpatient/partial hospitalization services; 
 
Level 2.1:  intensive outpatient services; 
 
Level 2.5:  partial hospitalization services; 
 
Level 3.0:  residential/inpatient services; 
 
Level 3.1:  clinically managed, low-intensity residential services; 
 
Level 3.3:  clinically managed population-specific high-intensity residential 
services; 
 
Level 3.5:  clinically managed, high-intensity residential services; 
 
Level 3.7:  medically monitored, intensive inpatient services; and 
 
Level 4.0:  medically managed, intensive inpatient services. 
 
Chapter 580 of 2017 requires MDH to publish a list on the MDH website of each recovery 
residence operating in each county in the State. The list, which must be posted by 
November 1, 2017, must indicate whether the owner of a recovery residence has received 
a valid certificate of compliance. In addition, a behavioral health program or health 
professional must provide an individual with a list of certified recovery residences and 
provide an individual who has been assessed as in need of ASAM Level 3.1 services with 
information on where the individual may receive those services when referring the 
individual to receive services at a recovery residence. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, MDH must submit two reports on the revision of 
regulations and improvements to specific oversight and procedures. MDH advises that it 
requires four additional staff (one full-time health policy analyst, two full-time program 
administrators, and one part-time administrator) to oversee continuous revision of  
COMAR 10.63, including procedures for overseeing SUD treatment programs and 
recovery residences. This would increase general fund expenditures by an estimated 
$318,716 in fiscal 2026, with ongoing costs in future years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 722/ Page 3 
However, as the bill requires MDH to report on revisions and improvements rather than to 
implement specific revisions and improvements, the Department of Legislative Services 
notes that MDH should be able to handle the reporting requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
To the extent that MDH determines that there is a need for additional oversight or to 
implement identified improvements that cannot be handled with existing resources, 
additional personnel may be needed in the future but any such need is not due specifically 
to the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  On December 20, 2024, The New York Times published an 
investigative report about PHA Healthcare, a company that ran an SUD treatment program 
in Baltimore City and placed some patients in apartment buildings filled with rampant drug 
use, leading to overdoses and deaths. MDH issued PHA a cease-and-desist order on 
December 23, 2024. The program ended its treatment services as of January 24, 2025, 
though some patients still live in housing provided by PHA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland’s Office of Overdose 
Response; The New York Times; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 14, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3