START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 754 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 754 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Hearing Notice 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Harford County Board of License Commissioners to publish certain 
hearing notices as well as decisions on license applications and certain changes to existing 
licenses in one newspaper of general circulation in Harford County or online, as specified. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Harford County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the board is required to publish notice 
of a hearing for an alcoholic beverages license application two times in two successive 
weeks (1) in one newspaper of general circulation published in the county and (2) on the 
board’s website. The board is also required to publish its decision on an application for a 
new license, an upgrade of an existing license, or a change in location of an existing license 
(1) in one newspaper of general circulation published in the county and (2) on the board’s 
website. Finally, the board is required, at least two consecutive weeks before a public 
hearing, to publish notice of a hearing on all proposed alterations of its regulations (1) in 
one newspaper of general circulation published in the county and (2) on the board’s 
website. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 754/ Page 2 
Under the bill, the board is authorized to publish the above notices either in a newspaper 
of general circulation in the county or online, as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 744 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2