START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 767 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 767 
(Delegate Terrasa, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Landlord and Tenant - Procedures for Failure to Pay Rent, 
Breach of Lease, and Tenant Holding Over 
 
 
This bill establishes additional requirements once a court has issued a warrant of restitution 
in a failure to pay rent, breach of lease, or tenant holding over action, as specified, generally 
related to notice. The bill also establishes civil remedies for a tenant if a landlord is in 
violation of the bill’s provisions. The bill applies prospectively and may not be applied or 
interpreted to have any effect on or application to any cause of action filed before the bill’s 
effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Execution of a Warrant of Restitution – Landlord’s Responsibilities 
 
If the District Court issues a warrant of restitution, the landlord must – at least six days 
before the scheduled date of repossession as set by the sheriff – provide written notice to 
the tenant of the date on which the warrant is scheduled to be executed by (1) sending the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 767/ Page 2 
notice by first-class mail with certificate of mailing; (2) posting the notice on the front door 
of the property and taking a date-stamped photograph of the notice posted on the front 
door; and (3) if the landlord knows or has on file the email address or cell phone number 
of the tenant, sending the notice electronically to the tenant by an email message or a text 
message. 
 
The notice must include the following: 
 
 
the District Court case number; 
 
the tenant’s name as stated in the summary ejectment case; 
 
the address of the leased premises; 
 
the date on which the warrant of restitution was ordered by the court; 
 
the initial scheduled date of the eviction; 
 
a statement that the repossession may occur unless the tenant (1) returns possession 
of the property to the landlord or (2) for a warrant of restitution issued based on a 
failure to pay rent action, exercises the right to redemption (if available); 
 
a statement informing the occupant of the risk of losing personal property as a result 
of the eviction and the ability to seek legal advice, as specified; 
 
a statement indicating the amount due to redeem the property, if a tenant still has a 
right to redemption; 
 
a statement that the notice is the final notice to the tenant of the intended 
repossession, even if the repossession is stayed for any reason; and 
 
specified contact information for the landlord. 
 
A landlord may charge a tenant up to $5.00 for expenses actually incurred in providing the 
notice. 
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that the tenant was notified if the landlord provides to 
the sheriff (1) the certificate of mailing; (2) a photograph of the notice posted on the front 
door of the property containing a readable timestamp indicating the date and time that the 
notice was posted; and (3) a signed affidavit of the person who posted the notice. 
 
Execution of a Warrant of Restitution – Sheriff’s Responsibilities 
 
If the sheriff reasonably believes that the landlord has not provided the required notice or 
that the tenant may have redeemed the property, the sheriff (1) must notify the 
District Court and (2) is prohibited from executing the warrant of restitution without further 
court order. If the District Court finds that the landlord did not provide the required notice, 
it must vacate the warrant of restitution. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 767/ Page 3 
However, if a landlord presents the required documentation to the sheriff, the sheriff must 
(1) file the documentation with the clerk of the court and (2) subject to existing 
requirements to keep pets safe and sheltered, execute the warrant of restitution by putting 
the landlord in possession of the premises. 
 
If a tenant is not present during the execution of the warrant of restitution, the sheriff must 
post a notice on the front door of the premises indicating that repossession of the premises 
has been completed. 
 
Other Provisions 
 
On violation of the bill’s requirements and a court finding in favor of a tenant, the tenant 
is entitled to (1) actual damages; (2) reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; (3) injunctive 
relief to recover possession of the leased premises or personal property; or (4) any other 
remedy the court may find reasonable. 
 
The bill does not restrict the authority of local jurisdictions to enact or enforce legislation 
that, in regard to the required notice above, (1) increases the minimum number of days of 
required notice to as many as 14 days and (2) decreases the minimum number of days of 
required notice to as few as 4 days. Additionally, the bill does not restrict the authority of 
local jurisdictions to enact or enforce legislation that establishes penalties for violations of 
the bill. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant must file the appropriate 
action (e.g., failure to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a 
judgment by the court, the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and 
signed by the court, authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution are forwarded to the 
local sheriff’s office who is then authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth 
numerous specific requirements for such actions, including those related to written notice 
prior to filing certain actions. This includes specific requirements for written notice prior 
to initiating a failure to pay rent action. 
 
In failure to pay rent actions, a tenant has the right to redemption of the leased premises by 
tendering in cash, certified check, or money order to the landlord or the landlord’s agent 
all past due amounts, as determined by the court, plus all court awarded costs and fees, at 
any time before actual execution of the eviction order. This right of redemption does not 
apply to any tenant against whom three judgments of possession have been entered for 
rent due and unpaid in the 12 months prior to the initiation of the action, as specified. 
 
A person may not remove a pet from real property delivered to a landlord or complainant 
following a failure to pay rent, tenant holding over, breach of leave, or wrongful detainer 
action and abandon it on public property or a public right-of-way. When delivering 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 767/ Page 4 
property to a landlord or complainant, the sheriff, constable or other official must 
(1) immediately inspect the premises for pets and (2) return any pet belonging to the tenant 
or former occupant. However, if the tenant or former occupant is not present when the 
property is delivered to the landlord or complainant, the sheriff, constable, or official must 
(1) contact an animal shelter or rescue organization to take custody of the pet; (2) provide 
the tenant or former occupant with the shelter or organization’s name and contact 
information; and (3) provide the shelter or organization with the tenant or former 
occupant’s name and contact information, including the individual’s telephone number if 
available. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Landlords are subject to (1) more stringent requirements before 
property may be repossessed and (2) additional civil remedies following the violation of 
any of the bill’s provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 992 and HB 1114 of 2024 and HB 1023 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 442 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford County; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4