START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 718 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 718 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Insurance Coverage Protection Commission - Established 
 
 
This bill reestablishes the Maryland Health Insurance Coverage Protection Commission to 
(1) monitor potential and actual federal changes to the federal Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA), the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act 
(MHPAEA), Medicaid, the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and 
the Maryland All-Payer Model; (2) assess the impact of such changes; and (3) provide 
recommendations for State and local action to protect access to affordable health coverage. 
By December 31 each year, the commission must submit a report on its findings and 
recommendations. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS), the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), and the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) jointly 
must staff the commission. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2029.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DLS, MDH, and MIA can likely staff the commission and prepare reports 
using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The duties of the commission include (1) assessing the current and 
potential adverse effects of the loss of health coverage on the residents, public health, and 
economy of the State resulting from changes to the ACA, MHPAEA, Medicaid, MCHP, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 718/ Page 2 
Medicare, or the Maryland All-Payer Model; (2) estimating the costs of such adverse 
effects and the resulting loss of health coverage; (3) examining measures that may prevent 
or mitigate such adverse effects and the resulting loss of health coverage; (4) making 
recommendations for laws that may be warranted to minimize such adverse effects and will 
assist residents in obtaining and maintaining affordable health coverage; and (5) identifying 
potential funding sources for recommended laws, as necessary.  
 
The commission may hold public meetings across the State to carry out its duties and 
convene workgroups to solicit input from stakeholders.  
 
The 25-member commission consists of (1) three members of the Senate; 
(2) three members of the House of Delegates; (3) the Secretary of Health (or designee); 
(4) the Maryland Insurance Commissioner (or designee); (5) the Executive Director of the 
Health Services Cost Review Commission (or designee); (6) the Executive Director of the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (or designee); (7) the Attorney General (or designee); 
(8) one representative of the Maryland Hospital Association; (9) one representative of a 
managed 
care 
organization; 
(10) 
one 
consumer 
of 
health 
care 
services; 
(11) one representative of a health insurance carrier; (12) one representative who is an 
employer; (13) one representative of the nursing home industry; (14) one representative of 
MedChi; (15) one representative of behavioral health care providers; (16) two members of 
the public; (17) one representative of a group model health maintenance organization 
(HMO); (18) one representative of the League of Life and Health Insurers of Maryland; 
(19) one representative of the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors; 
and (20) one representative of the Maryland Association of Counties.  
 
The President and the Speaker must designate a member who is a senator and a member 
who is a delegate, respectively, to serve as co-chairs of the commission. Members of the 
commission may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses, 
as provided in the State budget.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 17 of 2017 established the Maryland Health Insurance Coverage 
Protection Commission. Section 2 of Chapters 37 and 38 of 2018 added a representative of 
a group model HMO that participates in the individual market to the commission and 
required the commission to study and make recommendations regarding individual and 
group health insurance market stability. Chapters 417 and 418 of 2019 extended the 
termination date of the commission to June 30, 2023, and required the commission to 
establish a workgroup to monitor actions relating to the ACA and determine the most 
effective manner of ensuring that Maryland consumers can obtain and retain quality health 
insurance, independent of any action or inaction on the part of the federal government or 
any changes to federal law or its interpretation. Chapters 597 and 598 of 2019 required the 
commission to study and recommend whether the State Reinsurance Program should be 
extended after calendar 2023 and, if so, how it will be funded.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 718/ Page 3 
The commission was established to (1) monitor potential and actual federal changes to the 
ACA, Medicaid, MCHP, Medicare, and the Maryland All-Payer Model; (2) assess the 
impact of such changes; and (3) provide recommendations for State and local action to 
protect access to affordable health coverage. The commission met throughout the 
2017 through 2022 interims and issued six annual reports. The commission terminated 
June 30, 2023.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3