START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 799 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 799 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Maryland Innovation Initiative Institution Partnership 
Extension Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Innovation Initiative (MII) Institution Partnership 
Extension Program. The extension program is implemented and administered by MII, 
which already exists in the Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO). 
The purpose of the extension program is to expand opportunities at eligible institutions for 
technology validation, entrepreneurial development, and industry engagement. Eligible 
institutions are Bowie State University (BSU), Frostburg State University (FSU), and any 
other public or private nonprofit institution of higher education deemed eligible by MII. 
Each institution must provide a cash match equivalent to 10% of the amount awarded under 
the program. In fiscal 2027 and 2028, the Governor may include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $250,000 for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
annually in FY 2027 and 2028 and by $1.0 million annually thereafter. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures for the MII Fund (MIIF) increase correspondingly. Higher 
education expenditures increase by $15,000 annually in FY 2027 and 2028 and increase in 
future years to the extent that public four-year institutions of higher education or 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) must provide a match to receive program 
funds. Assumptions for this estimate are discussed below. All program funding is 
discretionary. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$250,000 
$250,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$0 
$15,000 
$15,000 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
($265,000) 
($265,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 799/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that local community 
colleges are deemed eligible, apply for, and receive funding under the program – subject 
to a 10% matching requirement. This estimate assumes no effect on local finances until at 
least FY 2029. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To qualify for a grant under the program, a project proposal must: 
 
 
support the creation of a new technology-based business in Maryland; 
 
advance technology toward commercialization of a product or service; 
 
foster entrepreneurial development at the eligible institution;  
 
create an opportunity for meaningful economic impact in the region around the 
eligible institution; or 
 
foster collaboration between the eligible institution and an industry partner, 
including (1) product development with commercialization potential and 
(2) matching funds provided by the industry partner.  
 
MII must develop criteria to review, evaluate, and rate project proposals for funding under 
the program, and grants must be distributed to projects based on the criteria. MII must 
collaborate with an eligible institution to identify and support industry partnerships and 
commercialization opportunities. 
 
The funding provided under the bill must supplement, not supplant, any funds that would 
otherwise be provided to MII. 
 
By January 1, 2026, TEDCO must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
similar programs in neighboring states and the potential economic benefits and costs of 
expanding MII to all public and private nonprofit institutions of higher education operating 
in the State. 
 
By July 1, 2028, TEDCO must include information on the program in its annual report to 
the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 697 of 2021 established the MII University Partnership 
Pilot Program, with nearly identical provisions as the extension program established by the 
bill, except for the potential applicability to institutions other than BSU and FSU and a 
requirement for a $50,000 annual contribution by BSU and FSU (rather than the 10% match 
requirement in this bill). The pilot program terminated June 30, 2024. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 799/ Page 3 
Maryland Innovation Initiative  
 
Chapter 450 of 2012 established MII in TEDCO to promote technology transfer from 
Maryland’s public and private nonprofit research institutions to the private sector. The 
initiative is authorized to provide grant funding or equity investment financing to a 
qualifying university, qualifying university-based entrepreneur, or other start-up entity to 
promote the commercialization of technology developed in whole or in part by a qualifying 
university. 
 
Only qualifying universities may submit proposals for grant funding from the initiative. 
Eligible universities must contribute specified amounts each year ($100,000 or $200,000, 
depending on the university) to qualify for the program. The eligible universities are the 
Johns Hopkins University; the University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus; the 
University of Maryland, College Park Campus; Morgan State University; and the 
University of Maryland Baltimore County. Chapter 450 also established a special fund, 
MIIF, for the administration of the program, including receipt and distribution of 
contributions from eligible universities. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not mandate a level of funding for the extension 
program, although it does specify a discretionary funding level of $250,000 annually in 
fiscal 2027 and 2028. The extension program is initially open to only BSU and FSU and 
may be expanded by MII to include any other public or private nonprofit institution of 
higher education in the State. There are currently 42 such institutions, including BSU and 
FSU:  13 public four-year institutions, 16 community colleges, and 13 private institutions. 
As such, costs for an expanded program under which any significant proportion of the 
State’s nonprofit institutions of higher education are eligible would be significantly higher. 
TEDCO estimates $100,000 to $500,000 per year, per institution, would be an appropriate 
additional funding level, depending on the institution. 
 
Given these considerations, to develop a reasonable approximation of expected funding for 
the extension program, this estimate assumes the following: 
 
 
no discretionary funding is provided in fiscal 2026; 
 
$250,000 in discretionary funding is provided annually in fiscal 2027 and 2028, 
consistent with the discretionary funding level specified in the bill; 
 
TEDCO has administrative expenses of approximately $100,000 annually in 
fiscal 2027 and 2028, based on that discretionary funding level, leaving 
$150,000 for grants in each of those years;  
 
discretionary funding is only provided to BSU and FSU in fiscal 2027 and 2028; 
 
MII expands eligibility to a limited number of additional institutions beginning in 
fiscal 2029, and total discretionary funding increases to $1.0 million annually; 
 
discretionary funding is provided in perpetuity, as the program itself is permanent; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 799/ Page 4 
 
the required 10% cash match does not accrue to MIIF; and 
 
discretionary funding received for projects submitted by State institutions is not 
considered higher education revenues. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $250,000 fiscal 2027 and 2028 and by 
$1.0 million annually thereafter. Special fund revenues for MIIF increase correspondingly 
as funds are received and used to provide grants for eligible purposes and to pay TEDCO’s 
administrative expenses.  
 
Higher education expenditures increase by $15,000 annually in fiscal 2027 and 2028 for 
BSU and FSU and increase in future years to the extent that public four-year institutions 
of higher education or BCCC must provide a match to receive program funds. 
 
General fund expenditures may vary significantly from this estimate, depending on the 
number of institutions determined to be eligible under the bill by MII and the amount of 
discretionary funding provided. 
 
TEDCO can complete the required report with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit from projects funded under the 
extension program. Use of funds for the previous pilot program are detailed in TEDCO’s 
July 2024 report on the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Commerce; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4