START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 793 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 793 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - University System of Maryland) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
University System of Maryland - Academic Facilities Bonding Authority 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the use of $30.0 million in academic facilities bonds for 
the purpose of financing and refinancing construction, renovation, and renewal projects at 
University System of Maryland (USM) buildings and campuses. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No likely effect in FY 2025. Revenues and expenditures from bond proceeds 
increase by $30.0 million in FY 2026. The revenues and expenditures are included in the 
FY 2026 Capital Improvement Program (CIP) as introduced. Higher education 
expenditures increase by an estimated $2.5 million annually, beginning in FY 2027, to pay 
debt service on the revenue bonds. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Bond Rev. 
$30.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$0 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
Bond Exp. 
$30.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  USM has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 793/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  USM must gain legislative approval to use academic revenue 
bond (ARB) proceeds for certain capital improvement projects at academic facilities. 
 
The maximum aggregate principal amount of bonds that USM may issue was increased by 
$300.0 million, from $1.4 billion to $1.7 billion, by Chapter 233 of 2022. This bill does 
not affect the cap on bond principal; it only authorizes the issuance of bonds within the 
existing limit for specific capital projects. 
 
The fiscal 2026 CIP as introduced proposes $30.0 million in ARBs in fiscal 2026 and 
$30.0 million each year from fiscal 2027 through 2030. The proposed amount of debt is 
consistent with the Capital Debt Affordability Committee recommendation for fiscal 2026. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  USM revenues and expenditures from bond proceeds increase by 
$30.0 million in fiscal 2026. The revenues and expenditures are included in the fiscal 2026 
capital budget as introduced. Beginning in fiscal 2027, USM expenditures to pay debt 
service on the ARBs increase by an estimated $2.5 million annually for 20 years. USM 
advises that total annual debt service does not increase overall since at least an equal 
amount of previously authorized debt will be retired. However, DLS advises that, absent 
the bill, annual debt service payments by USM would decrease as outstanding debt is 
retired unless new debt is authorized. Thus, debt service costs increase due to the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - April 3, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 793/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  University System of Maryland - Academic Facilities Bonding 
Authority 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 793 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Samantha Norris, University System of Maryland 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill authorizes the issuance of debt for ongoing capital and facilities renewal 
construction projects. Projects are authorized by the State and BPW. 

END OF PAGE 3