START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 787 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 787 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judiciary) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Courts - State Reporter - Publication of Cases 
 
 
This bill repeals a requirement for the State Reporter to secure a copyright for the State of 
Maryland for opinions of the Supreme Court of Maryland and the Appellate Court of 
Maryland designated for publication by the respective courts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill reflects current practice by repealing an obsolete provision. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Reporter, appointed by the Supreme Court of 
Maryland, is responsible for the publication and distribution of the official opinions of the 
Supreme Court of Maryland and the Appellate Court of Maryland. Opinions designated for 
publication must be published within six months of the decision in the case. Reported 
opinions filed since 1995 are available on the Judiciary’s website. However, the Judiciary’s 
website specifies that only bound volumes of the Maryland Reports and  
Maryland Appellate Reports are considered the final, official texts of the opinions of the 
Supreme Court of Maryland and the Appellate Court of Maryland. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the repealed language is obsolete. The U.S. Supreme Court in 
Banks v. Manchester held that federal copyright law does not apply to judicial opinions, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 787/ Page 2 
because the opinions constitute the authentic exposition and interpretation of the law that 
is binding on all citizens and free for publication to all. 128 U.S. 244, 253 (1888). The 
Banks case was recently affirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court in Georgia et al. v. 
Public.Resource.Org, Inc., 500 U.S. 255, 259 (2020), where the court, applying the logic 
of Banks, held that the annotations in the Geogia code (Official Code of Georgia 
Annotated) are not subject to copyright protection. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 622 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judiciary) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2