START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 783 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 783 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Implicit Bias and Structural Racism Training 
 
 
This bill expands the scope of required training for individuals licensed or certified by a 
health occupations board to include implicit bias and structural racism. Applicants for the 
renewal of a license or certificate issued by a health occupations board must attest to 
completion of an approved implicit bias and structural racism training program the 
first time they renew their license or certificate after April 1, 2026. The Cultural and 
Linguistic Health Care Professional Competency Program, in coordination with the 
Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities (OMHHD), must identify and approve 
implicit bias and structural racism training programs, as specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures may 
increase by an indeterminate amount in FY 2026 only for contractual assistance to identify 
and approve new training courses, as discussed below. Special fund expenditures for each 
health occupations board may increase in FY 2026 to the extent each board must update its 
licensing system to accept revised attestations. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Structural racism” means the totality of ways in which societies foster 
racial discrimination by mutually reinforcing systems of housing, education, employment, 
earnings, benefits, credit, media, health care, and criminal justice. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 783/ Page 2 
The Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Professional Competency Program, in 
coordination with OMHHD, must identify and approve implicit bias and structural racism 
training programs that are recognized by a health occupations board or accredited by the 
Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) or the Accreditation 
Council for Pharmacy Education. 
 
Each health occupations board may adopt regulations allowing an applicant for license 
renewal to receive continuing education credits for completing an implicit bias and 
structural racism training program. 
 
Uncodified language in the bill specifies that, if an applicant for renewal of a license or 
certificate is applying between October 1, 2025, and April 1, 2026, for the applicant’s 
first renewal, the applicant must attest that they have completed an approved implicit bias 
training program, as required under current law. 
 
Uncodified language also expresses the intent of the General Assembly that the structural 
racism training required under the bill be developed and offered using grant funding 
provided to the Maryland Nurses Association (MNA) from the American Nurses 
Association to advance antiracism efforts. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Implicit Bias Training 
 
“Implicit bias” means a bias in judgment that results from subtle cognitive processes, 
including the following prejudices and stereotypes that often operate at a level below 
conscious awareness and without intentional control:  (1) prejudicial negative feelings or 
beliefs about a group that an individual holds without being aware of the feelings or beliefs; 
and (2) unconscious attributions of particular qualities to a member of a specific social 
group that are influenced by experience and based on learned associations between various 
qualities and social categories, including race and gender. 
 
Chapter 745 of 2021 requires applicants for the renewal of a license or certificate issued 
by a health occupations board to attest to completion of an approved implicit bias training 
program the first time they renew their license or certificate after April 1, 2022. The 
Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Professional Competency Program, in coordination 
with OMHHD, must identify and approve implicit bias training programs that must be 
recognized by a health occupations board or accredited by ACCME. 
 
Chapter 337 of 2020 requires the Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Professional 
Competency Program to establish and provide an evidence-based implicit bias training 
program for health care professionals involved in perinatal care of patients. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 783/ Page 3 
Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Provider Professional Competency Program 
 
“Cultural and linguistic competency” means cultural and linguistic abilities that can be 
incorporated into therapeutic and medical evaluation and treatment, including (1) direct 
communication in the patient’s primary language; (2) understanding and applying the roles 
that culture, ethnicity, and race play in diagnosis, treatment, and clinical care; and 
(3) awareness of how the attitudes, values, and beliefs of health care providers and patients 
influence and impact professional and patient relations. 
 
Chapter 414 of 2009 established a voluntary Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Provider 
Competency Program to offer classes to health care providers on cultural and linguistic 
competency. The program must work collaboratively with universities and colleges of 
medicine, nursing, pharmacy, and dentistry and other health care professional training 
programs to develop courses with cultural competency, sensitivity, and health literacy that 
are designed to address the problems of racial and ethnic disparities in health care access, 
utilization, treatment decisions, quality, and outcomes. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH indicates that it requires one full-time program manager at a 
cost of $165,545 in fiscal 2026 to oversee the training program and ensure successful 
implementation of the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
disagrees. Given that the Cultural and Linguistic Health Care Professional Competency 
Program and OMHHD already approve and oversee implicit bias training, and the updated 
requirements would not be in place until April 2026, MDH would likely need only 
contractual assistance to identify and approve implicit bias and structural racism training 
for all health occupations boards. Thus, MDH general fund expenditures may increase by 
an indeterminate amount in fiscal 2026 only for those contractual services. 
 
MDH reports that MNA received an $8,000 grant that was used to develop a web-based 
training program focused on systemic racism. MNA plans to offer the training at no cost 
to health care professionals in the State. To the extent that this training is recognized by a 
health occupations board and approved by the Cultural and Linguistic Health Care 
Professional Competency Program and OMHHD, additional contractual expenditures to 
identify and approve training are likely not required. 
 
While several health occupations boards indicated that the bill would not have any fiscal 
or operational impact on them, the Maryland Board of Nursing (MBON) advises that it 
would need to update its licensing software to change the attestation on renewal 
applications from “implicit bias training program” to “implicit bias and structural racism 
training program.” It estimates a cost of $1,500 in fiscal 2026 for this update. To the extent 
that MBON and any other health occupations board needs to update licensing software, 
special fund expenditures increase anywhere from $1,500 to $30,000 in fiscal 2026 for 
each board to complete these updates. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 783/ Page 4 
The Maryland Board of Physicians advises that it would need to hire one licensure analyst 
at a $29,503 annual salary to assist with outreach to physicians about the updated 
requirements. DLS disagrees and believes any necessary outreach can be completed with 
existing staff and resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 458 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4