START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 731 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 731 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Wildlife - Protections and Highway Crossings 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Connectivity Coalition (MCC) to, generally, improve 
wildlife habitat connectivity and reduce wildlife and motor vehicle collisions in the State. 
The bill establishes responsibilities related to the coalition for the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) and the State Highway Administration (SHA). Local jurisdictions must 
consider wildlife movement and habitat connectivity when enacting, adopting, amending, 
or executing their comprehensive plans; the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) 
must coordinate with DNR and SHA to provided related and specified information to 
local governments. DNR and SHA may adopt regulations necessary to implement specified 
provisions of the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by an estimated 
$50,000 annually beginning in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not anticipated to be 
materially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 731/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Connectivity Coalition 
 
The purpose of MCC is to foster collaboration among State and federal agencies, 
nongovernmental organizations, and other stakeholders to (1) protect threatened and 
endangered species from habitat fragmentation that reduces access to resources such as 
food or potential mates; (2) protect motorists and wildlife in the State by reducing collisions 
between vehicles and wildlife; and (3) facilitate the sharing of resources, data, and expertise 
relating to wildlife habitat connectivity. 
 
Although the bill does not specify which State agency must provide staff for MCC, the bill 
requires (1) the State Highway Administrator or the Administrator’s designee to serve as 
chair of MCC and (2) DNR and SHA to adopt rules for MCC, including membership rules, 
the roles and responsibilities of the leadership of MCC, the role of specified members, and 
meeting rules and procedures. 
 
MCC must: 
 
 
develop criteria for prioritizing wildlife connectivity projects, which may include 
locations that meet specified conditions, equity in distributing funds between 
different regions of the State and urban, suburban, and rural areas, and any other 
criteria identified by MCC; 
 
develop performance metrics to evaluate the success of funded projects, including 
measurable outcomes, as specified, and enhancements to habitat connectivity; 
 
meet quarterly – although a meeting may be cancelled for lack of an agenda – to 
(1) share new data, analyses, and research; (2) identify any additional data, analyses, 
or research needed; (3) update the members on the status of planned or ongoing 
wildlife crossings; (4) identify locations where additional wildlife connectivity is 
needed; and (5) make recommendations on funding for wildlife connectivity; and 
 
develop a website and publish specified information on the website relating to MCC 
and its activities, information to educate the public on the importance of wildlife 
connectivity and wildlife crossings and completed crossings and crossings under 
development. 
 
SHA has final decision-making authority regarding any decision relating to the placement, 
funding, or design of wildlife crossings. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 731/ Page 3 
Local Government Comprehensive Plans 
 
Local jurisdictions must consider wildlife movement and habitat connectivity when 
enacting, adopting, amending, or executing their comprehensive plans. MDP must 
coordinate with DNR and SHA to provide each local jurisdiction with updated information 
on habitat connectivity concerns and current and planned wildlife crossings.  
 
Reporting 
 
SHA must report on wildlife crossings in each Consolidated Transportation Program 
(CTP) of the State. The report must include TTF expenditures for wildlife crossings, 
wildlife crossings planned and in process, and performance metrics and measurable 
outcomes evaluating the success of completed wildlife crossings. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Highway Administration  
 
SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately 16,800 lane miles of road, 
2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and 80 miles of sound/noise barriers 
in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, and maintaining 
these roads and bridges to safety and performance standards while considering 
sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. SHA must construct, reconstruct, and 
repair State highways as necessary and maintain them in good condition. 
 
Endangered Species Protections 
 
The Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act governs the protection of 
threatened and endangered species at the State level. Among other things, the Act includes 
specifications for the Secretary of Natural Resources in adding or removing plants and 
animals from the threatened and endangered species lists, prohibits certain activities that 
involve threatened and endangered species, including the possession and export of any 
such species; and establishes special additional protections for certain species. 
 
Additionally, DNR’s Maryland State Wildlife Action Plan outlines strategic conservation 
approaches for wildlife and wildlife habitats in the State. The plan is a strategy to guide the 
conservation of the State’s wide range of fish, wildlife, and habitats, providing the 
framework and overall direction for wildlife and broader biodiversity conservation efforts 
in Maryland. The plan is required for the State to receive funding from the 
federal government’s State Wildlife Grants Program. Among other federal requirements, 
the plan compiles, evaluates, and presents summary status information for Species of 
Greatest Conservation Need. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 731/ Page 4 
Local Comprehensive Plans 
 
Local jurisdictions are required to enact, adopt, amend, and execute a comprehensive plan 
in accordance with State law. Certain elements must be included in a comprehensive plan 
and a comprehensive plan also must include and implement specified visions stated in the 
law. At least once every 10 years, the planning commission of a local jurisdiction must 
review the comprehensive plan and, if necessary, revise or amend the plan to include all 
required elements and the specified visions. A sensitive areas element is one of the required 
elements of a plan, which must include the goals, objectives, principles, policies, and 
standards designed to protect sensitive areas from the adverse effects of development. 
 
State Expenditures:  In the execution of its duties, SHA often engages expert consultants 
to handle research, evaluation, studies, and staffing duties. To meet the bill’s requirements, 
SHA anticipates engaging a consultant to assist with coalition research and staffing duties. 
Therefore, TTF expenditures increase by $50,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026 for 
consultant services.   
 
DNR and MDP can meet the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. In 
addition, SHA can include the required information in the CTP using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
This analysis does not reflect any additional funding for wildlife connectivity projects, as 
the bill itself does not require that any such projects be undertaken. To the extent the bill 
leads to the prioritization of any such projects, however, it is assumed that such projects 
merely replace other projects that otherwise would have been funded with TTF, or perhaps, 
federal funds.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires that local jurisdictions consider wildlife movement 
and habitat connectivity when enacting, adopting, amending, or executing their 
comprehensive plans. Based on a limited survey of local governments, this requirement is 
not anticipated to significantly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 635 (Senators Lewis Young and Rosapepe) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 731/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Association of Counties; Harford and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; City of Frederick; National Wildlife Federation; 
Federal Highway Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5