START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 712 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 712 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Multiple Licenses - Golf Simulator 
Facilities 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Harford County Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class GSF (golf simulator facility) alcoholic beverages license to the holder of one or more 
Class B licenses. A Class GSF license must be included in the total number of nine Class B 
licenses that may be issued to the same person in Harford County. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Harford County finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, no person may be issued more than nine Class B 
alcoholic beverages licenses.  
 
Class Golf Simulator Facility License 
 
Chapters 1009 and 1010 of 2024 established the Class GSF alcoholic beverages license in 
Harford County. The board may issue the license for use by a golf simulator facility that is 
(1) open to the public; (2) features at least five golf simulator bays; and (3) has 
accommodations that are predominantly dedicated to golf simulator bays and seating for 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 712/ Page 2 
those bays. The license authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption so long as the licensee offers food on site at all times when alcoholic 
beverages are being sold. The annual license fee is $1,500.  
 
An applicant for a Class GSF license must submit a floor plan or layout of the proposed 
licensed premises to the board. The floor plan or layout must illustrate that the proposed 
licensed premises is predominantly dedicated to golf simulator bays and has seating 
dedicated to those bays. Additionally, a licensee’s annual gross sales from alcoholic 
beverages must not exceed 35% of the licensee’s annual gross sales. Golf simulator bay 
rental fees and food sales must comprise, respectively, at least 50% and 15% of the 
licensee’s annual gross sales. Before the board may renew a Class GSF alcoholic beverages 
license, the licensee must provide the board with an annual gross sales report showing that 
the licensee has met the specified minimum gross sales percentages for golf simulator bay 
rental fees and food sales and stayed under the specified maximum gross sales percentage 
for alcoholic beverages. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 746 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2