START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 744 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 744 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Reckless, Negligent, and Aggressive Driving (Sergeant Patrick 
Kepp Act) 
 
 
This bill makes reckless driving an incarcerable offense and increases the maximum 
monetary penalties for negligent driving and aggressive driving. The bill also (1) expands 
the list of traffic offenses that constitute aggressive driving; (2) expands reckless driving 
to include driving a vehicle at a speed of at least 30 miles per hour (mph) above the posted 
speed limit; and (3) alters the points assessment the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) 
must make against a person’s driver’s license for a negligent driving conviction and a 
conviction for speeding at 30 mph or more above the posted speed limit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) 
increase by at least $534,800 in FY 2026; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and 
ongoing operating costs. Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures for the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services. Minimal increase in general fund 
revenues from fines imposed in the District Court. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$534,800 
$637,900 
$666,200 
$695,800 
$725,500 
Net Effect 
($534,800) 
($637,900) 
($666,200) 
($695,800) 
($725,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s penalty provisions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 744/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Unless otherwise specified, a violation of the 
Maryland Vehicle Law (including reckless driving, negligent driving, and aggressive 
driving) is a misdemeanor. As noted below, the District Court has authorized prepayment 
penalties for some offenses. If an offense has an incarceration penalty, the defendant must 
appear in court and a prepayment penalty is not available. 
 
Reckless Driving 
 
Reckless driving is the operation of a motor vehicle (1) in wanton or willful disregard for 
the safety of persons or property or (2) in a manner that indicates a wanton or willful 
disregard for the safety of persons or property. The bill expands reckless driving to include 
traveling at a speed of at least 30 mph above the posted speed limit. 
 
Under current law, an individual convicted of a reckless driving offense is subject to a fine 
of up to $1,000. The prepayment penalty established by the District Court is $510, and 
MVA must assess six points against a violator’s driver’s license. Under the bill, reckless 
driving is a must-appear offense, punishable by imprisonment for up to 60 days and/or a 
maximum fine of $1,000.  
 
Current law specifies that MVA must assess five points against the driver’s license of an 
individual convicted of speeding 30 mph or more above the posted speed limit. Under the 
bill, MVA must assess six points against an individual’s driver’s license for such a speeding 
offense (in addition to assessing six points against their license for reckless driving). 
 
Negligent Driving 
 
Negligent driving is the operation of a motor vehicle in a careless or imprudent manner 
that endangers any property or the life or safety of any person. Under current law, a violator 
is subject to a fine of up to $500. The prepayment penalty established by the District Court 
is $240 or $280 if the offense contributes to an accident. The bill increases the maximum 
fine for a negligent driving offense to $750. 
 
Current law specifies that, on conviction, MVA must assess one point against an 
individual’s driver’s license, or three points if the offense contributes to an accident. Under 
the bill, MVA must assess two points on a driver’s license for a negligent driving offense, 
or three points if the offense contributes to an accident. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 744/ Page 3 
Aggressive Driving 
 
Under current law, aggressive driving is the commission of three or more of the following 
specified traffic offenses at the same time or during a single and continuous period of 
driving:  (1) failure to obey traffic lights with steady indication; (2) overtaking and passing 
vehicles; (3) passing on the right; (4) driving on laned roadways; (5) following too closely; 
(6) failure to yield the right-of-way; or (7) exceeding a maximum speed limit or posted 
maximum speed limit. 
 
The bill expands the list of traffic offenses that constitute aggressive driving to include 
violations of the following provisions of the Transportation Article:   
 
 
§ 21-201 – failure to obey traffic control device or leaving roadway to avoid traffic 
control device; 
 
§ 21-305 – driving left of center of roadway in overtaking and passing vehicle, 
except as authorized; 
 
§ 21-307 – driving on left side of the roadway in no-passing zone; 
 
§ 21-502(a)(2) – failure to stop for pedestrian in crosswalk; 
 
§ 21-502(c) – overtaking and passing vehicle stopped for pedestrian in crosswalk; 
 
§ 21-706 – overtaking and passing school vehicle stopped and operating alternately 
flashing red lights; 
 
§ 21-707 – failure to stop at stop signs and yield signs; 
 
§ 21-1117 – skidding, spinning wheels, and making excessive noise; 
 
§ 21-1131 – discharging diesel emissions onto another; 
 
§ 21-1209(a) – avoiding collision and overtaking and passing bicycle, electric 
personal assistive mobility device, or motor scooter; 
 
§ 21-1303(c) – motorcycle overtaking and passing in same lane as another vehicle; 
and 
 
§ 21-1303(d) – motorcycle operating between lanes of traffic or vehicles. 
 
Under current law, the maximum statutory penalty for aggressive driving is a $500 fine. 
The District Court assesses a prepayment penalty of $370 for aggressive driving; on 
conviction, MVA must assess five points against a violator’s driver’s license. The bill 
increases the maximum fine that may be imposed on an individual convicted of aggressive 
driving to $1,000. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 from 
fines imposed in the District Court due to higher maximum fines and expanded application 
of existing fines. While anticipated to be minimal, the magnitude of the revenue increase 
will depend upon the monetary value of actual fines imposed and collected. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 744/ Page 4 
State Expenditures: 
 
Judiciary 
 
Although the bill does not designate reckless driving as a must-appear offense, any charge 
that carries a possible sentence of incarceration is a must-appear violation. Therefore, under 
the bill, a person charged with reckless driving must appear in court and may not prepay 
the fine. The Judiciary can handle any increase in traffic trials due to the bill’s conversion 
of reckless driving into a must-appear offense with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information from the Judiciary on the number of violations (charges) 
and guilty dispositions (convictions) for the following specified offenses under the 
Transportation Article:  reckless driving – § 21-901.1(a); negligent driving – § 21-901.1(b); 
and aggressive driving – § 21-901.2. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions 
Sections 21-901.1(a), 21-901.1(b), and 21-901.2 of the Transportation Article 
 
 
Fiscal 2023 
Fiscal 2024 
Transportation Article Offenses 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
District Court 
 
 
 
 
§ 21-901.1(a) – Reckless Driving 
11,707 
1,057 
12,096 
974 
§ 21-901.1(b) – Negligent Driving 
18,142 
3,385 
17,668 
3,005 
§ 21-901.2 – Aggressive Driving 
545 
163 
612 
131 
Circuit Courts  
 
 
 
 
§ 21-901.1(a) – Reckless Driving 
1,668 
77 
1,869 
68 
§ 21-901.1(b) – Negligent Driving 
2,170 
89 
2,251 
96 
§ 21-901.2 – Aggressive Driving 
52 
3 
47 
1 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration  
 
Revocations and suspensions of driver’s licenses likely increase as a result of the bill’s 
expanded application of reckless driving and aggressive driving offenses and its 
requirements pertaining to point assessments. However, any impact on Transportation 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 744/ Page 5 
Trust Fund revenues is not expected to be material; MVA can handle any increase in its 
workload from the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
General fund expenditures for OPD increase by at least $534,785 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring five OPD attorneys and one secretary to provide representation in reckless driving 
cases. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$490,572 
Operating Expenses 
    44,213 
Minimum OPD FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$534,785 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
OPD does not provide legal representation in nonincarcerable criminal cases. However, as 
a result of the bill making reckless driving an incarcerable offense, OPD advises that its 
caseload increases significantly. OPD estimates that it receives 12,845 additional traffic 
cases annually due to the bill’s classification of speeding at 30 mph or more above the 
posted speed limit as reckless driving. Accordingly, OPD advises that it must hire  
12 full-time assistant public defenders and 4 secretaries, at a cost of approximately 
$1.3 million in fiscal 2026 and increasing to approximately $1.8 million by fiscal 2030, to 
handle the volume of new cases it receives under the bill. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that OPD did not account for existing 
reckless driving violations that are incarcerable under the bill. Therefore, OPD would likely 
advise that it requires additional personnel to provide adequate representation to all 
indigent defendants in reckless driving cases. 
 
DLS advises that itis unable to independently verify the assumptions OPD used in its 
calculations. Nonetheless, DLS advises that additional OPD personnel are needed to 
provide representation in reckless driving cases, as expanded under the bill. Based on 
known data for existing reckless driving violations and estimates for potential speeding 
cases classified as reckless driving under the bill, it is likely that OPD requires at least  
five attorneys and one secretary to implement the bill. Should actual experience under the 
bill indicate the need for additional OPD personnel, OPD can request those positions 
through the annual budget process. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 744/ Page 6 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s incarceration 
penalty for reckless driving due to more people being committed to State correctional 
facilities for convictions in Baltimore City. The number of people incarcerated as a result 
of the bill is expected to be minimal. 
 
Generally, persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to a local detention facility. The Baltimore Pretrial Complex, 
a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial detentions. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s monetary 
penalty provisions from cases heard in the circuit courts. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
incarceration penalty for reckless driving offenses. Counties pay the full cost of 
incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem 
operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately $140 to 
$350 per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 590 (Senator King, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, and Frederick counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 26, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6