START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

Chapter 549

(House Bill 731)

AN ACT concerning

Wildlife – Protections and Highway Crossings

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Connectivity Coalition; establishing that
the State Highway Administration has final decision–making authority regarding
certain decisions; ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Wildlife~~ ~~Connectivity~~ ~~Fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Natural~~ ~~Resources~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~a~~ ~~website~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~for~~ ~~accepting~~
~~donations~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~purposes;~~ requiring the State Highway Administration to
include certain information in each consolidated transportation plan of the State;
requiring a county or local jurisdiction to consider certain factors when enacting,
adopting, amending, or executing a comprehensive plan; and generally relating to
wildlife protection.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–2A–01(a), (d), and (l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–2A–06.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 1–408 and 3–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2024 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(i)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)204.~~ ~~and~~ ~~205.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 549 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)206.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–2A–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) (1) “Endangered species” means any species whose continued existence as
a viable component of the State’s wildlife or plants is determined to be in jeopardy.

(2) “Endangered species” includes any species of wildlife or plant
determined to be an “endangered species” pursuant to the Endangered Species Act.

(l) “Threatened species” means any species of wildlife or plants which appears
likely, within the foreseeable future, to become endangered including any species of wildlife
or plant determined to be a “threatened species” pursuant to the Endangered Species Act.

10–2A–06.2.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COALITION” MEANS THE MARYLAND CONNECTIVITY
COALITION.

(3) “ENDANGERED SPECIES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
10–2A–01 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) “FUND” MEANS THE WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY FUND.

(5) (4) “THREATENED SPECIES” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
10–2A–01 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(6) (5) “WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY” MEANS THE ABILITY OF
WILDLIFE TO MOVE FREELY BETWEEN HABITATS TO ACCESS RESOURCES, MAINTAIN
HEALTHY POPULATIONS, AND ADAPT TO ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

(7) (6) “WILDLIFE CROSSINGS” MEANS IMPROVEMENTS TO ROADS,
BRIDGES, OR HIGHWAYS DESIGNED TO IMPROVE WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY OR TO
REDUCE COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE.

(B) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND CONNECTIVITY COALITION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE COALITION IS TO FOSTER COLLABORATION
AMONG STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES, NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS,
AND OTHER STAKEHOLDERS TO:

(I) PROTECT THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES FROM
HABITAT FRAGMENTATION THAT REDUCES ACCESS TO RESOURCES SUCH AS FOOD
OR POTENTIAL MATES;

(II) PROTECT MOTORISTS AND WILDLIFE IN THE STATE BY
REDUCING COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE; AND

(III) FACILITATE THE SHARING OF RESOURCES, DATA, AND
EXPERTISE RELATING TO WILDLIFE HABITAT CONNECTIVITY.

(3) THE COALITION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(I) THE SECRETARY OF NATURAL RESOURCES, OR THE
SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(II) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATOR, OR THE
ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE;

(III) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED
BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(IV) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE; AND

(V) REPRESENTATIVES OF ANY OTHER STATE AGENCIES,
FEDERAL AGENCIES, NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS, REGIONAL
COALITIONS, OR PRIVATE ENTITIES SELECTED BY THE SECRETARY AND THE STATE
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATOR.

(4) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATOR OR THE
ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE SHALL SERVE AS CHAIR OF THE COALITION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 549 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
SHALL ADOPT RULES FOR THE COALITION, INCLUDING:

(I) MEMBERSHIP IN THE COALITION;

(II) THE ROLE OF ANY NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OR PRIVATE ENTITIES THAT ARE MEMBERS OF THE COALITION;

(III) THE ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LEADERSHIP OF
THE COALITION; AND

(IV) MEETING RULES AND PROCEDURES.

(5) (6) (I) THE COALITION SHALL DEVELOP CRITERIA FOR
PRIORITIZING WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS.

(II) CRITERIA DEVELOPED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH MAY INCLUDE:

1. LOCATIONS WITH A HIGH NUMBER OF COLLISIONS
BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE;

2. LOCATIONS WHERE HIGHWAYS DIVIDE THE HABITAT
OF THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES;

3. LOCATIONS WHERE WILDLIFE CROSSINGS COULD BE
DESIGNED TO FACILITATE MULTIPLE SPECIES;

4. EQUITY IN DISTRIBUTING FUNDS BETWEEN:

A. DIFFERENT REGIONS OF THE STATE; AND

B. URBAN, SUBURBAN, AND RURAL AREAS; AND

5. ANY OTHER CRITERIA IDENTIFIED BY THE
COALITION.

(6) (7) THE COALITION SHALL DEVELOP PERFORMANCE METRICS
TO EVALUATE THE SUCCESS OF FUNDED PROJECTS, INCLUDING:

(I) MEASURABLE OUTCOMES, SUCH AS REDUCTIONS IN
COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE; AND

(II) ENHANCEMENTS TO HABITAT CONNECTIVITY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

(7) (8) (I) THE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH, THE COALITION SHALL MEET QUARTERLY TO:

(I) 1. SHARE NEW DATA, ANALYSES, AND RESEARCH;

(II) 2. IDENTIFY ANY ADDITIONAL DATA, ANALYSES, OR
RESEARCH NEEDED;

(III) 3. UPDATE THE MEMBERS ON THE STATUS OF PLANNED
OR ONGOING WILDLIFE CROSSINGS;

(IV) 4. IDENTIFY LOCATIONS WHERE ADDITIONAL WILDLIFE
CONNECTIVITY IS NEEDED; AND

(V) 5. MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON DISBURSEMENTS
FROM THE FUND FUNDING FOR WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY.

(II) THE COALITION MAY CANCEL A MEETING FOR LACK OF AN
AGENDA.

(8) (9) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL HAVE FINAL
DECISION–MAKING AUTHORITY REGARDING ANY DECISION RELATING TO THE
PLACEMENT, FUNDING, OR DESIGN OF WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

(9) (10) THE COALITION SHALL DEVELOP A WEBSITE AND PUBLISH
ON ITS WEBSITE:

(I) THE PURPOSE, HISTORY, AND MEMBERS OF THE
COALITION;

(II) ANY CRITERIA USED FOR PRIORITIZING PROJECTS;

(III) ANY DATA, ANALYSES, OR RESEARCH RELEVANT TO THE
PURPOSE OF THE COALITION;

(IV) COALITION MEETING AGENDAS AND MINUTES;

(V) INFORMATION TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC ON THE
IMPORTANCE OF WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY AND WILDLIFE CROSSINGS; AND

(VI) COMPLETED WILDLIFE CROSSINGS AND WILDLIFE
CROSSINGS UNDER DEVELOPMENT.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 549 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) THERE IS A WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY FUND.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO:

(I) PROTECT ANY TERRESTRIAL OR SEMIAQUATIC
THREATENED SPECIES, ENDANGERED SPECIES, OR SPECIES OF GREATEST
CONSERVATION NEED WHOSE HABITAT OR MOVEMENT CORRIDORS INTERSECT
WITH A STATE HIGHWAY; AND

(II) PROTECT MOTORISTS AND WILDLIFE IN THE STATE BY
REDUCING COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE STATE
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
~~FUND;~~

(II) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(III) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND MAY BE USED TO:

(I) ADVANCE WILDLIFE CROSSING OR WILDLIFE–VEHICLE
COLLISION MITIGATION PROJECTS;

(II) ASSIST WITH PREPARATIONS NECESSARY FOR THE
PROJECTS SPECIFIED UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, INCLUDING DATA
COLLECTION, FEASIBILITY STUDIES, PROJECT DESIGN, AND ENGINEERING, WHICH
MAY INCLUDE HYDRAULIC ANALYSIS AND SIZING;

(III) DEVELOP METHODS AND TOOLS FOR IDENTIFYING
LOCATIONS WHERE WILDLIFE CROSSING OR WILDLIFE–VEHICLE COLLISION
MITIGATION PROJECTS WOULD:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

1. REDUCE COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND
WILDLIFE; OR

2. CONNECT HABITATS OF TERRESTRIAL OR
SEMIAQUATIC THREATENED SPECIES, ENDANGERED SPECIES, OR SPECIES OF
~~GREATEST~~ ~~CONSERVATION~~ ~~NEED;~~

(IV) DEVELOP REGIONAL OR STATEWIDE HABITAT MAPS TO
~~IMPROVE~~ ~~HABITAT~~ ~~CONNECTIVITY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~REDUCE~~ ~~COLLISIONS~~ ~~BETWEEN~~ ~~VEHICLES~~
AND WILDLIFE;

(V) CONSTRUCT EXCLUSIONARY FENCING;

(VI) PROVIDE MATCHING FUNDS FOR FEDERAL GRANTS;

(VII) PROVIDE MAINTENANCE FOR COMPLETED PROJECTS;

(VIII) MONITOR AND EVALUATE COMPLETED PROJECTS;

(IX) PROVIDE EDUCATION AND OUTREACH REGARDING:

1. COLLISIONS BETWEEN VEHICLES AND WILDLIFE;

2. THREATENED SPECIES, ENDANGERED SPECIES, OR
SPECIES OF GREATEST CONSERVATION NEED WHOSE HABITATS OR MOVEMENT
CORRIDORS ARE DIVIDED BY STATE HIGHWAYS; AND

3. ANY OTHER RELATED TOPIC THE DEPARTMENT OR
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION DETERMINES IS APPROPRIATE;

(X) PROVIDE MATCHING GRANTS TO COUNTIES AND
MUNICIPALITIES FOR PROJECTS RELATED TO THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND;

(XI) COVER THE COSTS OF RELEVANT ADMINISTRATION AND
PERSONNEL EXPENSES, INCLUDING:

~~1.~~ ~~COST~~ ~~RECOVERY;~~

2. GIS DATA; AND

3. ANY OTHER RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS; AND

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 549 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(XII) COVER THE COSTS OF ASSET MANAGEMENT FOR WILDLIFE
CROSSING INFRASTRUCTURE, INCLUDING PLANNING, INVENTORY, CONDITION
INFORMATION, AND LIFE CYCLE ANALYSES.

(7) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(8) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(9) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PROTECTIONS
SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION IS SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS
~~NOT~~ ~~INTENDED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~TAKE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PLACE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FUNDING~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~WOULD~~ ~~BE~~
APPROPRIATED FOR THESE PROTECTIONS.

(10) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
AND THE COALITION, THE DEPARTMENT MAY TRANSFER FUNDS FROM THE FUND
TO THE TRANSPORTATION TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 3–216 OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE IN ORDER TO ADVANCE THE GOALS AND PURPOSES OF
THE FUND.

(11) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
~~SHALL~~ ~~COORDINATE~~ ~~EFFORTS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~PROGRAMS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FUNDING~~
~~OPPORTUNITIES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAXIMIZE~~ ~~PROJECT~~ ~~IMPACTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~USE~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~
~~RESOURCES.~~

~~(D)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) DEVELOP A WEBSITE TO BE USED FOR ACCEPTING DONATIONS TO
THE FUND; AND

(2) IF FEASIBLE, WORK WITH THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE THE OPTION, APPEARING ON THE VEHICLE
REGISTRATION PORTAL, TO DONATE TO THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL REPORT ON
WILDLIFE CROSSINGS IN EACH CONSOLIDATED TRANSPORTATION PLAN OF THE
STATE.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) TRANSPORTATION TRUST FUND EXPENDITURES FOR
WILDLIFE CROSSINGS;

(II) WILDLIFE CROSSINGS PLANNED AND IN PROCESS; AND

(III) PERFORMANCE METRICS AND MEASURABLE OUTCOMES
EVALUATING THE SUCCESS OF COMPLETED WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

(F) (D) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

Article – Land Use

1–408.

(a) (1) A sensitive areas element shall include the goals, objectives, principles,
policies, and standards designed to protect sensitive areas from the adverse effects of
development.

(2) A CHARTER COUNTY SHALL CONSIDER WILDLIFE MOVEMENT AND
HABITAT CONNECTIVITY WHEN ENACTING, ADOPTING, AMENDING, OR EXECUTING
A PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 1–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(b) (1) Beginning October 1, 2013, the Department of Natural Resources shall
provide a statewide forest resource inventory to local jurisdictions at least every 5 years,
to be available for the local comprehensive plan review by local jurisdictions required
under § 1–416(a) of this subtitle and § 3–301(a) of this article.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE EACH CHARTER COUNTY WITH UPDATED
INFORMATION ON HABITAT CONNECTIVITY CONCERNS AND CURRENT AND
PLANNED WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

(c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment and the
Department of Natural Resources shall review the sensitive areas element to determine
whether the proposed plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the departments.

3–104.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 549 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) A sensitive areas element shall include the goals, objectives, principles,
policies, and standards designed to protect sensitive areas from the adverse effects of
development.

(2) A LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL CONSIDER WILDLIFE MOVEMENT
AND HABITAT CONNECTIVITY WHEN ENACTING, ADOPTING, AMENDING, OR
EXECUTING A PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–101 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(b) (1) Beginning October 1, 2013, the Department of Natural Resources shall
provide a statewide forest resource inventory to local jurisdictions at least every 5 years,
to be available for the local comprehensive plan review by local jurisdictions required
under §§ 1–416(a) and 3–301(a) of this article.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND THE STATE HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION TO PROVIDE EACH LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH UPDATED
INFORMATION ON HABITAT CONNECTIVITY CONCERNS AND CURRENT AND
PLANNED WILDLIFE CROSSINGS.

(c) Before the plan is adopted, the Department of the Environment and the
Department of Natural Resources shall review the sensitive areas element to determine
whether the proposed plan is consistent with the programs and goals of the departments.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~

~~6–226.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(2)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~1.~~ ~~This~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~ ~~in~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~years~~ ~~2024~~
~~through~~ ~~2028.~~

~~2.~~ ~~Notwithstanding~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~law,~~ ~~and~~ ~~unless~~
~~inconsistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~federal~~ ~~law,~~ ~~grant~~ ~~agreement,~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~federal~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~or~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~gift~~ ~~or~~ ~~settlement,~~ ~~net~~ ~~interest~~ ~~on~~ ~~State~~ ~~money~~ ~~allocated~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~
~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~to~~ ~~special~~ ~~funds~~ ~~or~~ ~~accounts,~~ ~~and~~ ~~otherwise~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~receive~~ ~~interest~~
~~earnings,~~ ~~as~~ ~~accounted~~ ~~for~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~accrue~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~State.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~funds:~~

~~204.~~ ~~the~~ ~~Victims~~ ~~of~~ ~~Domestic~~ ~~Violence~~ ~~Program~~ ~~Grant~~ ~~Fund;~~
~~[and]~~

~~205.~~ ~~the~~ ~~Proposed~~ ~~Programs~~ ~~Collaborative~~ ~~Grant~~ ~~Program;~~
~~AND~~

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 549

206. THE WILDLIFE CONNECTIVITY FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11