START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 749 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 749 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Washington County - Public Safety - Buildings Used for Agritourism 
 
 
This bill exempts an agricultural building in Washington County used for agritourism from 
adhering to the Maryland Building Performance Standards (MBPS). The bill also exempts 
an existing agricultural building in Washington County used for agritourism from 
obtaining a change of occupancy permit if (1) the building’s use of agritourism does not 
require it to be occupied by more than 200 people at any one time and (2) the total width 
of egress for the building meets specified building code standards. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Washington County finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Agritourism” is defined in the Land Use Article as an activity conducted 
on a farm that is offered to a member of the general public or to invited guests for the 
purpose of education, recreation, or active involvement in the farm operation. Agritourism 
activities include farm tours, hayrides, corn mazes, seasonal petting farms, farm museums, 
guest farms, pumpkin patches, “pick your own” or “cut your own” produce, classes related 
to agricultural products or skills, and picnic and party facilities offered in conjunction with 
any of the above. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 749/ Page 2 
Exemption from Maryland Building Performance Standards (for Agricultural Buildings 
Used for Agritourism) 
 
An “agricultural building” is a structure designed and constructed to house farm 
implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or other horticultural products. An agricultural 
building does not, however, include a place of human residence. MBPS do not apply to the 
construction, alteration, or modification of an agricultural building for which agritourism 
is an intended subordinate use in the following counties:  
 
 
Allegany; 
 
Anne Arundel; 
 
Baltimore; 
 
Calvert; 
 
Carroll; 
 
Cecil; 
 
Charles; 
 
Dorchester; 
 
Frederick; 
 
Garrett; 
 
Harford; 
 
Howard; 
 
Kent; 
 
Montgomery;  
 
Prince George’s; 
 
Queen Anne’s; 
 
St. Mary’s; 
 
Somerset; and 
 
Talbot. 
 
Except as described below, in those counties, an existing agricultural building used for 
agritourism is not considered a change of occupancy that requires a building permit if the 
subordinate use of agritourism (1) is in accordance with limitations set forth in regulations 
adopted by the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor); (2) occupies only levels of the 
building on which a ground level exit is located; and (3) does not require more than 
50 people to occupy an individual building at any one time. 
 
However, in Allegany, Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Garrett, Howard, 
Kent, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Worcester counties, an existing 
agricultural building used for agritourism does not require a building permit for a change 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 749/ Page 3 
in occupancy if the maximum occupancy is 200 people or less and the building’s total 
width of egress meets or exceeds the International Building Code (IBC) standard that 
applies to egress components other than stairways in a building without a sprinkler system. 
In Montgomery County, if the subordinate use of agritourism requires more than 50 people 
but fewer than 100 people to occupy an individual building at any one time, then the total 
width and number of means of egress must meet or exceed the IBC standard that applies 
to egress components other than stairways in a building without a sprinkler system. 
 
An agricultural building used for agritourism must be structurally sound and in good repair 
but need not comply with (1) requirements for bathrooms, sprinkler systems, and elevators 
as required under MBPS or (2) any other requirements of MBPS or other building codes 
as set forth in regulations adopted by MD Labor. 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards 
 
MD Labor currently incorporates by reference the IBC (2021 Edition), including the 
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) (2021 Edition), with modifications, as 
MBPS. In general, the standards apply to all buildings and structures within the State for 
which a building permit application is received by a local government. Chapter 38 of 2022 
(the Climate Solutions Now Act) required MD Labor to adopt IECC (2018 Edition) by  
January 1, 2023, and to adopt each subsequent version of IECC within 18 months after it 
is issued. Each local jurisdiction must implement and enforce the most current version of 
MPBS and any local amendments to MPBS. In addition, any modification to MBPS 
adopted by the State after December 31, 2009, must be implemented and enforced by a 
local jurisdiction no later than 12 months after the modifications are adopted by the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 580 (Washington County Senators) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 749/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4