START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 702 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 702 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
County Boards of Education - Special Education Service Delivery Models - 
Publication Requirement 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education to develop and publish on its website a list 
of all special education service delivery models provided to parentally placed private 
school students within the jurisdiction of the local school system. “Parentally placed private 
school student” means a child with a disability enrolled by the parent or guardian of the 
child in a private elementary or secondary school or facility, including a religious school 
or facility, in accordance with relevant federal statute. It does not include a child with a 
disability placed in or referred to nonpublic placement by a public agency to ensure 
appropriate educational services are provided to the child. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can handle the bill’s requirements using existing 
resources. Prince George’s County Public Schools and Wicomico County Public Schools 
currently publish the required information on their websites. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each local board of education must develop and publish on its website a 
list of all special education service delivery models in the local school system. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 702/ Page 2 
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that a child with 
disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student turns 
21 years old, in accordance with an individualized family service plan or individualized 
education program specific to the individual needs of the child. 
 
A child with a disability who needs special education and related services that cannot be 
provided in a public county, regional, or State program must be placed in an appropriate 
nonpublic educational program that offers these services. A child with a disability who 
needs special education and related services is eligible for an appropriate nonpublic 
educational placement if a State or local agency provides documentation that the child 
cannot attend a public school in the local school system (1) because of the child’s home 
circumstances or (2) because of medical necessity. 
 
IDEA – to the extent consistent with the number and location of children with disabilities 
in the State who are enrolled by their parents (i.e., not by the State or a local school system) 
in private elementary schools and secondary schools – requires that local school systems 
provide federally funded special education and related services to these children. Such 
services to parentally placed private school children with disabilities may be provided to 
the children on the premises of private (including religious) schools, to the extent consistent 
with law. According to federal regulations, each local school system must locate, identify, 
and evaluate all children with disabilities who are enrolled by their parents in private 
(including religious) elementary and secondary schools located in the school district. This 
process must be designed to ensure the equitable participation of parentally placed private 
school children and an accurate count of those children. Further, a local school system or 
State education agency must consult with private school representatives and 
representatives of parents of parentally placed private school children with disabilities 
during the design and development of special education and related services for the 
children, regarding (among other things) the types of services provided, including direct 
services and alternate service delivery mechanisms. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 602 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 702/ Page 3 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3