START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 791 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 791 
(Delegate Otto, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Somerset County - Property Tax - Emergency Services Tax 
 
  
This bill authorizes Somerset County to impose, by law, an annual property tax on all 
property subject to the county property tax to pay all or part of the costs of emergency 
services in the county, including fire, rescue, and emergency medical services. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in Somerset County revenues depending on the special 
property tax rate imposed by the county commissioners. County expenditures are not 
directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill provides that the emergency services tax must be collected in the 
same manner as other county taxes are collected. If a property owner fails to pay the 
emergency services tax when due and payable, the unpaid tax must (1) be a lien on all 
property belonging to the person required to make payment and (2) accrue interest and 
penalties at the same rate and in the same manner as the accrual of interest and penalties 
for unpaid county property taxes. The bill specifies that property may be sold in accordance 
with collection provisions of the Tax – Property Article to enforce the emergency services 
tax. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 791/ Page 2 
The county commissioners may not enact a law to initially impose or subsequently increase 
an emergency services tax until after a public hearing is held on the proposed law at the 
same time as the county’s annual budget hearing. The county must provide the public with 
advance notice of the hearing. 
 
Current Law:  Several county governments in Maryland have been granted the statutory 
authority to impose a separate property tax rate for fire, rescue, and emergency medical 
services. In most cases, the special property tax rates apply countywide; however, in some 
cases these rates vary by district. Three counties (Charles, Howard, and Montgomery) 
impose a special property tax rate that encompasses the entire county. In contrast,  
St. Mary’s County imposes various rates by election district for both fire and rescue 
services, while imposing a countywide rate for support services. While Frederick and 
Garrett counties are authorized to impose a special property tax; fire, rescue, and 
emergency medical services are currently funded through the county general property tax 
rate. Additional information on the authority to impose special property tax rates is 
provided in the Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. A copy of the report is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Somerset County government spent $1.6 million in fiscal 2023 for 
fire and ambulance services and an additional $1.6 million for 9-1-1 communication 
services. In addition, the two municipal governments in the county provided nearly 
$0.5 million in funding for fire and rescue services as shown in Exhibit 1. The City of 
Crisfield provided $438,104 in total funding for fire and rescue services, of which $378,000 
went to grants for volunteer fire-rescue companies, while the Town of Princess Anne 
provided $25,000, which also went to grants for volunteer companies. 
 
Somerset County currently imposes a $1.00 real property tax rate (per $100 of assessed 
value) and a $2.50 personal property tax rate. As shown in the County Revenue Outlook 
Report, the county government is projected to collect approximately $21.0 million in 
property tax revenue in fiscal 2025. Based on the current property tax base,  
Somerset County could generate approximately $170,000 for each 1 cent increase on the 
real property tax rate and $16,825 for each 1 cent increase on the personal property tax 
rate.  
 
Under the bill, the Somerset County Commissioners are authorized to impose a countywide 
special property tax on all property subject to the county property tax rate that could be 
used to pay for all or part of the cost to provide emergency services in the county, including 
fire, rescue, and emergency medical services. The actual impact on county revenues will 
depend on the special property tax rate imposed by the county commissioners. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 791/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Funding for Fire-Rescue Services in Somerset County 
Fiscal 2023 
 
Somerset County Government 
Fire and Ambulance Services 
$1,635,534 
911 Communication Services 
1,579,113 
Total 
$3,214,647 
Crisfield City Government 
Fire-Rescue Services – Municipal Operated 
$60,104 
Volunteer Fire-Rescue Services – Municipal Grants 
378,000 
Total 
$438,104 
Princess Anne Town Government 
Fire-Rescue Services – Municipal Operated 
$0 
Volunteer Fire-Rescue Services – Municipal Grants 
25,000 
Total 
$25,000 
 
Source:  Local Government Finances Report, Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 719 (Senator Carozza) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Somerset County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 791/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4