START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 790 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 790 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Payment Plans - Notice to Taxpayers 
 
 
This bill requires county governments (through the county tax collector) to include with 
each property tax bill a separate insert containing a specified statement and other 
information. This information must be included on both the State Tax Sale Ombudsman’s 
website and county government websites. The bill takes effect May 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The requirements of the bill can be handled with the existing resources 
of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in county expenditures related to new notification costs, 
beginning in FY 2027, which could total approximately $500,000 statewide. County 
revenues are not directly affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The separate insert for property tax bills must include the following 
statement:  “If you would like to pay your property taxes in monthly installments, you may 
be eligible to enroll in an installment payment plan.” 
 
The separate insert must also include (1) a concise description of the installment program 
or any local installment payment program for property taxes and (2) instructions on how 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 790/ Page 2 
to enroll in the installment program or any local installment payment program for property 
taxes. 
 
The State Tax Sale Ombudsman must design the separate insert and provide the insert to 
each county tax collector. However, county tax collectors must design the separate insert 
if the insert includes information on a local installment payment program for property 
taxes. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 771 of 2024 requires the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to contract 
with a vendor to operate an installment payment program available to any homeowner for 
the payment of property taxes, whether in advance, currently due, or in arrears. The 
legislation also authorizes counties and municipalities to establish installment payment 
programs for taxes in arrears on any residential property. 
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman Installment Payment Program 
 
The State Tax Sale Ombudsman is required to contract with a vendor to operate an 
installment payment program for the payment of taxes in which any homeowner may 
enroll. The installment payment program must allow a homeowner to (1) make advance 
payments of taxes; (2) make payments of taxes currently due; or (3) make payments of 
taxes in arrears. 
 
A homeowner whose dwelling is subject to a deed of trust, a mortgage, or any other 
encumbrance that includes the escrowing of tax payments may not enroll in the installment 
payment program for the advance payment of taxes. An advance payment of taxes is 
calculated by applying the current property tax rate to the assessment of the homeowner’s 
property for the prior year. If the advance payment is different than the taxes due as finally 
determined, the vendor must bill the homeowner for the unpaid balance or refund any 
excess tax paid. The failure by a homeowner to make an advance payment under the 
installment payment program may not be considered to be a failure to pay the property tax 
when due except as provided for otherwise applicable property tax due dates.  
 
The ombudsman must notify the county or municipal tax collector to whom the taxes are 
owed when a homeowner enters into an installment payment plan. If the homeowner is in 
compliance with the terms of an installment payment plan, the collector may not take any 
action (including sale of a lien on the property at a tax sale) under Title 14, Subtitle 8 
(“Collection”) of the Tax-Property Article to collect any property taxes in arrears that are 
included in the installment payment plan. A homeowner is not in compliance with the terms 
of an installment payment plan if the homeowner fails to make a payment for a period of 
90 days after the date the payment is due, or a longer period determined by the ombudsman. 
If a homeowner is not in compliance with the terms of an installment payment plan (1) the 
ombudsman may terminate the installment payment plan and must notify the collector to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 790/ Page 3 
whom the taxes are owed and (2) the collector may take action under Title 14, Subtitle 8 
to collect any property taxes in arrears that were included in the installment payment plan. 
 
The cost of the contract with the vendor to operate the installment payment program must 
be paid entirely by reasonable fees imposed on homeowners enrolled in the program. 
 
Local Installment Payment Programs for Taxes in Arrears 
 
County and municipal governments (including the Mayor and City Council of 
Baltimore City) are authorized to establish an installment payment program for taxes in 
arrears on any residential property. Any fee or charge of any kind that is included on a 
property tax bill may be paid through the installment payment program. Local governments 
may provide for (1) any additional eligibility criteria for an installment payment program; 
(2) the process for enrolling in an installment payment program; (3) the frequency and due 
dates of installment payments; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the 
installment payment program. 
 
If a person is in compliance with the terms of an installment payment program, the tax 
collector may not take any action (including sale of a lien on the property at a tax sale) 
under Title 14, Subtitle 8 of the Tax-Property Article to collect any property taxes in arrears 
that are included in the installment payment program. A person is not in compliance with 
the terms of an installment payment program if the person fails to make a payment for a 
period of 90 days after the date the payment is due, or a longer period determined by the 
Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county or 
municipality. If a person is not in compliance with the terms of an installment payment 
program, the collector may (1) terminate the person’s enrollment in the installment 
payment program and (2) take action under Title 14, Subtitle 8 to collect the property taxes 
in arrears that were included in the installment payment program. 
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman  
 
Chapter 730 of 2019 established the State Tax Sale Ombudsman within SDAT to, among 
other things, (1) actively assist eligible homeowners to apply for tax credits, discount 
programs, and other public benefits that may assist the homeowners to pay delinquent taxes 
and improve their financial situation; (2) refer eligible homeowners to legal services, 
housing counseling, and other social services that may assist the homeowners to pay 
delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; and (3) maintain a toll-free 
telephone number that a homeowner may call to obtain individualized personal assistance 
with delinquent taxes. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 790/ Page 4 
Payment of Property Taxes 
 
Property taxes for owner-occupied residential property and certain small business property 
are due on a semiannual schedule. The first installment is due on July 1 and may be paid 
without interest on or before September 30. The second installment is due on December 1 
and may be paid without interest on or before December 31. Local governments may add 
a service charge to the second installment to pay for administrative costs and lost interest 
between September 30 and December 31. Homeowners and certain small business owners 
may elect to pay the full year’s property tax on or before September 30 to avoid the service 
charge. 
 
Chapter 647 of 2019 authorizes local governments to provide, by law, for an optional 
installment payment schedule for county, municipal, or special taxing district real property 
taxes and any local fees or other charges included on a tax bill. 
 
An installment payment schedule may be scheduled in advance of the property tax bill and 
may include any number of due dates scheduled on or after January 1 and on or before 
otherwise applicable due dates (see the semiannual due dates above for owner-occupied 
residential property and certain small business property). For any installment payment 
scheduled after July 1, the local government may impose a service charge. 
 
Local governments are prohibited from authorizing advance payment or an installment 
payment schedule for property taxes imposed on real property that is subject to a deed of 
trust, a mortgage, or any other encumbrance that includes the escrowing of property tax 
payments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County governments are responsible for property tax billing on behalf 
of the State, county, and municipal governments and therefore will be responsible for 
preparing and sending out the notices required by the bill. As a point of reference, there are 
approximately 2.1 million residential real property accounts in the State. Assuming the 
additional notification costs average $0.25 per account, county government expenditures 
could increase by approximately $500,000 annually, beginning in fiscal 2027. The 
estimated notification costs reflect one additional page within the property tax bill for the 
new insert and an increase in mailing costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 790/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5