START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 750 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 750 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Washington County - Property Tax Credit - Economic Development Projects 
 
 
This bill alters an existing local property tax credit in Washington County for real property 
owned or leased by a new or expanding business that creates new jobs. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County property tax revenues increase by approximately 
$710,000 annually beginning in FY 2026 as a result of changes to the property tax credit 
program. County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Washington County is authorized to grant a property tax 
credit against the county property tax imposed on real property owned or leased by a new 
or expanding business that creates new jobs, provided specified conditions are met. The 
bill alters the definition of new or expanded premises to include renovated premises. 
 
Under current law, an existing business in the county must (1) obtain at least an additional  
1,500 square feet of new or expanded premises by purchasing newly constructed premises, 
constructing new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, or leasing previously 
unoccupied premises and (2) employ at least one individual in a new permanent  
full-time position during a 12-month period, during which period the business entity also 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 750/ Page 2 
must obtain and occupy the new or expanded premises. The bill expands eligibility for the 
property tax credit to include renovating existing premises and requires the employment of 
at least five individuals in new permanent full-time positions during a 12-month period. 
 
Under current law, a new business locating in the county must (1) obtain at least 
2,500 square feet of new or expanded premises by purchasing newly constructed premises, 
constructing new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, or leasing previously 
unoccupied premises and (2) employ at least 5 individuals in new permanent  
full-time positions during a 24-month period, during which period the business entity also 
must obtain and occupy the new or expanded premises. The bill requires the employment 
of at least 25 individuals in new permanent full-time positions during a 24-month period. 
 
The bill requires a new business entity locating in the county or an existing business entity 
in the county to invest at least $20.0 million in capital improvements (increased from 
$10.0 million under current law) in the county by purchasing newly constructed premises, 
constructing new premises, causing new premises to be constructed, renovating existing 
premises, or leasing previously unoccupied premises. As a result of these capital 
improvements, the business entity must create 200 new permanent full-time positions (up 
from 100 under current law). 
 
Under current law, the property tax credit for an existing business is equal to the following 
percentages of the property tax assessment:  52% in the first and second taxable years; 
39% in the third and fourth taxable years; and 26% in the fifth and sixth taxable years. The 
bill adjusts these percentages to the following:  55% in the first taxable year; 40% in the 
second taxable year; and 25% in the third taxable year. 
 
Under current law, the property tax credit for a new business is equal to the following 
percentages of the property tax assessment:  30% in the first and second taxable years; 
20% in the third and fourth taxable years; and 10% in the fifth and sixth taxable years. The 
bill adjusts these percentages to the following:  55% in the first and second taxable years; 
40% in the third and fourth taxable years; and 25% in the fifth and sixth taxable years. 
 
Under current law, if a new or existing business entity invests at least $10.0 million in 
capital improvements in the county and creates 100 new permanent full-time positions, the 
amount of the property tax credit is increased to the following percentages:  100% for the 
first 5 years; 75% in years 6 through 10; 50% in years 11 through 15; and 0% after 15 years. 
The bill alters the percentages to the following:  75% for the first 5 years; 70% in year 6; 
65% in year 7; 60% in year 8; 55% in year 9; 50% in year 10; 45% in year 11;  
40% in year 12; 35% in year 13; 30% in year 14; 25% in year 15; and 0% after 15 years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 750/ Page 3 
The lessor of real property granted a property tax credit must reduce the amount of taxes 
for which a business is contractually liable under the lease agreement by the amount of any 
credit granted for improvements made by the business. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Two business entities in Washington County currently receive 
property tax credits under the Job Creation and Real Property Tax Credit Program. Under 
current law, it is estimated that the tax credits will reduce county revenues by 
approximately $2.7 million in fiscal 2025. Washington County estimates that the changes 
to the tax credit program proposed by the bill will result in a $710,000 annual reduction in 
the amount of tax credits provided to businesses beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 596 (Washington County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3