START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 720 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 720 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Repeal of Somers Cove Marina Commission and 
Improvement Fund and Alteration of Operations 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals provisions that establish and govern the Somers Cove 
Marina Commission and the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund and, in place of 
those provisions, establishes authority and responsibilities of the Secretary of Natural 
Resources relating to the marina, transferring management of the marina from the 
commission to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The remaining balance from 
the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund is transferred to the Natural Resources 
Property Maintenance Fund in DNR, which also receives ongoing revenue from the marina 
and may be used by DNR for managing, operating, maintaining, and developing the 
marina. The bill also establishes a Somers Cove Marina Advisory Commission in DNR. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues are expected to increase, and special fund 
expenditures may increase, beginning in FY 2026, potentially significantly, as discussed 
below. General fund revenues increase relatively minimally through FY 2028 due to 
interest earnings.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Somerset County or Town of 
Crisfield finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 720/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Transfer of Management of the Marina from the Commission to the Department 
 
The bill repeals provisions that establish and govern the Somers Cove Marina Commission 
and the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund (described under Current Law) and 
authorizes the Secretary of Natural Resources to: 
 
 
execute leases of land, buildings, or facilities at Somers Cove Marina; 
 
procure and execute contracts for operations, maintenance, management, 
improvements, events, or concessions at the marina in accordance with State 
procurement law; 
 
employ a marina manager who is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the 
marina; 
 
employ additional staff to operate and maintain the marina; and 
 
assess slip and other fees and charges as necessary to operate, maintain, manage, 
and improve Somers Cove Marina. 
 
The bill also requires the Secretary to: 
 
 
if applicable, set the compensation for a manager and staff; 
 
by October 1, 2027, develop a master plan for the operations, maintenance, 
development, and improvement of the marina that improves services to the general 
boating public; and 
 
by October 1, 2032, and October 1 every five years thereafter, update the master 
plan. 
 
All revenue received by DNR from managing, operating, maintaining, improving, and 
developing Somers Cove Marina must be deposited into the Natural Resources Property 
Maintenance Fund (discussed below). 
 
The bill requires DNR and the Somers Cove Marina Commission to work cooperatively to 
ensure the continuity of operations at the marina as management responsibilities are 
transferred from the commission to the department, including any necessary assignments 
of contracts and negotiation or renegotiation of agreements related to the facility, property, 
management, maintenance, service, and staffing.  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 720/ Page 3 
Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund 
 
The bill modifies provisions governing the Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund, 
primarily to: 
 
 
establish that the fund consists of revenues received by DNR from Somers Cove 
Marina, along with money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest 
earnings (an existing requirement that any investment earnings be credited to the 
general fund is repealed), and any other money from any other source accepted for 
the benefit of the fund; and 
 
establish that the fund may be used for managing, operating, maintaining, and 
developing Somers Cove Marina, in addition to its existing uses of maintaining, 
repairing, and managing department-owned property, and specified administrative 
costs/expenses. 
 
By October 1, 2025, the Somers Cove Marina Commission must transfer the remaining 
balance from the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund to the Natural Resources 
Property Maintenance Fund, including any unencumbered funds, accounts receivable, and 
cancelled encumbrances. 
 
Establishment of Advisory Commission 
 
The bill establishes a Somers Cove Marina Advisory Commission in DNR to advise the 
Secretary on matters related to the management, operation, maintenance, and development 
of the marina. The advisory commission must meet at least biannually. DNR must strive 
to ensure that current members of the Somers Cove Marina Commission are appointed to 
the advisory commission. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Commission and Fund Established  
 
There is a Somers Cove Marina Commission established, under the Natural Resources 
Article, as a body politic and corporate and an instrumentality of the State. There is also a 
Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund, to be used for the operation, maintenance, 
development, 
and 
improvement 
of 
the 
Somers 
Cove 
Marina 
facilities 
in 
Crisfield, Maryland. 
 
Executive Director  
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources must appoint an employee of the State to be 
Executive Director of the commission who (1) administers the Somers Cove Marina 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 720/ Page 4 
Improvement Fund; (2) prepares operating and capital budgets; (3) supervises the marina 
manager (a State employee, responsible for the day-to-day operations of the marina); 
(4) may execute leases and contracts; (5) must develop, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary and in cooperation with the commission, an annual master plan for the 
operations, maintenance, development, and improvement of the marina; (6) administers 
specified grants; and (7) employs a staff to operate and maintain the marina. 
 
Commission Responsibilities and Authority  
 
The commission must: 
 
 
adopt an operating and capital budget to implement the master plan; 
 
apply for grants from DNR’s Waterway Improvement Fund (which finances 
projects and activities that promote, develop, and maintain Maryland’s waterways 
for the benefit of the boating public);  
 
assess slip and other fees and charges at the marina to implement the master plan; 
 
set policy and provide general oversight of the marina operations; and 
 
adopt rules and regulations. 
 
The commission may: 
 
 
accept gifts, contributions, or loans of money, supplies, goods, and services; 
 
accept appropriations, allotments, or loans from federal, State, and local 
governments; 
 
exercise a power usually possessed by a private corporation in performing similar 
functions unless to do so would conflict with State law; and 
 
do all things necessary to carry out its powers and responsibilities. 
 
Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund  
 
Any money obtained by the commission is credited to the Somers Cove Marina 
Improvement Fund and is not money of the State (maintained in a bank account separate 
from State funds), though subject to audit by the State. By October 1 of each year, the 
commission must provide DNR an accounting of revenues and expenses from the marina 
for the previous fiscal year.   
 
Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund 
 
Statute establishes that the Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund is created within 
DNR to be used for the maintenance, repair, and management of property owned by DNR. 
Any investment earnings of the fund are credited to the general fund. Money in the fund 
may be used for specified administrative costs relating to the purposes of the fund. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 720/ Page 5 
Background:  Somers Cove Marina is a 515-slip facility, in Crisfield, Maryland, on 
property owned by DNR but operated by the Somers Cove Marina Commission. DNR 
indicates that having both the commission and the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund 
outside of the department leaves DNR without necessary oversight of the operations and 
finances of the marina, which is in need of critical maintenance and other investment of 
more than $100.0 million. DNR indicates the bill allows the department to change the 
operational structure of the marina to allow it to (1) retain ownership; (2) lease the 
operations to an entity qualified to effectively manage the marina; and (3) gain oversight 
over the marina’s finances. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Transfer of management of the marina from the commission to DNR 
is expected to result in an increase in special fund revenues and a potential increase in 
special fund expenditures, beginning in fiscal 2026, due to (1) revenues and potential 
expenditures associated with the department’s management of the marina and (2) the 
transfer of the remaining balance from the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund to the 
Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund. The extent of the increase in revenues and 
any increase in expenditures cannot be reliably estimated at this time, as discussed below, 
but may be significant. General fund revenues are also expected to increase relatively 
minimally, through fiscal 2028, due to interest earnings. 
 
Revenues and Expenditures Associated with Management of the Marina 
 
The extent of the increase in special fund revenues and any increase in special fund 
expenditures associated with management of the marina depends largely on whether the 
department manages the marina’s operations (1) directly or (2) by executing a lease and/or 
contract with a third party to manage the marina. If the department manages the marina’s 
operations directly, special fund revenues and expenditures (and special-funded staff 
positions) correspondingly increase significantly, likely by more than $1.0 million annually 
(based on current marina revenues and expenditures, discussed below), reflecting revenues 
to, and expenditures from, the Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund. To the 
extent DNR instead is able to execute a lease and/or contract to have a third party manage 
the marina (under which the tenant/contractor receives the majority of income from the 
marina and passes on a small percentage of the income to the department as lease 
payments), special fund (Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund) revenues 
increase, reflecting those lease revenues (equal to some, relatively small, fraction of the 
overall marina income). 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, the commission’s revenues and expenditures were roughly 
equivalent in fiscal 2024, and information provided by DNR indicates that revenues and 
expenditures for the marina were also roughly, or relatively close to, equivalent in 
fiscal 2022 and 2023 (and similarly more than $1.0 million annually). 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 720/ Page 6 
Transfer of Fund Balance 
 
While the commission has negative net assets, as shown in Exhibit 1, that is due to the 
commission’s liabilities to the State (which it appears are for unpaid reimbursement of the 
State for its staffing of the marina). The State therefore will not be assuming net liabilities 
to others, and special fund revenues are expected to increase in fiscal 2026 from the receipt 
of the commission’s cash and cash equivalents and any other financial assets (net of 
remaining liabilities due to others) that are transferred to the Natural Resources Property 
Maintenance Fund as part of the remaining balance of the Somers Cove Marina 
Improvement Fund (which holds the commission’s financial assets). The extent of the 
remaining balance of the Somers Cove Marina Improvement Fund transferred to the 
Natural Resources Property Maintenance Fund on October 1, 2025, cannot be reliably 
estimated; however, for illustrative purposes, if the commission’s revenues and 
expenditures between July 1, 2024, (the end of fiscal 2024) and October 1, 2025, are 
assumed to be equivalent, the estimated fund balance transferred  on October 1, 2025, is 
$336,671 (based on analysis of the commission’s net financial assets at the end of 
fiscal 2024 shown in the commission’s fiscal 2024 financial statements, excluding 
liabilities to the State). 
 
Interest Earnings Through Fiscal 2028 
 
General fund revenues increase relatively minimally through fiscal 2028 due to interest 
earnings – from the additional money transferred to, and deposited into, the Natural 
Resources Property Maintenance Fund – accruing to the general fund. 
 
Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024) 
and § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and Procurement Article require, notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain 
exceptions) accrue to the general fund. Section 8 of Chapter 717 applies from fiscal 2024 
through 2028 and § 6-226(a)(2) applies from fiscal 2029 forward. The Natural Resources 
Property Maintenance Fund is not exempted from the requirement under Section 8 of 
Chapter 717 but is exempted from the requirement under § 6-226(a)(2). General fund 
revenues therefore increase relatively minimally through fiscal 2028. 
 
State Finances Are Assumed to not Otherwise be Directly Affected 
 
DNR indicates that it incurred costs of $312,760 in fiscal 2024 for the three staff it provides 
for the marina (the executive director, marina manager, and a maintenance worker). 
Presumably those costs are not directly affected by the bill, unless a lease and/or contract 
results in a change in the extent to which DNR staff contribute to managing the marina. 
 
This analysis assumes that the bill does not directly affect the State’s responsibility for 
future capital investment in the marina (which is property currently owned by the State and 
operated by an instrumentality of the State). 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 720/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1  
Somers Cove Marina Commission FY 2024 Finances 
 
FY 2024 
Total Revenues 
$1,085,465 
Total Expenditures 
1,052,649 
Operating Revenues (diesel and gasoline sales, slip 
rentals, transient income, other revenues) 
1,082,755 
Cost of Goods Sold 
449,489 
Gross Profit 
633,266 
Operating Expenses (employees, communications, 
travel/vehicle expenses, utilities, contractual services, 
supplies/materials, equipment, miscellaneous) 
603,160 
Operating Profit 
30,106 
Other Revenue 
2,710 
Change in Net Assets 
32,816 
Net Assets, Beginning of Year 
(514,602) 
Net Assets, End of Year 
($481,786) 
Assets (including cash and cash equivalents of $298,414) 
449,592 
Liabilities (including $852,483 due to the State) 
931,378 
 
Source:  Department of Natural Resources; Somers Cove Marina Commission, Financial Statements, FY 2024 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 720/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Natural 
Resources; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - May 13, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 720/ Page 9 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - Repeal of Somers Cove Marina Commission 
and Improvement Fund and Alteration of Operations 
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 720 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Dylan Behler 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation is focused on ensuring a more streamlined approach to how the Department of 
Natural Resources manages Somers Cove Marina. There is not a direct small business impact 
unless the Department leases out operations of the marina to a small business in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 9