START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 324

Chapter 324

(House Bill 795)

AN ACT concerning

Federal Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program – Employee Certification and
Awareness Materials

FOR the purpose of establishing requirements related to the certification of employment
by public service employers under the federal Public Service Loan Forgiveness
Program, including requirements regarding determinations of whether employees
are full–time; requiring the Student Loan Ombudsman in the Office of the
Commissioner of Financial Regulation to develop and disseminate information to
increase awareness of and participation in the Program; and generally relating to
employment certification for the federal Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Financial Institutions
Section 2–104.1(a)(1) and (5)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Financial Institutions
Section 2–104.1(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–1801 through 3–1805 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 18.
Certification of Public Service Employment Under the Federal Public Service
Loan Forgiveness Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Financial Institutions
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 324 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2–104.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(5) “Student Loan Ombudsman” means an individual, whether a paid
employee or a volunteer, whom the Commissioner designates to serve as a liaison between
student loan borrowers and student loan servicers.

(e) The Student Loan Ombudsman, in consultation with the Commissioner, shall
disseminate information about student education loans and servicing by:

(1) Helping student loan borrowers understand their rights and
responsibilities under the terms of student education loans;

(2) Providing information to the public, State agencies, elected officials,
and other individuals regarding student loan borrower problems and concerns; [and]

(3) Disseminating information about the availability of the Student Loan
Ombudsman to assist those with student education loan servicing concerns, including
disseminating the information to:

(i) Student loan borrowers;

(ii) Potential student loan borrowers;

(iii) State higher education institutions; and

(iv) Student loan servicers; AND

(4) DEVELOPING AND DISSEMINATING INFORMATION TO INCREASE
AWARENESS OF AND PARTICIPATION IN THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN
FORGIVENESS PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–1804 OF THE LABOR AND
EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE.

Article – Labor and Employment

3–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of Labor and Industry.

SUBTITLE 18. CERTIFICATION OF PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYMENT UNDER THE
FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 324

3–1801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “CERTIFY” MEANS TO:

(1) COMPLETE THE EMPLOYER SECTIONS OF THE FEDERAL PUBLIC
SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FORM FOR A CURRENT OR FORMER
EMPLOYEE; OR

(2) SHARE DATA DIRECTLY WITH THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION ABOUT A CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEE THAT CORRESPONDS TO
THE INFORMATION REQUIRED ON THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN
FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FORM.

(C) “EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS OR WAS EMPLOYED BY A
PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER.

(D) “FULL–TIME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 34 C.F.R. § 685.219.

(E) “INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
10–101 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN
FORGIVENESS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER 20 U.S.C. § 1087E(M).

(G) (1) “PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER” MEANS AN EMPLOYER IN THE
STATE WHO IS DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFYING EMPLOYER UNDER THE FEDERAL
PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

(I) A STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYER, INCLUDING:

1. AN OFFICE OR A DEPARTMENT;

2. AN INDEPENDENT AGENCY;

3. A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM;

4. A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

5. A PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 324 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

6. AN AUTHORITY OR OTHER BODY; AND

(II) AN EMPLOYER DESIGNATED AS A TAX–EXEMPT
ORGANIZATION UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

(2) “PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A FEDERAL OR
TRIBAL NATION GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION, AGENCY, OR GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY.

(H) “PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FORM” MEANS THE
FORM USED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION TO:

(1) CERTIFY AN INDIVIDUAL’S CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYMENT
WITH A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER; AND

(2) DETERMINE AN INDIVIDUAL’S ELIGIBILITY FOR THE PURPOSES OF
THE FEDERAL PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM.

(I) “STUDENT LOAN OMBUDSMAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–104.1
OF THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARTICLE.

3–1802.

(A) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A PUBLIC SERVICE
EMPLOYEE TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF HOURS THAT THE EMPLOYEE WORKS FOR
THE PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, FOR THE
PURPOSES OF CERTIFYING EMPLOYMENT FOR THE PROGRAM, A PUBLIC SERVICE
EMPLOYER SHALL:

(1) ADOPT A POLICY CALCULATING HOURS WORKED USING A METHOD
THAT MAXIMIZES THE AMOUNT OF TIME FOR WHICH AN EMPLOYEE CAN BE
CONSIDERED FULL–TIME; AND

(2) CONSIDER AS FULL–TIME AN EMPLOYEE WHO SATISFIES OR
SATISFIED THE MINIMUM AMOUNT OF TIME REQUIRED TO QUALIFY AS FULL–TIME.

(C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY:

(I) TO A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER THAT IS AN INSTITUTION

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 324

OF HIGHER EDUCATION; AND

(II) WITH RESPECT TO AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS AN ADJUNCT OR
TENURED PROFESSOR.

(2) (I) FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING WHETHER AN
EMPLOYEE QUALIFIES AS FULL–TIME UNDER THE PROGRAM, A PUBLIC SERVICE
EMPLOYER SHALL CREDIT THE EMPLOYEE, FOR EACH HOUR OF THE EMPLOYEE’S
CREDIT, CONTACT, OR CLASSROOM TIME, WITH AT LEAST:

1. 3.35 HOURS WORKED; OR

2. IF A HIGHER NUMBER OF HOURS IS ALLOWED UNDER
THE PROGRAM, THE NUMBER ALLOWED UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(II) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO SUPERSEDE
A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER’S POLICY OR ADJUSTMENT FOR ADDITIONAL WORK
ASSOCIATED WITH LECTURE OR CLASSROOM TIME.

(3) TO MAXIMIZE THE AMOUNT OF TIME FOR WHICH AN EMPLOYEE
CAN BE CONSIDERED TO BE A FULL–TIME EMPLOYEE, A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER
SHALL TREAT CONSECUTIVE ACADEMIC TERMS THAT AN EMPLOYEE TEACHES AS A
CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT PERIOD, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER:

(I) THE HOURS ARE TAUGHT UNDER SEPARATE EMPLOYMENT
CONTRACTS; OR

(II) THE ACADEMIC TERMS ARE SEPARATED BY ROUTINE
ACADEMIC VACATION.

3–1803.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION, A PUBLIC
SERVICE EMPLOYER SHALL CERTIFY THE EMPLOYMENT OF EACH:

(I) CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEE WHO REQUESTS THAT
THE PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER COMPLETE A PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN
FORGIVENESS PROGRAM FORM; AND

(II) EMPLOYEE WHO IS LEAVING THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE
PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER ON THE EMPLOYEE’S SEPARATION.

(2) THE PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER SHALL CERTIFY:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 324 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE PERIOD OF EMPLOYMENT REQUESTED BY THE
CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEE; OR

(II) IF NO PERIOD IS SPECIFIED, THE CURRENT OR FORMER
EMPLOYEE’S ENTIRE PERIOD OF EMPLOYMENT.

(B) (1) IF THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION ALLOWS A PUBLIC
SERVICE EMPLOYER TO DIRECTLY CERTIFY THE EMPLOYMENT OF A CURRENT OR
FORMER EMPLOYEE, THE PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER MAY SEND THE INFORMATION
NECESSARY TO CERTIFY THE EMPLOYMENT OF AN EMPLOYEE DIRECTLY TO THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.

(2) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT PREVENT A PUBLIC SERVICE
EMPLOYER FROM SEEKING PERMISSION FROM AN EMPLOYEE BEFORE CERTIFYING
THE EMPLOYEE’S EMPLOYMENT TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.

(C) A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER MAY NOT UNREASONABLY DELAY THE
CERTIFICATION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF A CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEE.

3–1804.

(A) (1) THE STUDENT LOAN OMBUDSMAN SHALL DEVELOP AND UPDATE
AS NECESSARY MATERIAL DESIGNED TO PROMOTE AWARENESS OF AND INCREASE
PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE MATERIALS SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A STANDARDIZED LETTER THAT:

1. GIVES A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE PROGRAM;

2. PROVIDES INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT AN EMPLOYEE
MUST DO TO BENEFIT FROM THE PROGRAM; AND

3. RECOMMENDS THAT EMPLOYEES VISIT THE U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION’S OFFICIAL WEBSITE FOR ADDITIONAL RESOURCES;

(II) A DETAILED FACT SHEET THAT:

1. DESCRIBES THE PROGRAM; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 324

2. INCLUDES THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION’S
OFFICIAL WEBSITE ADDRESSES FOR THE PROGRAM AND FOR RESOURCES FOR
STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS; AND

(III) A DOCUMENT CONTAINING FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE PROGRAM.

(B) ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 15, 2025, THE STUDENT LOAN OMBUDSMAN, IN
COORDINATION WITH OTHER STATE AGENCIES, SHALL MAKE THE MATERIALS
DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC
SERVICE EMPLOYERS.

(C) (1) ON OR AFTER NOVEMBER 15, 2025, EACH PUBLIC SERVICE
EMPLOYER SHALL PROVIDE EACH NEWLY HIRED EMPLOYEE WITH THE MOST
RECENTLY AVAILABLE VERSION OF THE MATERIALS DEVELOPED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE EMPLOYEE’S FIRST
DAY OF EMPLOYMENT.

(2) A PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER MAY PROVIDE THE MATERIALS
DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION BY MAIL, BY E–MAIL, OR
DURING AN IN–PERSON NEW EMPLOYEE ORIENTATION.

(D) ON OR AFTER MARCH 15, 2026, EACH PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYER
SHALL ANNUALLY PROVIDE THE MOST RECENTLY AVAILABLE VERSION OF THE
MATERIALS DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO ALL
EMPLOYEES IN WRITTEN OR ELECTRONIC FORM.

3–1805.

THE COMMISSIONER SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7