START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 757 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 757 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Professional and Volunteer Firefighter Innovative Cancer Screening 
Technologies Program - Funding 
 
This bill increases the amount the Governor may include in the annual budget for the 
Professional and Volunteer Firefighter Innovative Cancer Screening Technologies 
Program from at least $500,000 to at least $1.0 million. The Secretary of Health may use 
up to 20% of program funds to support research centers (including the University of 
Maryland Institute for Health Computing) in collecting, analyzing, and processing program 
outcome data to assess and improve the effectiveness and clinical utility of the cancer 
screening funded by the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2030. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming the additional discretionary funding is provided in FY 2026 and 
subsequent years, Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures 
increase by $400,000 annually over the five-year period beginning in FY 2026, as 
discussed below. The FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$600,000 for the program. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
Net Effect 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that (1) more funding 
is available for the program and (2) a local fire company or department applies for and 
receives a grant from the program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 757/ Page 2 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 219 of 2019 established the program, administered by MDH, to 
provide grants to local fire departments and volunteer fire companies and departments to 
procure innovative cancer screening tests that are not otherwise conducted during routine 
physical examinations or not covered by insurance. The goal of the program is to reduce 
cancer mortality among firefighters while advancing the adoption of novel technologies 
that may also benefit the health of Marylanders and the economy of the State. 
 
Each year, MDH must issue a request for applications from local fire departments and 
volunteer fire companies or departments (the only entities eligible to apply for grants). The 
county where the department or company is located must assist the department or company 
with filing applications. Several criteria must be included in an application, including the 
number of firefighters proposed to be screened and a description of each test proposed. 
MDH must develop a weighting formula to rate each application and must prioritize 
applicants based on the quality of the application and the degree to which the proposed 
tests meet specified criteria. If MDH receives applications for grants totaling more than the 
amount of funds available for the program, MDH must award the grants on a pro rata basis. 
 
The program’s appropriations and expenditures (including funds received as grants) are 
subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits. By December 1 each year, MDH must 
submit a report to specified committees of the General Assembly concerning the program’s 
activities. 
 
Chapters 782 and 783 of 2024 repealed the $100,000 annual mandated appropriation for 
the program and instead authorized the Governor to include at least $500,000 in the 
annual budget for the program beginning in fiscal 2025. The fiscal 2025 budget as enacted 
included $400,000 for the program. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $600,000 for the program.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although discretionary, the bill specifies an intended funding level of 
at least $1.0 million annually over the five-year period beginning in fiscal 2025, a $400,000 
increase over the amount budgeted for fiscal 2026. This analysis assumes that the full 
$1.0 million in discretionary funding is appropriated for each of those five years and, in 
the absence of the bill, the fiscal 2026 appropriation of $600,000 would otherwise be 
provided annually. Thus, total program spending increases to $1.0 million and general fund 
expenditures for MDH increase by $400,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. (The 
additional funding for fiscal 2026 may be made available by deficiency appropriation in 
the 2026 legislative session.)  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 757/ Page 3 
As discussed below, program spending in fiscal 2026 likely consists of $59,757 in 
personnel expenses, as much as $200,000 for research centers, and at least $740,000 in 
grants to local fire companies and departments. 
 
Personnel Costs  
 
MDH advises that no new positions were provided when the program was established, and 
the program has to date been supported with existing resources. However, with the 
expansion of program funding under the bill, additional personnel are required. Thus, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $59,757 in fiscal 2026. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring one part-time (50%) program administrator to oversee grant solicitation and 
review, monitor grantee activities, and communicate with grant applicants and awardees. 
It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. This analysis assumes that this position is funded with program general funds. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$50,764 
Other Operating Expenses 
    8,993 
Total FY 2026 Personnel Expenditures 
$59,757 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Although the bill’s authorization for the $1.0 million higher level of funding for the 
program terminates after five years, this analysis assumes that this permanent position is 
retained to continue to manage the program, which does not terminate. 
 
Under an alternative scenario, if funding is maintained at the $600,000 level included in 
the fiscal 2026 budget, there is no effect on general fund expenditures. However, research 
centers could receive up to $120,000 beginning in fiscal 2026, which would reduce the 
amount of funds available for grants. If, however, the fiscal 2025 level of funding would 
otherwise have been maintained, the bill could result in an increase of $600,000 annually 
in general fund expenditures over the five-year period. 
 
Research Centers 
 
The bill allows the Secretary of Health to allocate up to 20% of program funds to research 
centers, including the University of Maryland Institute for Health Computing. Thus, 
assuming a full $1.0 million is allocated to the program beginning in fiscal 2026, as much 
as $200,000 may be provided to research centers annually over five years for data 
collection and analysis. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 757/ Page 4 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Assuming that the full $1.0 million in discretionary funding is 
provided, local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that local 
governments apply for and receive grant funding and use that funding to provide cancer 
screenings for professional and/or volunteer firefighters. As noted above, available grant 
funding may increase to at least $740,000 under the bill over the five-year period beginning 
in fiscal 2026. 
 
Additional Comments:  In fiscal 2024, 513 individuals were screened through the 
program. All the individuals were tested using the OneTestTM Premium by 
20/20 GeneSystems, Inc., which is a multi-cancer early detection blood test that predicts 
an individual’s risk of being identified as having cancer in the coming 12-month period. 
On average, the cost of each test was $192. The OneTestTM Premium is designed to detect 
12 biomarkers that can aid in the detection of cancers. As the OneTestTM Premium only 
detects cancer risk and does not diagnose cancer, no cancers were detected by the test. 
However, among the individuals tested, the risk predictor for certain cancers was elevated 
in some of the individuals (breast, colon, liver, lung, ovarian, pancreas, prostate, and 
stomach). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 849 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University of Maryland Medical System; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University Association; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
and Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4