START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 704 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 704 
(Delegate Wivell, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Maryland Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program - 
Eligible Institutions 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Graduate and Professional Scholarship 
Program to include individuals attending the Meritus School of Osteopathic Medicine. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Graduate and Professional 
Scholarship does not necessitate additional spending, as discussed below. The  
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can make needed administrative 
changes with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A recipient of a graduate and professional scholarship must be a 
Maryland resident, demonstrate a financial need, and attend one of several specified 
graduate and professional schools. Scholarships range from $1,000 to $5,000 per 
school year and may not be received for more than eight semesters. 
 
MHEC must allocate funds from the Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program to 
institutions of higher education based on the proportion of State residents enrolled in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 704/ Page 2 
eligible programs at each institution. Institutions then distribute the scholarship funds to 
eligible students. 
 
State Expenditures:  Funding for the Graduate and Professional Scholarship Program is 
as provided in the annual State budget. Therefore, expanding eligibility does not necessitate 
additional spending. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$1.2 million in funding for the program. In fiscal 2024, the program made $336,000 in 
awards to 289 applicants. MHEC advises that, since funding is allocated to each institution 
of higher education based on the proportion of State residents enrolled in eligible programs, 
adding another institution without additional funding will result in decreased funding 
allocations among currently eligible institutions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 597 (Senators Corderman and McKay) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 28, 2025 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2