START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 714 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 714 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Performing Arts Nonprofit Organization 
License - Record-Keeping Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals obsolete references to the Comptroller relating to recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements for a performing arts nonprofit organization beer, wine, and liquor 
license in Harford County and repeals the Comptroller’s previous authority to temporarily 
suspend the license without a hearing. The bill authorizes, rather than requires, the  
Harford County Board of License Commissioners to summon a performing arts nonprofit 
organization beer, wine, and liquor license holder for a hearing and impose a fine, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Harford County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a report or an investigation by the board, a board officer, the 
Executive Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC), or any 
other person indicates a performing arts nonprofit organization beer, wine, and liquor 
license holder is violating specified requirements of the license, the board may summon 
the license holder to a hearing. If the charges are sustained after the hearing, the board may 
impose a fine between $250 and $2,000 and may suspend or revoke the license holder’s 
license. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 714/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Chapter 12 of 2019 established the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission 
(ATC, the predecessor to ATCC), beginning June 1, 2020 (Chapter 359 of 2020 delayed 
the effective date to January 1, 2021), and transferred personnel, powers, duties, and 
responsibilities that relate to the regulation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco from the 
Comptroller (specifically the Field Enforcement Division (FED)) to ATC. Chapter 12 
specified that all duties and responsibilities associated with FED’s alcoholic beverages and 
tobacco regulation functions must continue under ATC. Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 
(Cannabis Reform Act) reconstituted ATC as ATCC and clarified the powers and duties of 
ATCC related to alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis regulation and enforcement. 
 
Chapters 1011 and 1012 of 2024 established a performing arts nonprofit organization 
license in Harford County. The license authorizes the holder to sell or serve beer, wine, 
and liquor at retail for on-premises consumption at up to three locations designated at the 
time of application. The Acts established various recordkeeping and reporting 
requirements for license holders and authorized the Comptroller to immediately suspend 
for a maximum of 30 days the license of a license holder who fails to comply with these 
requirements, as specified. If a report or an investigation indicates that the license holder 
violated specified license requirements, the board must summon the license holder and 
conduct a hearing. Violators are subject to a fine between $250 and $2,000 and may have 
their license suspended or revoked. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 745 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s 
Office; Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2