START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 776 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 776 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Practice Act and Maryland Physician Assistants Act - 
Revisions 
 
 
This bill alters, clarifies, and makes consistent provisions of law regarding physicians, 
physician assistants (PAs), and allied health professionals regulated by the Maryland Board 
of Physicians (MBP). Among other actions, the bill alters disciplinary grounds and the 
disciplinary process, licensure requirements, board duties, specified notification 
requirements, and provisions governing the allied health professional advisory committees. 
The bill increases existing civil penalties and establishes new administrative penalties for 
specified violations. The bill also repeals obsolete and redundant language and makes 
clarifying and conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues to the Board of Physicians Fund may increase by an 
indeterminate amount beginning as early as FY 2026 to the extent new and increased civil 
or administrative penalties are assessed. General fund revenues may also increase by a 
minimum amount beginning as early as FY 2026 to the extent increased civil penalties are 
assessed. MBP can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  MBP’s mission is to assure quality health care through the 
efficient licensure and effective discipline of the health care providers under its jurisdiction. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 776/ Page 2 
MBP has regulatory authority over physicians, PAs, radiographers, radiation therapists, 
nuclear medicine technologists, radiologist assistants, respiratory care practitioners, 
polysomnographic technologists, athletic trainers, perfusionists, naturopathic doctors, and 
genetic counselors. 
 
The bill defines “employer” to mean a person that enters an arrangement for professional 
services, whether paid or unpaid or contractual or otherwise, with an individual licensed 
under Title 14 or 15 of the Health Occupations Article. 
 
As discussed further below, the bill generally (1) repeals the requirement that MBP approve 
a certifying board; (2) clarifies that a supervised medical graduate includes those that have 
passed parts 1 and 2 of a specified osteopathic medical licensing examination; (3) requires 
MBP to issue a verification of license status; (4) prohibits MBP from releasing a list of 
applicants for licensure; (5) requires that an MBP fee be used to cover the actual 
documented costs of fulfilling duties for the practitioner type from whom the fee was 
collected; (6) authorizes MBP, under a subpoena, to inspect the place of business of any 
licensee and increases the fine for failure to comply; (7) authorizes MBP to issue a  
cease-and-desist order for a licensee who practices with an unauthorized person; 
(8) authorizes MBP to impose an administrative penalty of up to $15,000 on a licensee for 
specified violations; (9) alters what MBP must publicly report regarding licensees on its 
website; (10) alters disciplinary panel procedures; (11) reduces the amount of time for 
physician peer review; (12) replaces the physician rehabilitation program with a 
rehabilitation program for all licensees; (13) subjects applicants to an examination as part 
of the review of a license application; (14) requires an applicant for reinstatement to pay 
the cost of an examination; (15) clarifies reporting requirements for employers, with 
specified exceptions for licensees entering treatment programs; (16) authorizes a 
disciplinary panel to impose civil penalty for a report made by an employer in bad faith of 
up to $10,000 for an employer of a physician and up to $5,000 for an employer of an allied 
health practitioner; (17) clarifies that employers are prohibited from employing an 
individual to practice without a license, subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for 
employing an unlicensed physician or $5,000 for employing an unlicensed allied health 
practitioner; (18) increases the maximum penalty on an employer for knowingly failing to 
report to MBP to $10,000 for failure to report on a physician and $5,000 for failure to report 
on an allied health practitioner; (19) specifies that applicants must be fluent in oral and 
written English and meet any education, certification, training, or examination 
requirements established by MBP; (20) specifies that a license expires on a date set by 
MBP and may be renewed for a term set by MBP; (21) requires licensees to notify MBP 
of a name or address change within 30 days; (22) alters physician license reinstatement 
provisions; (23) alters the composition of and member requirements for various allied 
health advisory committees; (24) alters and clarifies requirements regarding various allied 
health professions; and (25) alters and clarifies provisions regarding a PA collaboration 
agreement and specified notification regarding delegated prescriptive authority. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 776/ Page 3 
Approval of Certifying Boards:  Under current law, “board certified” means a physician is 
certified by a public or private board and the certifying board is (1) a member of American 
Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS), an American Osteopathic Association (AOA) 
certifying board, the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada (RCPSC), or 
the College of Family Physicians of Canada (CFPC); (2) has been approved by MBP; or 
(3) requires that the physician complete a postgraduate training program that provides 
complete training in the specialty or subspecialty and is accredited by the Accreditation 
Council for Graduate Medical Education or AOA and be certified by a member board of 
ABMS, AOA, RCPSC, or CFPC. The bill repeals the requirement that MBP approve the 
certifying board if it meets either of the other two requirements. 
 
Supervised Medical Graduate:  Under current law, a “supervised medical graduate” must 
have passed parts 1 and 2 of the United States Medical Licensing Examination, among 
other requirements. The bill specifies that a supervised medical graduate also includes 
someone who has passed parts 1 and 2 of the Comprehensive Osteopathic Medical 
Licensing Examination of the United States. 
 
Additional Board Duties:  The bill requires MBP to issue a verification of license status 
and clarifies that the board must keep a list of all pending license applicants and all 
licensees (rather than physicians) who are currently licensed. The board is prohibited from 
releasing a list of applicants for licensure. 
 
Board of Physicians Fund:  Under current law, the Board of Physicians Fund is a special 
fund with funds generated by fees for the issuance and renewal of licenses, as well as other 
MBP services. The bill requires that a fee collected by MBP must be used to cover the 
actual documented direct and indirect costs of fulfilling statutory and regulatory duties for 
the specified practitioner type of the applicant or licensee from whom the fee was collected. 
 
Inspection of Place of Business:  Under current law, the board may issue a subpoena under 
which the executive director or an authorized agent or investigator may enter at any 
reasonable hour a place of business of a licensed physician as part of an investigation. 
Failure to allow the board entry is subject to a penalty of $100. The bill specifies that the 
board may enter a place of business of any licensee and increases the fine for failure to 
comply to $1,000. 
 
Practicing with an Unauthorized Person:  Under current law, a disciplinary panel may 
issue a cease-and-desist order or obtain injunctive relief against an individual for practicing 
without a license. The bill expands that authority to include if an individual practices a 
profession regulated by MBP with an unauthorized person. 
 
Administrative Penalties:  The bill authorizes MBP to impose an administrative penalty of 
up to $15,000 for (1) failure to produce all documents in response to an MBP subpoena;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 776/ Page 4 
(2) dispensing a drug without a valid dispensing permit; and (3) failure to complete a 
supplemental application for a license compact. MBP must adopt regulations to establish 
these administrative penalties. Any penalties must be paid to the Board of Physicians Fund. 
 
Public Reporting on Maryland Board of Physicians’ Website:  Under current law, MBP 
must maintain a public individual profile of each licensee on its website. Additionally, 
MBP must notify the public on its website that an individual may contact MBP to find out 
whether a particular licensee has been involved in three or more medical malpractice 
settlements with an amount of $150,000 or more in the past five years. Although current 
practice, the bill additionally codifies this language under the naturopathic doctor statute. 
MBP, following the filing of charges or initial denial of a license application, must disclose 
the filing to the public on MBP’s website. The bill also increases the minimum medical 
malpractice settlement amount that public may obtain information about a licensee on from 
$150,000 to $1.0 million. 
 
Investigation and Disciplinary Process:  Under current law, MBP has two 11-member 
disciplinary panels. Either may, by majority vote, revoke or suspend a license or discipline 
a licensee if the licensee violated certain statutory disciplinary grounds. Upon receiving a 
complaint, MBP conducts a preliminary investigation, the results of which are presented 
to the original panel. The panel may close the case or instruct MBP to conduct a complete 
investigation. For certain complaints, the complete investigation requires physician peer 
review. The reviewer has 90 days to complete the peer review and can apply for up to a 
30-day extension. The results of the full investigation are presented to the panel, which can 
vote to charge the respondent. If charged, the respondent is given the option to attend a 
case resolution conference. If no agreement is reached or if the respondent declines to 
participate in the conference, the case is referred to the Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH) for a hearing before an administrative law judge (ALJ). The OAH hearing is 
conducted according to the Administrative Procedure Act. An ALJ provides the facts, but 
MBP is not bound by the findings. The administrative prosecutor and the respondent can 
file disagreements with the ALJ’s decision, and the opposite board panel (the one that did 
not originally handle the case) will consider the exceptions, if any, and issue a final order. 
If the respondent disagrees with the final order, they may file a petition for judicial review. 
 
The bill requires that, if a complaint proceeds to a hearing, the chair of the disciplinary 
panel assigned to the complaint must refer the complaint to OAH (rather than the other 
disciplinary panel). If the disciplinary panel rescinds its referral of the complaint to OAH, 
the complaint will return to the original disciplinary panel. After an evidentiary hearing at 
OAH, the chair of the original disciplinary panel assigned to the complaint must refer the 
complaint to the other disciplinary panel for further action and members of the original 
disciplinary panel may not participate in the complaint. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 776/ Page 5 
The bill also shortens the peer review process so that a reviewer has 60 (rather than 90) days 
to complete their review and may apply for up to a 20-day (rather than 30-day) extension. 
 
The bill adds willfully hindering, preventing, or otherwise delaying a person from making 
information available to MBP or a disciplinary panel in furtherance of any investigation or 
willfully making a misrepresentation to a disciplinary panel as disciplinary grounds for 
physicians and PAs. 
 
The bill authorizes a disciplinary panel (rather than MBP) to reinstate the license of an 
individual whose license has been surrendered or revoked for more than one year if the 
licensee meets requirements for reinstatement and completes a criminal history records 
check. 
 
The bill also establishes that a disciplinary panel may reprimand, suspend, put on 
probation, or revoke the license of a physician, PA, or allied health practitioner if the 
licensee establishes a pattern of excessive or medically unnecessary procedures or 
treatment. 
 
Rehabilitation Program:  The bill repeals the definition of “physician rehabilitation 
program” and replaces it with “rehabilitation program,” which means the program of MBP 
or the nonprofit entity with which MBP contracts that evaluates and provides assistance to 
impaired physicians and allied health professionals who are directed by MBP to receive 
treatment and rehabilitation for alcoholism, chemical dependency, or other physical, 
emotional, or mental conditions. The bill also adds PAs to those eligible for the 
rehabilitation program. 
 
Examination of Licensees and Applicants:  Under current law, as part of the review of a 
license application or investigation of an allegation, a licensee may be required to submit 
to an appropriate examination. If a licensee refuses to submit to examination, that is 
considered evidence of the licensee’s inability to practice competently, unless the refusal 
was out of the licensee’s control. MBP must pay the cost of any examination. The bill adds 
applicants for licensure to those who must submit to an examination. While MBP must pay 
the examination cost for applicants and licensees, an applicant for reinstatement must pay 
their own examination cost. 
 
Employers:  The bill requires an employer to file a report with MBP if they have 
(1) reduced, suspended, revoked, restricted, denied, conditioned, or did not renew a 
licensee’s privileges, employment, or other ability to practice or treat patients; 
(2) involuntarily terminated or restricted the licensee’s employment or staff membership; 
(3) asked the licensee to voluntarily resign because of conduct or while being investigated; 
and (4) one of the above actions was taken for reasons that might be grounds for 
disciplinary action by MBP, because the licensee may have engaged in an act that may 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 776/ Page 6 
constitute unprofessional conduct, because the licensee may be unable to practice with 
reasonable skill and safety because of a physical or mental condition or professional 
incompetence, or because the licensee may have harmed or placed one or more patients or 
the public at risk of harm by engaging in an act that creates an immediate or continuing 
danger. 
 
The report must include (1) the action taken by the employer; (2) a detailed explanation of 
the reasons for the action, including references to patient medical records, if any, that 
informed the employer’s action; and (3) the steps taken by the employer to investigate the 
licensee’s conduct. MBP may request additional information from the employer regarding 
the action they took against the licensee. If an employer receives such a request, they must 
promptly provide the additional information. 
 
An employer that knows that the conduct of a licensee requires reporting because the 
licensee is impaired by alcohol or another substance is not required to report to MBP if 
(1) the employer knows that the licensee is in an accredited substance use disorder (SUD) 
treatment program or is under the care of a health practitioner who is competent and 
capable of dealing with SUDs; (2) the employer can verify the licensee remains in the 
treatment program until successful discharge; and (3) the action or condition of the licensee 
has not caused injury to any person while the licensee is practicing. If the employer knows 
that the licensee is noncompliant with the SUD treatment program, the employer must 
report that noncompliance to MBP. 
 
An employer must submit the report to MBP within 10 days of the action requiring the 
report, but MBP may extend the reporting time for good cause shown. Under current law, 
such a report is not subject to subpoena or discovery in any civil action other than a 
proceeding arising out of a hearing and decision of MBP. The bill adds that the report is 
also privileged and not subject to inspection under the Maryland Public Information Act. 
However, MBP may enforce reporting requirements by subpoena. Any person submitting 
the information required by these reporting requirements must have immunity from 
liability described under § 5-715(d) of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. 
 
The bill authorizes a disciplinary panel to impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 per 
incident for a report made by an employer of a physician in bad faith and up to $5,000 for 
an employer of an allied health practitioner. 
 
The bill prohibits an employer from employing a physician to practice medicine without a 
license. A disciplinary panel may impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a violation of 
this prohibition, or up to $5,000 for employing an allied health practitioner to practice 
without a license. Any funds collected accrue to the Board of Physicians Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 776/ Page 7 
Civil Penalties for Knowingly Failing to Report to the Board:  Under current law, a 
disciplinary panel can impose on a hospital, a related institution, an alternative health 
system, or an employer a civil penalty for failure to report on actions against a licensee. 
The current fine is up to $5,000 for failure to report on a physician, and up to $1,000 for 
failure to report on an allied health practitioner. The bill specifies that the fine applies to 
an employer and increases the maximum penalty to $10,000 for knowingly failing to report 
on a physician and $5,000 for knowingly failing to report on an allied health practitioner. 
 
Licensing Requirements and Communication in the English Language:  Under current law, 
an applicant for a license must pass MBP’s required examination. As part of the 
examination, an applicant must be proficient in speaking English. The bill specifies that, 
to qualify for licensure, an applicant must meet any education, certification, training, or 
examination requirements established by MBP. Applicants also must be fluent in both 
spoken and written English communication. 
 
License Term and Renewal Notification:  Under current law, a license expires two years 
from its issue date and may be renewed every two years. At least one month before the 
license expires, MBP must send notice to the licensee, as well as a blank panel data sheet 
supplied by the Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office. The bill specifies that 
a license expires on a date set by MBP and may be renewed for a term set by MBP. The 
requirement to send a licensee a blank panel data sheet is repealed. The bill also specifies 
that, to qualify for license renewal, a licensee must provide satisfactory evidence of 
compliance with any continuing competency requirements and meet any additional license 
renewal requirements established by MBP. 
 
Change in Name or Address:  Under current law, a licensee must notify MBP’s secretary 
in writing within 60 days of a name or address change. The bill requires that this 
notification be provided within 30 days after the change. 
 
Reinstatement of Physician License or Emeritus Status:  Under current law, MBP must 
reinstate the license of a physician who has failed to renew or is on inactive status if the 
physician (1) meets renewal requirements; (2) pays the reinstatement fee; and (3) submits 
evidence to MBP of compliance with the qualifications and requirements for reinstatement. 
The bill adds two additional requirements; a physician must submit a reinstatement 
application and meet any additional MBP license reinstatement requirements. 
 
Advisory Committees – Generally:  The bill authorizes MBP, except as otherwise specified, 
to adopt regulations regarding its advisory committees governing members’ terms of 
office, procedures for filling committee vacancies, the removal of members, and the duties 
of each officer. The bill alters the membership, procedures, and responsibilities of all 
MBP advisory committees to make them more uniform, as follows: 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 776/ Page 8 
 
all committee members must be Maryland residents; 
 
all licensed committee members must be in good standing with MBP; 
 
a committee member may not serve more than two consecutive full terms; 
 
at the end of a term, a member continues to serve until their successor is appointed; 
 
a member who was appointed after a term has begun may serve only for the rest of 
the term until a successor is appointed; 
 
quorums are established for each committee; 
 
committees must recommend any statutory changes that affect their profession 
to MBP; 
 
committees are no longer responsible for submitting an annual report to MBP or 
developing a code of ethics, standards of care, or continuing education requirements 
for license renewal; 
 
except for the PA advisory committee, committees are no longer responsible for 
evaluating the credentials of applicants; 
 
a committee may provide recommendations regarding the practice of their 
profession and advise MBP on any matters related to the profession; and 
 
MBP no longer needs to consider all committee recommendations, nor must they 
provide a report to the committee on disciplinary matters involving licensees. 
 
Respiratory Care Advisory Committee:  The bill renames the Respiratory Care Professional 
Standards Committee to be the Respiratory Care Advisory Committee and removes the 
committee’s responsibility to recommend criteria for respiratory care practice in the home 
setting. 
 
Radiation Therapy, Radiography, Nuclear Medicine Technology, and Radiology 
Assistance Advisory Committee:  The bill specifies that the consumer member of the 
committee must not be or have ever been any health care professional, as specified or in 
training to be any health care professional and may not have had financial interest in the 
provision of goods or services related to the profession within the two years prior to 
appointment to the committee. 
 
Polysomnography Advisory Committee:  The bill renames the Polysomnography 
Professional Standards Advisory Committee to be the Polysomnography Advisory 
Committee. The bill removes the prohibition on the consumer member of the committee 
having a household member who is a health care professional and the committee’s 
responsibility to develop and recommend criteria for those licensed in other states to 
practice in Maryland and polysomnographic technologists to direct students. 
 
Polysomnographic Technologists:  The bill adds an exception for a polysomnographic 
technologist employed by the federal government while practicing within their scope of 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 776/ Page 9 
employment and removes the option for an education requirement for an applicant to be 
waived. 
 
Athletic Trainer Advisory Committee:  Under current law, there are nine members of the 
Athletic Trainer Advisory Committee, including (1) three licensed athletic trainers who are 
certified by the national certifying board and have at least five years of clinical experience; 
(2) three licensed physicians with specified experience; (3) one member who is either a 
chiropractor with sports medicine experience, physical therapist, or occupational therapist; 
and (4) two consumer members. The athletic trainer members may by appointed from a list 
of qualified individuals submitted to MBP by the Maryland Athletic Trainers 
Association, Inc. (MATA). MBP may request an additional list of nominees for each 
vacancy. 
 
The bill reduces the number of committee members from nine to seven by removing 
one consumer member and the member who is either a chiropractor, physical therapist, or 
occupational therapist. The requirement that the athletic trainer members have specified 
certification and experience and the authority of the board to appoint members from the 
list submitted by MATA are repealed. Instead, MBP must appoint at least one of the athletic 
trainer members from the MATA list. The bill also specifies that the consumer member of 
the committee may not have a household member who participates in a commercial or 
professional field related to athletic training or have had a financial interest in a person 
regulated by MBP within the two years before appointment to the committee. 
 
Perfusionists:  While an individual generally must be licensed by MBP to practice 
perfusion in the State, the bill adds an exception for a perfusionist employed by the federal 
government while practicing within their scope of employment. The bill also prohibits a 
licensed physician from employing or supervising an individual practicing perfusion 
without a license. A disciplinary panel may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for a 
violation of this prohibition. Any penalty collected must be remitted to the general fund. 
 
Naturopathic Medicine Advisory Committee:  The bill reduces the term of a committee 
member from four to three years and alters committee responsibilities by removing the 
need to develop and recommend procedures for issuing licenses to applicants who qualify 
by reciprocity. The bill specifies that the licensed physician members of the committee are 
not required to be practicing physicians. The consumer member of the committee may not 
be or ever been in training to be or licensed to practice a health occupation, nor may they 
participate in or have a household member who participates in a commercial or professional 
field related to naturopathic medicine nor had a financial interest in a person regulated by 
the board or goods and services related to naturopathic medicine within two years before 
appointment to the committee. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 776/ Page 10 
Naturopathic Doctors:  Under current law, to apply for a naturopathic doctor license, an 
applicant must, among other things, complete an attestation that the applicant has a 
collaboration and consultation agreement with a licensed physician. The bill removes the 
attestation requirement but requires that a naturopathic doctor maintain a collaboration and 
consultation agreement with a physician licensed to practice in the State. A naturopathic 
doctor and licensed physician may terminate their agreement at any time. If the agreement 
is terminated or the physician suddenly departs, is incapacitated, or passes away, the 
naturopathic doctor may not practice until they enter a new agreement with another 
physician. A physician or employer must notify MBP within 10 days of the termination of 
a naturopathic doctor if the reason for termination may be grounds for discipline and must 
notify MBP within 10 days after the termination of a collaboration and consultation 
agreement. The bill also prohibits a licensed physician from employing an individual 
practicing naturopathic medicine without a license. A disciplinary panel may impose a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000 for a violation of this prohibition. Any penalty collected must be 
remitted to the general fund. 
 
Genetic Counseling Advisory Committee:  The bill specifies that the consumer member of 
the committee may not have had a financial interest in the provision of goods and services 
to genetic counselors or to the field of genetic counseling within the two years prior to 
appointment to the committee. The bill also alters committee responsibilities to remove the 
need to develop and recommend procedures for issuing licenses to applicants who qualify 
by reciprocity. 
 
Genetic Counselors:  Under current law, an applicant for a license to practice genetic 
counseling must submit evidence of certification by a national certifying organization 
approved by MBP. Initial licensure legislation included a grandfathering clause which 
exempted applicants from the national certification requirement if they (1) worked as a 
genetic counselor for at least 10 years prior to January 1, 2024, and at least 5 consecutive 
years immediately preceding the date of application for licensure; (2) graduated from an 
MBP-approved education program; (3) submitted specified letters of recommendation; and 
(4) applied for licensure by December 31, 2024. The bill repeals this grandfathering clause 
exception, thereby requiring national certification for licensure to practice genetic 
counseling. The bill also specifies that an individual may not misrepresent to the public 
that they are authorized to practice genetic counseling in the State. 
 
Physician Assistant Advisory Committee:  The bill requires that the consumer member of 
the committee and members of their household may not have ever participated in a field 
related to PA practice. Additionally, they may not have had financial interest in a person 
or career regulated by MBP or the provision of goods and services to PAs or the field of 
PA practice in the two years prior to appointment to the committee. The bill also repeals 
the requirement that the committee elect a secretary and limits the term of a committee 
member to three years. 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 776/ Page 11 
Physician Assistants:  Under current law, a PA may practice only after providing notice to 
MBP of the executed collaboration agreement and each patient care team physician listed 
on the collaboration agreement. The bill removes the requirement that a PA notify MBP of 
each patient care team physician listed on the collaboration agreement. The bill specifies 
that a patient care team physician may be added or removed from a collaboration agreement 
by immediately documenting the addition or removal in the collaboration agreement on file 
at the PA’s primary place of business. The bill also removes the requirement that, if a 
patient care team physician who has delegated prescriptive authority to a PA restricts or 
removes the delegation, the physician must notify MBP within five business days. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  OAH advises that the changes to disciplinary proceedings in the bill 
would likely result in an indeterminate increase in the number of hearings delegated by 
MBP to OAH. OAH would also need to train ALJs on updates to the law. This can be 
handled within OAH’s existing budgeted resources. In fiscal 2024, OAH received 17 cases 
from MBP. 
 
Additionally, this bill increases civil penalties for licensees who violate specified 
provisions of law (some of which accrue to the Board of Physicians Fund and some to the 
general fund) and establishes additional administrative penalties. Thus, special fund 
revenues to the Board of Physicians Fund and to the general fund increase by an 
indeterminate amount as early as fiscal 2026 to the extent that individuals violate such 
provisions and penalties are imposed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 423 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland Health Care Alternative Dispute 
Resolution Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11