START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 775 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 775 
(Delegate Otto, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Correctional Services - Death of Incarcerated Individual - Notification 
 
 
This bill requires, whenever an incarcerated individual dies in a Division of 
Correction (DOC) facility, the Commissioner of Correction to notify (1) the State delegates 
and State senator representing the legislative district where the facility is located; (2) the 
legislative body of the county where the facility is located or the Baltimore City Council, 
if the facility is located in Baltimore City; and (3) the chief executive of the county where 
the facility is located or the Mayor of Baltimore City, if the facility is located in 
Baltimore City. The notification must include the cause of death of the 
deceased incarcerated individual and may not include protected health information of the 
deceased incarcerated individual. The Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS) must adopt regulations compliant with the federal Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) to implement the bill’s provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures for DPSCS to 
provide the required notifications. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Investigation by Department of State Police:  The Department of State Police must 
investigate any death of an incarcerated individual suspected to be a homicide that occurs 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 775/ Page 2 
while the incarcerated individual is in the custody of DOC whether within or outside a 
correctional facility. 
 
Federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act:  HIPPA protects the 
individually identifiable health information for an individual for up to 50 years after the 
death of the individual. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2