START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 782 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 782 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Study on Detecting Deadly Weapons in Public Middle and High Schools 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS) to study how best to 
detect deadly weapons on public middle and high school properties and have schools 
rapidly report the detection of a deadly weapon to law enforcement. By December 1, 2025, 
MCSS must issue an interim report on its findings to the Presiding Officers and selected 
committees of the General Assembly in a manner that does not jeopardize school safety. 
By December 1, 2026, MCSS must issue a final report to the same entities. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures may increase in FY 2026 
and 2027 to conduct the evaluation, but a reliable estimate is not feasible in the absence of 
clarity regarding the scope and intensity of the evaluation, as discussed below. No effect 
on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems can likely participate in the required study and 
evaluation with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required study must include a comprehensive evaluation of the current 
security infrastructure used in each public school system in the State. It must include 
meetings with members of each local school system to assess (1) physical and 
technological security measures currently in use and (2) any gaps or areas that require 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 782/ Page 2 
improvement. MCSS must build on information collected as part of regular safety 
evaluations required under current law. Information collected is not a public record and 
must be protected as specified. The study must also, at a minimum, include an evaluation 
of: 
 
 
widely accepted available methods not currently used by public school systems in 
the State and the feasibility of using those methods to help fill gaps or make 
improvements in the security system identified in the comprehensive evaluation; 
 
how the current security system could best be adapted to achieve better detection of 
deadly weapons and quicker reporting to law enforcement agencies when deadly 
weapons are detected; 
 
software used for school safety, as specified; 
 
an increased use of security cameras in public middle and high schools and their 
ideal placement; and 
 
an increased use of metal detectors, including handheld metal detectors, in public 
middle and high schools. 
 
In conducting the study, MCSS must request any available assessment of each technology 
being evaluated that analyzes the technology’s efficacy, bias, data ownership, privacy, 
scope of use, and risk management. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Safe to Learn Act 
 
Chapter 30 of 2018, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act, made comprehensive changes 
designed to improve the safety of the State’s public schools. The remainder of this section 
summarizes relevant provisions of the Act. 
 
School Safety Subcabinet 
 
The School Safety Subcabinet consists of the following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General;  
 
the Secretary of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Commission on School Construction. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 782/ Page 3 
The State Superintendent or designee chairs the subcabinet, and the Executive Director of 
the Maryland Center for School Safety provides staff. 
 
The Act required each local school system, by June 15, 2019, and regularly thereafter, to 
conduct a safety evaluation of each public school under its jurisdiction. The purposes of 
the evaluations are to (1) identify and, if necessary, develop solutions for physical safety 
concerns, including issues with building security and (2) identify and evaluate any patterns 
of safety concerns on school property or at school-sponsored events. 
 
Maryland Center for School Safety 
 
Chapter 372 of 2013 established MCSS as an independent unit within State government 
under the direction of a governing board chaired by the State Superintendent of Schools. 
Five years later, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act made MCSS an independent unit within 
the Maryland State Department of Education and increased the mandated appropriation for 
MCSS’s operations from $500,000 to $2.0 million annually. MCSS’s duties include:   
 
 
assisting local school systems to identify resources and implement training for 
students and parents about relationship violence, identifying the signs of unhealthy 
relationships, and preventing relationship violence; 
 
analyzing data on School Resource Officers (SROs) and developing guidelines for 
local school systems regarding the assignment and training of SROs; 
 
certifying school safety coordinators; 
 
consulting with local school systems on safety evaluations; 
 
reviewing and commenting on school emergency plans; and 
 
reporting on life-threatening incidents that occur on public school grounds. 
 
School Resource Officers and School Security Employees 
 
The Maryland Safe to Learn Act defines an SRO as (1) a law enforcement officer assigned 
to a school in accordance with a memorandum of understanding between a local law 
enforcement agency and a local school system or (2) a Baltimore City School Police 
Officer, as defined in current law. 
 
Each local school system must file a report with MCSS that identifies (1) the public schools 
that have an SRO assigned and (2) if no SRO is assigned to a public school, the adequate 
local law enforcement coverage that will be provided to the school. 
 
Annually, the Governor must include $10.0 million for the Safe Schools Fund to provide 
grants to local school systems and law enforcement agencies to meet the 
SRO/law enforcement coverage requirements established by Chapter 30. Grants must be 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 782/ Page 4 
made based on the proportion of public schools in each jurisdiction and may be used for 
school security employees. 
 
A school security employee is an individual who (1) is not an SRO and (2) is employed by 
a local school system to provide safety and security-related services at a public school. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MCSS advises that, if the intent of the evaluation is to review existing 
school security measures and identify gaps, it likely can conduct the required study with 
existing resources, relying largely on existing assessments, plans, and on interviews with 
school safety personnel in each local school system. However, if the intent is for the 
evaluation to conduct a more thorough evaluation of weapons-detection strategies, 
technology, and equipment, MCSS anticipates that it needs to hire a consultant with 
expertise in that area, resulting in an increase in general fund expenditures in fiscal 2026 
and 2027. In the absence of clarity regarding the intent of the bill, general fund expenditures 
may increase to conduct the evaluation, potentially significantly, but a reliable estimate is 
not feasible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Center for 
School Safety; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4