START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 795 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 795 
(Delegate Spiegel, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Federal Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program - Employee Certification and 
Awareness Materials 
 
 
This bill requires that, for the purposes of certifying employment for the federal Public 
Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) Program, a public service employer must (1) adopt a 
policy calculating hours worked with a method that maximizes the amount of time for 
which an employee can be considered full time and (2) consider an employee as full time 
if the employee satisfies, or satisfied, the minimum amount of time to qualify as such. The 
bill establishes procedures for certifying employment of adjunct or tenured professors in 
institutions of higher education that are also public service employers under PSLF. More 
generally, a public service employer may not unreasonably delay the certification of the 
employment of a current or former employee. The bill also requires the Student Loan 
Ombudsman to develop and disseminate specified materials and requires public service 
employers to share those materials as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State agencies can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures for local employers (all of which qualify as public service 
employers) may increase minimally to conform existing personnel practices to the bill’s 
requirements, though any changes are likely absorbable with existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 795/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill may not be construed to require a public service employee to 
increase the number of hours the employee works for a public service employer; the bill 
applies only to the methods of calculating full-time employment for the purposes of PSLF. 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
Institutions of Higher Education as Public Service Employers 
 
An institution of higher education that is also a public service employer must, with respect 
to an employee who is an adjunct or tenured professor, credit the employee for each hour 
of the employee’s credit, contact, or classroom time with at least 3.35 hours worked or the 
number allowed under PSLF if higher. This does not supersede an institution of  
higher education’s policy or adjustment for additional work associated with lecture or 
classroom time. An institution of higher education that is also a public service employer 
must treat consecutive academic terms that an employee teaches as a continuous 
employment period, regardless of whether the hours are taught under separate employment 
contracts, or the academic terms are separated by routine academic vacation. 
 
Certification Requirements – Generally 
 
A public service employer must certify the employment, as specified, of each (1) current 
or former employee who requests that the public service employer complete a PSLF form 
and (2) employee who is leaving the employment of the public service employer on the 
employee’s separation. 
 
If the U.S. Department of Education (ED) allows a public service employer to directly 
certify employment, the public service employer may send the information necessary to 
certify employment directly to ED. The bill does not prevent a public service employer 
from seeking permission from an employee before certifying directly with the department. 
 
Student Loan Ombudsman 
 
The Student Loan Ombudsman must develop, and update as necessary, materials designed 
to promote awareness of and increase participation in PSLF. The materials must include a 
standardized letter, detailed fact sheet, and a frequently-asked-questions document. 
 
Beginning October 15, 2025, the ombudsman, in coordination with other State agencies, 
must make the materials available to public service employers. One month later, beginning  
November 15, 2025, each public service employer must provide each newly hired 
employee with the most recently available version of the material developed by the 
ombudsman by mail, email, or during an in-person orientation within 30 days of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 795/ Page 3 
employment. Beginning March 15, 2026, each public service employer must annually 
provide the most recently available version of the materials developed by the ombudsman 
to all employees in written or electronic form. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Federal Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program 
 
PSLF is intended to encourage individuals to enter and continue to work full time in public 
service jobs. Under the program, an individual may qualify for forgiveness on the 
remaining balance due on the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program (known as 
the Direct Loan Program) loans after making 120 monthly payments on those loans while 
employed full time by qualified public service employers. Each of the 120 qualifying 
payments must be made for the full scheduled monthly installment amount; however, the 
120 required payments do not need to be made consecutively. 
 
For PSLF, individuals are generally considered to work full time if they work for a 
qualifying employer(s) for a weekly average (alone or when combined) of at least 30 hours. 
For nontenure track employment at a higher education institution, the hours worked are 
determined by multiplying each credit or contact hour taught per week by at least 
3.35 hours. 
 
Employment can be certified by an official who has access to an individual’s employment 
or service records and is authorized by an employer to certify employment. This is often 
someone in the human resources department, though in some cases supervisors or other 
individuals may be authorized to certify employment. If an individual does not submit the 
PSLF form annually, then at the time that individual applies for forgiveness, the individual 
is required to submit employment certification for each employer while making the 
required 120 qualifying monthly payments. 
 
Student Loan Ombudsman 
 
Statutory provisions require the Office of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation 
(OCFR) to designate an individual to serve as Student Loan Ombudsman. Among other 
things, the ombudsman must monitor student loan servicing activity in Maryland, receive 
and process complaints about student education loan servicing, and may refer any matter 
that is abusive, unfair, deceptive, or fraudulent to the Office of the Attorney General for 
civil enforcement or criminal prosecution. 
 
In addition, the ombudsman is charged with helping student loan borrowers understand 
their rights and responsibilities under the terms of their student education loans. The 
ombudsman gathers information about the state of student loan servicing in Maryland to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 795/ Page 4 
inform the public and the State legislature about student loan issues and trends. That 
information is provided to the public, and complaint data and any recommendations are 
provided to the General Assembly in the ombudsman’s annual report. 
 
State/Local Expenditures: 
 
Student Loan Ombudsman Responsibilities 
 
The Maryland Department of Labor advises that OCFR can handle the bill’s 
responsibilities with existing resources and that it has already created the required 
materials. 
 
State and Local Public Service Employers 
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that it already has a 
methodology for calculating hours that maximizes the amount of State service that can be 
reported by an employee who is participating in PSLF. DBM notes it can use existing 
resources to include PSLF materials with onboarding packets of information that new 
employees receive. 
 
Human resources departments in other State agencies and local governments may need to 
implement procedural changes to the extent they do not already certify PSLF employees 
as specified in the bill, but they can likely accommodate those changes with existing 
resources. 
 
Institutions of Higher Education 
 
The University System of Maryland advises that the bill does not have a fiscal impact, 
though the bill has an operational impact in that it creates additional responsibilities for its 
human resources unit that processes and retains records.  
 
Additional Comments:  Nonprofit organizations that are public service employers in the 
State may face operational difficulties to conform existing practice to the bill’s 
PSLF certification requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1172 of 2024 and HB 1048 of 2023. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 795/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Library Agency; 
University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - February 26, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5