START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 761 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 761 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Uniform Disposition of Abandoned Property Act - Revisions 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes to the Maryland Uniform Disposition of Abandoned 
Property Act, which governs the distribution of abandoned property in the State. Among 
other provisions, the bill (1) explicitly applies the requirements of the Act to additional 
forms of property (e.g., virtual currency); (2) establishes various new requirements and 
procedures related to abandoned property claims; and (3) authorizes the Comptroller to 
retain additional proceeds from the sale of abandoned property to use for certain purposes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues are assumed to increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning in FY 2026. Special fund expenditures by the Comptroller’s Office increase as 
retained funding under the bill is used for specified purposes, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In general, the bill makes numerous alterations to the Maryland Uniform 
Disposition of Abandoned Property Act, some of which are described in additional detail 
below. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 761/ Page 2 
Selected Definitions 
 
The bill adds a definition of “apparent owner” to mean a person whose name appears on a 
record of a holder as the owner of property held, issued, or owing by the holder. An 
“indication of apparent owner interest in property” is defined to mean (1) a record 
communicated by the apparent owner to the holder or agent of the holder concerning the 
property or the account in which the property is held; (2) an oral communication by the 
apparent owner to the holder or agent of the holder concerning the property or the account 
in which the property is held, if the holder or its agent contemporaneously makes and 
preserves a record of the fact of the apparent owner’s communication; (3) for an account, 
underlying security, or interest in a business association, the presentment of specified items 
(e.g., evidence of receipt of a distribution made by electronic means); (4) activity directed 
by an apparent owner in the account in which the property is held, as specified; (5) a deposit 
into or withdrawal from an account at a financial institution, as specified; (6) subject to 
specified provisions, payment of a premium on an insurance policy; and (7) any other 
action by the apparent owner that reasonably demonstrates to the holder that the apparent 
owner knows that the property exists. 
 
The bill also defines a “record” to mean information that is inscribed on a tangible medium 
or stored in an electronic or other medium and retrievable in perceivable form. 
 
Apparent Owners 
 
For purposes of the Act: 
 
 
an action by an agent or other representative of an apparent owner, other than a 
holder acting as the apparent owner’s agent, is presumed to be an action on behalf 
of the apparent owner; and 
 
a communication with an apparent owner by a person other than the holder (or 
representative) is not an indication of apparent owner interest in property unless a 
record of the communication evidences the apparent owner’s knowledge of a right 
to the property. 
 
The bill includes extensive provisions related to the determination of the address of an 
apparent owner, including circumstances under which Maryland is deemed to be the state 
of the last known address versus another state. 
 
Presumptions of Abandoned Property – Generally 
 
Existing statute includes provisions that govern when property held by specified entities is 
presumed to be abandoned. For example, certain property held by a banking or financial 
organization or business association is presumed abandoned three years after the later of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 761/ Page 3 
(1) the date the holder is deemed to no longer have a valid address for the owner of the 
property or (2) the date the owner last took specified actions, including 
increasing/decreasing the amount of the deposit or corresponded in writing concerning the 
deposit. Among other changes, the bill incorporates references to an owner accessing the 
account or information concerning the account into these provisions, thereby recognizing 
additional actions as continued ownership of property. 
 
Establishing the Death of an Insured or Annuitant of a Life Insurance Policy 
 
A “death master file” is the Social Security Administration Death Master File or any other 
database or service that is at least as comprehensive for determining that an individual 
reportedly has died. The bill includes provisions regarding the use of a death master file 
for the purpose of determining when the death of an insured or an annuitant is presumed 
for purposes of the Act. A holder of specified funds must, at least on an annual basis, 
(1) conduct a death master file examination and comparison (as specified in the bill) on all 
insureds and annuitants and (2) make a record of the date on which any examination and 
comparison occurs. 
 
Additional Presumptions Established for Specific Types of Property 
 
Under the bill, virtual currency is presumed abandoned if it remains unclaimed five years 
after the last indication of apparent owner interest in the property. Within 30 days before 
the filing of a report required under existing statute regarding property that is presumed 
abandoned, the holder of abandoned virtual currency must liquidate the virtual currency. 
The holder must remit any liquidation proceeds to the Comptroller. Notwithstanding any 
other provision under the applicable subtitle, an owner has no right of recourse against a 
holder or the Comptroller to recover any gain in value to the virtual currency that occurs 
after the aforementioned liquidation. 
 
The bill also includes specific procedures to determine when property held in a pension 
account or retirement account that qualifies for tax deferral under the income tax provisions 
of the Internal Revenue Code is presumed abandoned, as specified. 
 
Notice to Persons Who Appear To Be Owners of Abandoned Property – Publication 
 
The Comptroller is generally required under current law to publish the names of newly 
reported owners of property presumed abandoned within 365 days of the filing of the report 
by the holder of abandoned property. However, notice of property valued at less than $100 
is not required to be published unless the Comptroller considers publication to be in the 
public interest; the bill reduces this threshold to $50. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 761/ Page 4 
Additional Procedural Requirements and Authorizations 
 
The bill establishes in statute numerous procedural requirements in regard to the 
Comptroller’s duties as the administrator of abandoned property. Among other provisions, 
the bill authorizes the Comptroller to waive an existing filing requirement for persons 
claiming a legal interest in any abandoned property that has been delivered to the State if  
(1) the person receiving the property or payment is the apparent owner, as specified;  
(2) the Comptroller reasonably believes the person is entitled to receive the property or 
payment; and (3) the property or payment has a value of $5,000 or less. 
 
The Comptroller may apply property held to a claim for the payment of a debt owed to the 
State identified by or certified to the Comptroller, including debts for unpaid State, county, 
or municipal tax. The Comptroller may make periodic inquiries of State and local agencies 
in the absence of a filed claim to determine whether an apparent owner included in the 
unclaimed property records of the State has enforceable debts. If an enforceable debt is 
identified, the Comptroller must (1) apply the property or net proceeds of a sale of the 
property to the debt of an apparent owner who appears in the records; (2) pay the amount 
identified by or certified to the administrator; and (3) notify the owner of any payment 
toward a debt that the Comptroller determines is owed by the owner. 
 
The bill alters statutory requirements regarding the commencement of a civil court action. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision – or as to whose claim the Comptroller has failed to 
act within six months (90 days under existing statute) after the filing of the claim – may 
commence an action in the circuit court to establish the claim. The proceeding must be 
brought within 90 days after the decision or within one year (180 days under existing 
statute) from the filing of the claim if the Comptroller fails to act. 
 
Retention in Special Fund 
 
The bill authorizes the Comptroller to retain, from funds received from the sale of 
abandoned property (1) an amount not exceeding $5.0 million for information technology 
(IT) costs, including cybersecurity, customer relation systems, and a system for managing 
unclaimed property and (2) an amount of funds the Comptroller reasonably estimates is 
sufficient to pay any claims allowable under the Act (instead of a maximum $50,000). 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that the Maryland Uniform 
Disposition of Abandoned Property Act is outdated and requires the Comptroller’s Office 
to make determinations related to types of property that did not exist when the Act was 
conceived. The Act also fails to address digital means of communication, online record 
storage, and other factors. As such, the bill is intended to modernize the Act by 
incorporating additional forms of property, such as virtual currency and to bring Maryland 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 761/ Page 5 
into conformity with national best practices related to the disposition of unclaimed 
property. 
 
Abandoned Property – Generally 
 
Title 17 of the Commercial Law Article generally governs abandoned property in the State; 
the Comptroller is the administrator of abandoned property. Statute includes provisions 
that govern when property held by specified entities is presumed to be abandoned. 
 
Statute also includes additional notice and procedural requirements. For example, a holder 
of presumed abandoned property valued at $100 or more is required to send written notice 
(by first-class mail) to the apparent owner of the presumed abandoned property, at the 
apparent owner’s last known address, informing the owner that the holder is in possession 
of the property and that the property will be considered abandoned unless the owner 
responds to the holder within 30 days after the notification. 
 
A person holding abandoned property must also file a report with the Comptroller including 
information on the nature of the property and the property’s presumed owner. The 
abandoned property specified in the report must be transferred to the Comptroller. The 
Comptroller is required to take specified actions, including those related to publication and 
the mailing of notice to apparent owners. 
 
A person who claims a legal interest in property delivered to the Comptroller must file a 
claim to the property or to the proceeds from its sale, as further specified in statute. 
 
Disposition of Funds 
 
All funds received under Title 17 (the Maryland Uniform Disposition of Abandoned 
Property Act) must be credited by the Comptroller to a special fund. Statute specifies that 
the Comptroller must retain up to $50,000 at the end of each fiscal year to pay any claims 
allowed under Title 17. After deducting administrative costs, the Comptroller must 
distribute $8.0 million to the Maryland Legal Services Corporation Fund. 
 
Further, the Comptroller must distribute all unclaimed money from judgments of restitution 
to the State Victims of Crime Fund to assist victims of crimes and delinquent acts to protect 
the victims’ rights as provided by law. If a victim entitled to restitution that has been treated 
as abandoned property is located after the money has been distributed, the Comptroller 
must reduce the next distribution to the State Victims of Crime Fund by the amount 
recovered by the victim. 
 
After making the distributions required above, the Comptroller must distribute $500,000 
from the remaining net funds to the Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders Fund. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 761/ Page 6 
Further, from fiscal 2024 through 2027, the Comptroller must subsequently distribute 
$14.0 million from the remaining funds to the Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund. 
 
After making the required distributions, the Comptroller must distribute the remaining 
net funds to the general fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The precise impact on State finances cannot be determined without 
experience under the bill. Some provisions in the bill – such as the explicit inclusion of 
virtual currency – likely result in additional types of property being reported as abandoned. 
However, some property that may have otherwise been deemed abandoned may not be 
deemed as such under the bill due to other provisions (i.e., including additional types of 
actions as signs of continued ownership). As referenced above, after any claims are paid 
and required distributions are made, remaining net funds are disbursed to the general fund. 
The Comptroller’s Office advises generally that gross revenues have historically eclipsed 
the total amount of claims paid, and provisions in the bill are expected to increase gross 
revenues. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the Comptroller is authorized under the 
bill to retain $5.0 million for IT and other purposes in the related special fund; however, 
the Comptroller advises that this retention is likely to have only a nominal effect on 
revenues. This analysis therefore assumes there is no impact on other special funds that 
receive distributions after the required retention by the Comptroller’s Office. 
 
As the additional revenues retained by the Comptroller’s Office must be used for specified 
IT and cybersecurity costs, it is anticipated that special fund expenditures increase 
significantly (assumed to begin in fiscal 2026) as the retained funding is used for this 
purpose. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 665 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Harford, and Montgomery counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 761/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7