START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 723 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 723 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Authorization to Practice for Former Federal Employees 
and Dental Applicants Licensed or Certified in Another State 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) to issue a license to a dentist 
or dental hygienist licensed in another state within 15 business days after receiving the 
applicant’s completed application if the applicant otherwise meets the requirements for 
licensure. The bill also specifies the requirements a dental radiation technologist (DRT) 
authorized to practice in another state must meet to be quality for a DRT certificate from 
BDE. If an applicant for a DRT certificate authorized to practice in another state meets the 
requirements for certification, BDE must issue the certificate within 15 business days after 
receiving the completed application. BDE may adopt regulations necessary to provide for 
the certification of individuals authorized to practice as a DRT in another state. The 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must develop a plan for authorization to practice 
a health occupation in the State for specified individuals and submit the plan to specified 
committees of the General Assembly by October 1, 2025. The bill’s provisions regarding 
development and submission of the plan take effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  BDE can handle the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
Any impact on BDE special fund revenues is indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal, 
as discussed below. MDH can develop and submit the required plan using existing 
budgeted resources. Any impact on special fund revenues for the health occupations boards 
is indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal, as discussed below.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 723/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A DRT authorized to practice in another state must be issued a certificate 
in Maryland if the applicant pays the required fee and provides adequate evidence that the 
applicant:   
 
 
meets the qualifications otherwise required for a DRT certificate; 
 
has satisfied the examination requirement for certification of another state that BDE 
determines is comparable to the examination requirement in Maryland; 
 
is not being investigated by a disciplinary authority of another state, does not have 
charges pending against the applicant’s certification, and has not been disciplined 
by a disciplinary or certifying authority of another state or country, or been 
convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country for an act that would be 
grounds for disciplinary action in Maryland; and 
 
has not previously failed an examination for certification as a DRT in Maryland. 
 
Required Plan 
 
MDH must develop a plan for a temporary or permanent authorization to practice a health 
occupation in the State for individuals who (1) are not licensed or otherwise authorized to 
practice a health occupation in the State; (2) hold a license or other authorization issued by 
another state that is equivalent to the license or other authorization required to practice the 
health occupation in this State; and (3) left employment with a federal agency after 
January 20, 2025. 
 
By October 1, 2025, MDH must submit the plan, including any necessary statutory 
changes, to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee.  
 
Current Law:  Under the Health Occupations Article, an individual must be licensed to 
practice dentistry or dental hygiene or be certified to practice dental radiation technology. 
BDE is mandated to protect the public by regulating the practice of dentistry and dental 
hygiene in Maryland. BDE issues licenses and certificates, adopts standards of practice, 
investigates complaints based on alleged violations of regulations and statutes, and 
disciplines licensees. 
 
Dentistry 
 
To qualify for a license to practice dentistry, an individual must (1) be of good moral 
character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) hold a degree of Doctor of Dental Surgery, Doctor 
of Dental Medicine, or equivalent from a college or university that is authorized to grant 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 723/ Page 3 
the degree and recognized by BDE as requiring adequate preprofessional collegiate training 
and as maintaining an acceptable course of dental instruction; and (4) pass a specified 
examination given by BDE. 
 
“Practice dentistry” encompasses (1) performing any intraoral dental service or operation; 
(2) diagnosing, treating, or attempting to diagnose or treat any disease, injury, 
malocclusion, or malposition of a tooth, gum, jaw, or associated structure, as specified; 
(3) performing dental laboratory work; (4) placing or adjusting a dental appliance in a 
human mouth; or (5) administering anesthesia for the purposes of dentistry and not as a 
medical specialty. “Practice dentistry” includes (1) patient evaluation, diagnosis, and 
determination of treatment plans; (2) determination of treatment options, including the 
choice of restorative and treatment materials and diagnostic equipment; and 
(3) determination and establishment of dental patient protocols, dental standards, and 
dental practice guidelines. 
 
Dental Hygiene 
 
To qualify for a license to practice dental hygiene, an individual must be of good moral 
character, pass a specified examination given by BDE, and graduate from a school for 
dental hygienists that (1) requires at least two years of education in an institution of higher 
education; (2) is accredited by American Dental Association (ADA); and (3) is approved 
by BDE. 
 
In general, a dental hygienist is licensed to practice dental hygiene (1) under the supervision 
of a licensed dentist who is on the premises and available for personal consultation while 
the services are being performed or not on the premises under specified circumstances and 
(2) only in a dental office or clinic, hospital, school, charitable institution, or certified 
health maintenance organization. 
 
A licensed dental hygienist is authorized to perform a preliminary dental exam; perform a 
complete prophylaxis, including the removal of any deposit, accretion, or stain from the 
tooth surface or restoration; polish a tooth or restoration; chart cavities, restorations, 
missing teeth, periodontal conditions, and other features observed; apply a medicinal agent 
to a tooth for a prophylactic purpose; take a dental X-ray; or perform any other intraoral 
function authorized by the board. A dental hygienist who complies with specified 
requirements may prescribe (1) topical and systemic types of prescription or  
over-the-counter fluoride preparations; (2) topical antimicrobial oral rinses; and 
(3) ibuprofen not exceeding 600 mg every six hours for up to three days after nonsurgical 
periodontal therapy. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 723/ Page 4 
Out-of-state Licensure of a Dentist or Dental Hygienist 
 
A dentist or dental hygienist licensed in any other state that applies for an appropriate 
license in Maryland must (1) pay the required application fee; (2) provide adequate 
evidence that the applicant meets the qualifications otherwise required for a general license 
to practice dentistry or dental hygiene, holds a license to practice dentistry or dental 
hygiene in another state, and has satisfied specified examination requirements; (3) is not 
being investigated, disciplined, have charges pending against their license, or has not been 
convicted or disciplined by a court of any state or country for an act that would be grounds 
for disciplinary action; and (4) has not previously failed an examination for licensure in 
this State. 
 
A dentist licensed in any other state must be issued a license in Maryland if the applicant:   
 
 
has passed the American Dental Licensing Examination and the Maryland Dental 
Jurisprudence Examination given by BDE or its designee; or 
 
(1) for the five preceding years, has been actively engaged in practicing dentistry 
for at least 850 hours on average per year; (2) has passed an examination with a 
clinical component as a requirement for licensure in another state; (3) has passed a 
comprehensive written examination on applied clinical diagnosis and treatment 
planning administered by the American Board of Dental Examiners (ADEX); and 
(4) has passed the Maryland Dental Jurisprudence Examination. 
 
A dental hygienist licensed in any other state must be issued a license in Maryland if the 
applicant:   
 
 
has passed the American Dental Hygiene Licensing Examination and the Maryland 
Dental Hygiene Jurisprudence Examination; or 
 
(1) for the three preceding years, has been actively engaged in practicing dental 
hygiene for at least 150 hours on average per year; (2) has passed an examination 
with a clinical component as a requirement for licensure in another state; (3) has 
passed a comprehensive written examination on applied clinical diagnosis and 
treatment planning administered by ADEX; and (4) has passed the Maryland Dental 
Hygiene Jurisprudence Examination given by the board or its designee. 
 
BDE may adopt regulations for the content and administration of examinations and any 
other regulations necessary to provide for the licensure of dentists or dental hygienists 
licensed in any other state that apply to be licensed in Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 723/ Page 5 
Dental Radiation Technology 
 
A DRT means an individual other than a licensed dentist or dental hygienist who practices 
dental radiation technology. An individual must be certified by BDE as a DRT to place or 
expose dental radiographs. An individual may be simultaneously certified as a DRT and 
an expanded function dental assistant (a dental assistant authorized to perform specific 
intraoral procedures). 
 
To qualify as a DRT, an applicant must be (1) at least 18 years old; (2) of good moral 
character; (3) hold a high school diploma or equivalent; (4) complete BDE-approved 
educational requirements established by the Maryland State Dental Association or the 
Maryland Dental Society; (5) complete a BDE-approved course of at least 24 hours related 
to dental radiology; (6) pass an examination administered or approved by BDE; and 
(7) meet any requirements established by ADA or any applicable federal standards for 
training and certification as a DRT. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.44.19.03), an individual holding an active 
license or certification to practice dental radiation technology in any other state may be 
granted certification in the State if the individual (1) has engaged in practicing dental 
radiation technology for at least 150 hours in the three years preceding application for 
certification in the State and (2) meets any requirements established by ADA or any 
applicable federal standards for training and certification as a DRT. 
 
Health Occupations Boards – Generally 
 
Under current law, 20 health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating various 
health professions in Maryland. Many health occupations professions participate in 
interstate compacts that offer expedited authorizations to practice in other compact states. 
With specified exceptions, an individual must be licensed, certified, registered, or 
permitted by the respective board before the individual may practice in the State. Licensure, 
certification, registration, and permit requirements vary by profession but typically require, 
among other things, specified education and experience, passage of a national and/or State 
examination, and a criminal history records check.  
 
State Revenues:   
 
Out-of-state Dental Radiation Technologists 
 
Any impact on BDE special fund revenues is indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal. 
BDE special fund revenues may increase as DRTs authorized to practice in another state 
seek certification in Maryland. The initial DRT application fee for applicants that hold an 
active license or certification to practice dental radiation technology in another state is $20, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 723/ Page 6 
and the biannual renewal fee is $68. As the number of individuals who may seek a DRT 
certification under the bill is unknown, this impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Required Plan 
 
MDH must develop a plan for authorization for specified individuals to practice a health 
occupation in the State and submit the plan to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by October 1, 2025. Any impact on special fund revenues for the health 
occupations boards as a result of the plan is indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 749 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6