START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 217

Chapter 217

(House Bill 799)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Maryland Innovation Initiative ~~University~~ Institution
Partnership Extension Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Innovation Initiative ~~University~~ Institution
Partnership Extension Program; authorizing certain ~~universities~~ public and private
nonprofit institutions of higher education to participate in the Program; establishing
eligibility criteria for project proposals to receive funding under the Program;
~~requiring~~ authorizing the Governor to include an appropriation in the annual budget
bill for certain fiscal years for the Program; altering the purpose and contents of the
Maryland Innovation Initiative Fund; and generally relating to the establishment of
the Maryland Innovation Initiative ~~University~~ Institution Partnership Extension
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–454(a), (b), and (d), 10–455(a), and 10–457(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–457(b) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–461
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–454.

(a) In this part the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 217 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) “Commercialization” means the process of introducing a new product or
technology into the market.

(d) “Initiative” means the Maryland Innovation Initiative established under §
10–455 of this subtitle.

10–455.

(a) There is a Maryland Innovation Initiative.

10–457.

(a) There is a Maryland Innovation Initiative Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funding for the purposes described in [§
10–456] §§ 10–456 AND 10–461 of this subtitle.

(d) The Fund consists of:

(1) appropriations as provided in the State budget;

(2) contributions by the qualifying universities under § 10–455 of this
subtitle AND ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITIES INSTITUTIONS UNDER § 10–461 OF THIS
SUBTITLE;

(3) grants or funds from federal laboratories located in Maryland;

(4) interest or other income earned on the investment of money in the
Fund; and

(5) any other money accepted for the benefit of the Initiative.

10–461.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTION” MEANS BOWIE STATE
UNIVERSITY AND, FROSTBURG STATE UNIVERSITY, AND ANY OTHER PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE NONPROFIT INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION DEEMED ELIGIBLE BY
THE INITIATIVE.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND INNOVATION INITIATIVE
~~UNIVERSITY~~ INSTITUTION PARTNERSHIP EXTENSION PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 217

(B) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND INNOVATION INITIATIVE UNIVERSITY
INSTITUTION PARTNERSHIP EXTENSION PROGRAM.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO EXPAND OPPORTUNITIES
FOR TECHNOLOGY VALIDATION, ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT, AND
INDUSTRY ENGAGEMENT AT ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITIES INSTITUTIONS.

(C) (1) THE INITIATIVE SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE
PROGRAM.

(2) THE INITIATIVE SHALL COLLABORATE WITH AN ELIGIBLE
~~UNIVERSITY~~ INSTITUTION TO IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIPS
AND COMMERCIALIZATION OPPORTUNITIES.

(3) THE INITIATIVE MAY EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR EXPANDING
ELIGIBILITY TO OTHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE NONPROFIT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION.

(D) TO QUALIFY FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM, EACH ELIGIBLE
UNIVERSITY SHALL PAY AN ANNUAL CONTRIBUTION OF $50,000.

(E) (D) (1) ONLY AN ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTION MAY SUBMIT
PROJECT PROPOSALS FOR FUNDING UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(2) TO QUALIFY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM, A PROJECT
PROPOSAL MUST:

(I) SUPPORT THE CREATION OF A NEW TECHNOLOGY–BASED
BUSINESS IN MARYLAND;

(II) ADVANCE TECHNOLOGY TOWARD COMMERCIALIZATION OF
A PRODUCT OR SERVICE;

(III) FOSTER ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT AT THE
ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTION;

(IV) CREATE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC
IMPACT IN THE REGION AROUND THE ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTION; OR

(V) FOSTER COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE ELIGIBLE
UNIVERSITY INSTITUTION AND AN INDUSTRY PARTNER, INCLUDING:

1. PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT WITH COMMERCIALIZATION
POTENTIAL; AND
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 217 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. MATCHING FUNDS PROVIDED BY THE INDUSTRY
PARTNER.

(F) (E) (1) THE INITIATIVE SHALL DEVELOP CRITERIA TO REVIEW,
EVALUATE, AND RATE PROJECT PROPOSALS FOR FUNDING UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL DISTRIBUTE GRANTS TO
PROJECTS BASED ON THE CRITERIA DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) AN ELIGIBLE INSTITUTION SHALL PROVIDE A CASH MATCH
EQUIVALENT TO 10% OF THE AMOUNT AWARDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(G) (F) (1) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2027 AND 2028, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $500,000
$250,000 FOR THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE FUNDING PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE USED TO
SUPPLEMENT, NOT SUPPLANT, ANY FUNDS THAT WOULD OTHERWISE BE PROVIDED
TO THE INITIATIVE.

(H) (G) IN ADDITION TO INFORMATION ON THE INITIATIVE INCLUDED IN
THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CORPORATION UNDER § 10–415 OF THIS SUBTITLE,:

(1) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, THE CORPORATION SHALL
REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON SIMILAR PROGRAMS IN
NEIGHBORING STATES AND THE POTENTIAL ECONOMIC BENEFITS AND COSTS OF
EXPANDING THE INITIATIVE TO ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE NONPROFIT
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION OPERATING IN THE STATE; AND

(2) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2028, THE CORPORATION SHALL REPORT
TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025. ~~It~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~3~~ ~~years~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2028,~~
~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~
~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4