START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 786 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 786 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee, et al.) (By Request - 
Maryland Judiciary) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Appellate Court of Maryland - Sessions at Educational Institutions 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Appellate Court of Maryland to hold sessions at secondary and 
postsecondary educational institutions in the State, as designated by the Chief Judge of the 
Appellate Court of Maryland, in conjunction with the administrations of secondary and 
postsecondary educational institutions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Generally, the Appellate Court of Maryland must hold its 
sessions in the City of Annapolis. However, statute authorizes the court to hold sessions at 
the University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the University of Baltimore, as 
designated by the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland, in conjunction with the 
deans of the University of Maryland School of Law and the University of Baltimore School 
of Law. 
 
Article IV, § 14 of the Constitution of Maryland requires the Supreme Court of Maryland 
to hold its sessions in the City of Annapolis, but further provides that the court may 
temporarily “transfer their sittings elsewhere upon sufficient cause.” Accordingly, an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 786/ Page 2 
Amended Administrative Order (dated November 16, 2023) authorizes the Supreme Court 
of Maryland, beginning with the September 2023 term, to temporarily transfer up to 
two days of oral arguments per term to a secondary or postsecondary educational institution 
in the State to, among other things, promote public understanding of the court and provide 
educational benefits to students, faculty, and community members who are able to attend 
oral arguments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 629 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Anne Arundel County 
Public 
Schools; 
Baltimore 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2