START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 796 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 796 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property – Filing Fee for Residential Mortgage Foreclosure – Increase 
 
 
This bill increases, from $300 to $450, the filing fee that must accompany an order to 
docket (OTD) or a complaint to foreclose a mortgage or deed of trust on residential 
property. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD) increase by approximately $525,600 in FY 2026; future years 
reflect annualization. General fund revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2026. 
Expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$525,600 
$700,800 
$700,800 
$700,800 
$700,800 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$525,600 
$700,800 
$700,800 
$700,800 
$700,800  
 Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Initiation of the Foreclosure Process in Maryland – Generally 
 
Generally, to foreclose on residential property in Maryland, the secured party must 
first send a notice of intent to foreclose (NOI) to the mortgagor or grantor and the record 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 796/ Page 2 
owner, then file and serve an OTD or a complaint to foreclose. (Whether an OTD or a 
complaint to foreclose is appropriate is based on the lien instrument held by the secured 
party.) An OTD or a complaint to foreclose a mortgage or deed of trust on residential 
property must be accompanied by, in addition to any other filing fees required by law, a 
$300 filing fee. 
 
For information regarding the State’s foreclosure process, see the Appendix – Foreclosure 
Process. 
 
Housing Counseling and Foreclosure Mediation Fund 
 
Revenue collected from the filing fee is required to be distributed to the Housing 
Counseling and Foreclosure Mediation Fund administered by DHCD. The fund may only 
be used for specified purposes, including (1) supporting nonprofit and government housing 
counselors and other nonprofit entities with providing legal assistance to homeowners who 
are trying to avoid foreclosure or manage foreclosure proceedings; (2) supporting efforts 
by DHCD and the Maryland Department of Labor to provide advice and assistance to 
homeowners facing financial difficulty or foreclosure; and (3) assisting in funding the costs 
of foreclosure mediation provided by the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). 
 
State Revenues:  DHCD reports that there were 4,672 foreclosure fillings in fiscal 2024, 
resulting in special fund revenues of $1.4 million. To the extent that the number of filings 
stays consistent despite the fee increase in the bill, special fund revenues for the Housing 
Counseling and Foreclosure Mediation Fund increase by approximately $525,600 in 
fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date, and by $700,800 
annually thereafter. Although there is no direct impact on expenditures, additional funding 
is available for specified purposes, including funding the costs of foreclosure mediations 
provided by OAH. 
 
General fund revenues increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026, due to interest earnings 
from the additional fee revenues generated by the bill accruing to the general fund. 
 
Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024) 
and § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and Procurement Article require, notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain 
exceptions) accrue to the general fund. Section 8 of Chapter 717 applies from fiscal 2024 
through 2028 and § 6-226(a)(2) applies from fiscal 2029 forward. The Housing Counseling 
and Foreclosure Mediation Fund is not exempted from the requirement under  
§ 8 of Chapter 717 nor the requirement under § 6-226(a)(2). General fund revenues 
therefore increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 796/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business lenders are subject to increased fees under the 
bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 566 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3