START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 719 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 719 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - State Boat Act - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters definitions, regulatory requirements, Waterway Improvement 
Fund (WIF) funding limits, and fees, under the State Boat Act. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
increase by approximately $4.9 million annually beginning in FY 2026. Federal fund 
revenues likely increase minimally beginning in FY 2027. Special fund expenditures are 
expected to increase overall, potentially by $100,000 or more annually, beginning in 
FY 2026, as discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$4.9 
$4.9 
$4.9 
$4.9 
$4.9 
FF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments may benefit from greater access to WIF funding for 
local marina and other construction projects and small emergency projects. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment due to the amendments, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 719/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Personal Watercraft 
 
Current Law:  “Personal watercraft” means a Class A vessel (defined as a motorboat that 
is less than 16 feet in length, as specified in federal regulations) that: 
 
 
has an inboard motor, which uses an internal combustion engine powering a water 
jet pump as its primary source of motive propulsion; 
 
is designed for the operator and passenger to ride on the outside surfaces of the 
vessel rather than inside the vessel; 
 
has the probability that the operator and passenger may, in the normal course of use, 
fall overboard; and 
 
is designed with no open load-carrying area which would retain water. 
 
“Vessel” as it applies to the State Boat Act, means any description of watercraft, including 
an ice boat but not including a seaplane, that is used or capable of being used as a means 
of transportation on water or ice. It includes the motors, spars, sails, and accessories of a 
vessel. 
 
The Bill:  “Personal watercraft” means a vessel that is: 
 
 
propelled by a water-jet pump or other machinery as its primary source of motive 
power; and 
 
designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on the vessel. 
 
The bill removes the term “Class A vessel” both from the personal watercraft definition as 
well as from provisions governing “livery vessel owners” (requiring that their vessels are 
seaworthy and that they possess a boating safety certificate). Under the bill, livery vessel 
owners are persons who rent, lease, or charter vessels (not limited to motorboats) less than 
16 feet in length for less than 24 hours (under current law, they are defined as persons who 
rent, lease, or charter Class A (motorboat) vessels for less than 24 hours). The general 
definition of vessel is unchanged. 
 
Regulations 
 
Current Law:  DNR regulations do not become effective unless advertised publicly in at 
least two daily newspapers of general circulation and at least one weekly newspaper 
serving the area or areas involved at least 45 days before the effective date. If 50 citizens 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 719/ Page 3 
of the State file a petition with DNR at least 15 days prior to the effective date, DNR must 
conduct a public hearing on the proposed regulations. 
 
The Bill:  The publication, petition, and hearing requirements for DNR regulations 
pertaining to the State Boat Act are repealed. 
 
Manufacturer and Dealer License Fees 
 
Current Law:  A manufacturer or dealer may not conduct business in the State unless 
licensed to do so in accordance with regulations adopted by DNR. The license fee set by 
DNR may not exceed $25 (and is currently $25). 
 
The Bill:  The license fee set by DNR may not exceed $50. 
 
Vessel Fees and Applicability 
 
Current Law:  Any owner of a vessel principally used on the waters of the State and to be 
numbered must apply to DNR for a certificate of title for the vessel. DNR must charge a 
fee of $2 to issue a certificate of title, transfer of title, or a duplicate or corrected certificate 
of title. 
 
Generally, any vessel equipped with propulsion machinery of any type on the waters of the 
State must be numbered for identification in accordance with the State Boat Act and any 
related DNR regulations. There are certain exceptions and exemptions, such as a vessel 
propelled only by sail. 
 
The fee for a two-year certificate of number for vessels (including for manufacturers and 
dealers) is $24, and the fee to replace a lost, destroyed, or corrected certificate is $2. Vessels 
16 feet in length or less and equipped with a 7.5 horsepower motor or less are exempt from 
the fee. 
 
An owner of a vessel that has a valid document issued by the U.S. Coast Guard and that is 
used principally in the waters of the State for pleasure must apply to DNR for a Maryland 
use sticker. The fee for the two-year sticker is $10. 
 
Statute does not contain provisions related to a nonmotorized vessel decal. 
 
The Bill:  The bill increases, from $2 to $20, the fee DNR must charge to issue a certificate 
of title, transfer of title, or a duplicate or corrected certificate of title. 
 
The fee for a two-year certificate of number (including for manufacturers and dealers) is 
increased, from $24 to $70, and the fee for a replacement or corrected certificate is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 719/ Page 4 
increased from $2 to $20. Under the bill, there is no exemption from the fee for vessels 
16 feet in length or less and equipped with a 7.5 horsepower motor or less. 
 
The fee for a Maryland use sticker is increased, from $10 to $70. 
 
An owner of a vessel may apply to DNR for a nonmotorized vessel decal as specified if 
the vessel is (1) not equipped with propulsion machinery; (2) used principally on the waters 
of the State; and (3) not required to have a certificate of number or Maryland use sticker. 
The decal is valid for a period of up to two years and expires on December 31 of the 
calendar year following the year the decal is issued. The fee is $12. 
 
The nonmotorized vessel decal must be displayed on the exterior of the vessel. Within 
30 days after the sale or other transfer of a vessel displaying such a decal, the transferor 
must give notice of the transfer to DNR. If the transferee intends to continue to use the 
vessel principally on the waters of the State, the transferee may submit an application for 
a (new) nonmotorized vessel decal and pay the associated $12 fee. 
 
Personal Flotation Devices 
 
Current Law:  A person may not operate or permit the operation of a vessel under 21 feet 
in length while there is present in the vessel a child not wearing a personal flotation device, 
which is securely and properly attached to the child. For purposes of this requirement, 
“personal flotation device” means a Type I, II, III, or V U.S. Coast Guard approved 
personal flotation device that is the proper size for the child and in good and serviceable 
condition. 
 
A person who is in or over the waters of the State and is being towed behind a vessel must 
wear a personal flotation device. For purposes of this requirement, “personal flotation 
device” includes a life jacket, a life vest, a life preserver, a barefoot wetsuit, or a trick skiing 
wetsuit. 
 
The Bill:  References to specific types of personal flotation devices are repealed. Personal 
flotation devices for children must instead be approved by the U.S. Coast Guard. Personal 
flotation devices for children must still be properly sized, in good and serviceable 
condition, and securely and properly attached to the child. 
 
Speed Limits 
 
The Bill:  Notwithstanding any other provision of the State Boat Act, DNR may establish 
or alter by public notice: 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 719/ Page 5 
 
if DNR determines public safety is at risk and it is contrary to the public interest to 
delay action, a speed zone near (1) a construction project on or adjacent to State 
waters; (2) a marine event; or (3) an accident or other emergent situation; or 
 
an area where vessel movement is controlled, limited, or restricted as designated by 
the U.S. Coast Guard or another federal agency. 
 
DNR is also authorized to adopt regulations to implement this authority. 
 
State Boat Act Fund 
 
Under current law, the State Boat Act Fund in DNR is a special, nonlapsing fund consisting 
of any fee or other revenue DNR receives under the authority of the State Boat Act, money 
appropriated in the State budget, or money received from any other source. The fund must 
be used for administration of the State Boat Act, to cover the cost of DNR fulfilling its 
duties and responsibilities under the Act, and for other specified administrative costs. 
 
Within the limits of funds available, DNR may enter into any agreement with the federal 
government, any municipality or other political subdivision of the State, or any private 
agency to share the cost of any development, construction, or improvement of waterways 
or of facilities determined to have beneficial value to the boating public. 
 
Waterway Improvement Fund 
 
Current Law:  The provisions establishing and pertaining to WIF are contained within the 
State Boat Act. WIF finances projects and activities that promote, develop, and maintain 
Maryland’s waterways for the benefit of the boating public. With certain exceptions, a local 
government and WIF must jointly finance projects to construct marine facilities beneficial 
to the boating public. The contribution of WIF must be limited to no more than 50% of the 
cost of each project. WIF may, however, finance completely any construction project 
beneficial to the boating public, which costs $250,000 or less, regardless of its location. 
 
Other types of projects that may be financed solely by WIF include projects for dredging 
and marking channels and harbors, construction of jetties and breakwaters, and clearing 
debris, aquatic vegetation, and obstructions in navigable waters, as well as construction of 
marine facilities located within lands owned by DNR and construction of pump-out stations 
for use by the general boating public at public and private marinas. 
 
In any fiscal year, the department may spend from WIF, without legislative approval, up 
to $225,000. Up to $125,000 of that amount may be spent on specified small projects of up 
to $5,000 in cost to WIF, and up to $100,000 may be spent for boating safety and education. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 719/ Page 6 
The Bill:  The bill (1) allows for WIF to finance completely any construction project 
beneficial to the boating public that costs $500,000 (instead of $250,000) or less, regardless 
of its location; (2) establishes that WIF may also finance completely any marina 
construction project beneficial to the general boating public that costs $1.0 million or less, 
regardless of its location; and (3) establishes that WIF may finance up to 50% of the costs 
exceeding (1) $500,000 for construction projects beneficial to the boating public and 
(2) $1.0 million for marina construction projects beneficial to the general boating public. 
 
The bill also modifies the existing authorization for certain WIF funding to be spent 
without legislative approval. Instead of up to $225,000 being authorized to be spent 
(including up to $125,000 for small projects and up to $100,000 for boating safety and 
education), up to $350,000 is authorized to be spent in operating funds for small projects 
of up to $25,000 in cost to WIF per project, and separately, consistent with current law, up 
to $100,000 is authorized to be spent for boating safety and education. 
 
Background:  DNR administers the State Boat Act, which establishes a range of regulatory 
requirements for the boating industry in the State. Boat registration fees accrue to the 
State Boat Act Fund, a special fund established for the administration of the Act. DNR 
advises that the fees increased by the bill have not been increased in decades and, as a 
result, fee revenues have not kept pace with program costs. 
 
DNR advises that the bill’s changes to defined terms related to vessels and personal 
flotation devices better align with related federal definitions and ensure that statute 
properly includes electronically propelled personal watercraft moving forward. The 
provision requiring publication of proposed boating regulations in newspapers was created 
prior to the modern Administrative Procedure Act and creates a timeline that is inconsistent 
with the timelines in the Act. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues for the State Boat Act Fund in DNR increase by 
approximately $4.9 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026. Special fund revenues in 
fiscal 2026 are expected to be only marginally less than in future years, despite the bill’s 
October 1, 2025, effective date, because most of the affected fees are paid at the end of 
each calendar year. The vast majority of estimated revenue is expected from ongoing 
renewals of vessel certificates of number and Maryland use stickers, which occur at the 
end of each calendar year. 
 
Estimates for individual revenue components for fiscal 2026 and later are shown in 
Exhibit 1. Actual revenues may vary from this estimate if regulatory activity changes from 
historical levels. The estimate does not include any revenue associated with the bill’s 
voluntary nonmotorized vessel decal, although associated revenues are assumed to be 
modest in the context of the other revenue components. For illustrative purposes, DNR 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 719/ Page 7 
assumes 5,000 of such decals may be issued annually, which would generate an additional 
$60,000 in special fund revenue not included in the estimate. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Annual Special Fund Revenues, by Component 
Under Current Law and the Bill 
Fiscal 2026+ 
 
Current Law 
The Bill 
Difference 
Certificate of Title 
$50,940 
$509,420 
$458,480 
Certificate of Number 
1,786,420 
5,981,080 
4,194,660 
Certificate of Number – Replacement 
1,030 
20,580 
19,550 
Maryland Use Sticker 
36,660 
256,620 
219,960 
Maryland Use Sticker – Replacement 
50 
900 
860 
Manufacturer and Dealer Licenses 
10,680 
21,350 
10,680 
Total 
$1,885,780 
$6,789,950 
$4,904,190 
 
Note:  Revenue estimates are based on recent multiple-year average regulatory activity and have been 
rounded to the nearest $10. Does not include revenues associated with the bill’s voluntary nonmotorized 
vessel decal. The estimates account for the fact that, while current statute establishes the replacement fee 
for a certificate of number at $2, but no Maryland use sticker replacement fee, the fee in regulations and in 
practice, for both, is currently $1. 
 
Source:  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
DNR advises that federal funding for its Natural Resources Police is based, in part, on the 
quantity of numbered vessels in the State; to the extent that the bill leads to additional 
voluntary nonmotorized vessel decals, federal funding increases. While DNR cannot 
provide a precise per-vessel revenue estimate, based on prior year funding, each additional 
numbered vessel increases federal funding by about $12 per fiscal year. Accordingly, 
federal fund revenues for DNR likely increase by an unknown but modest amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures are expected to increase overall, 
potentially by $100,000 or more annually, beginning in fiscal 2026, due to the net effect of  
(1) an indeterminate increase in spending of WIF operating funds for small projects 
(discussed below) and (2) a decrease in spending (State Boat Act Fund expenditures) for 
newspaper advertising of likely less than $5,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 719/ Page 8 
The bill’s changes to the provisions governing use of WIF funding for small projects 
increase the overall amount that may be spent for small projects from $125,000 to $350,000 
and increase the per project amount from $5,000 to $25,000. DNR indicates the current 
$5,000 per project limit on the amount that may be spent on small projects (generally 
emergency maintenance/safety projects), without legislative approval, limits the extent to 
which the department is able to spend funding included in the operating budget each 
fiscal year for those projects. The fiscal 2025 budget, and the fiscal 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly, both include $275,000 for WIF-funded small projects (DLS 
notes this is above the amount currently authorized in the statutory provisions amended by 
the bill), but DNR indicates it has not been able to spend close to that amount on small 
projects in past years, primarily due to the $5,000 per project limit. In fiscal 2024, for 
example, DNR indicates it was only able to spend $96,000. Based on this information, and 
the magnitude of the increase in the per project limit from $5,000 to $25,000, it appears 
that net special fund expenditures could increase by $100,000 or more annually due to 
additional WIF expenditures for small projects under the bill, even when accounting for 
the savings from reduced spending for newspaper advertising. 
 
The bill’s provisions that increase the extent to which WIF can finance 100% of 
construction projects and marina construction projects (by establishing new cost limits per 
project of $500,000 and $1.0 million, respectively), and allow for WIF to finance up to 
50% of the costs of a project that exceed those amounts, are not expected to change the 
overall level of funding appropriated from WIF. (The Governor’s fiscal 2026 through 2030 
Capital Improvement Program includes $24.0 million in WIF funding in each of  
fiscal 2026 and 2027 and $16.0 million from fiscal 2028 through 2030.) DNR indicates 
that the increased limits, and the ability to provide up to 50% of funding for costs above 
the limits, increases flexibility in how projects are funded and allow for individual projects 
to be fully funded in one fiscal year instead of spreading the work for a project out over 
several fiscal years. 
 
DNR can handle the bill’s administrative requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments may benefit from (1) increased access to 100% 
WIF funding for local marina or other construction projects that otherwise require 
matching funding, or are funded over multiple fiscal years, in the absence of the bill, and 
(2) access to 50% WIF funding for those same projects, for costs above the limits on 100% 
WIF funding. The bill, however, does not directly affect the overall amount of funding 
provided for those projects. Local governments also benefit from increased availability of 
funding for small emergency maintenance/safety projects under the increased per project 
limit of $25,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 719/ Page 9 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses that provide goods or services for local 
governments’ small emergency maintenance/safety projects may meaningfully benefit 
from increased funding for those projects. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 239 and SB 304 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Worcester counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 719/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - State Boat Act - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 719 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Dylan Behler 
 
 
  
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation does provide for a targeted increase on fees but none are expected to have a 
meaningful impact on Maryland Small Businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 10