START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 745 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 745 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists - Behavior Analysts - 
Licensure Applications 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists to issue a 
behavior analyst license within 30 days after receiving a completed application from a 
qualified applicant. If an applicant submits an incomplete application but is determined to 
meet licensure requirements based on additional information submitted, the board must 
issue a license within 50 days of receiving the additional information. The board must 
notify an applicant for a behavior analyst license by email when the board (1) receives the 
application; (2) begins reviewing the application; (3) determines the application is 
complete or needs more information; or (4) decides to issue or deny the license. Upon 
request of an applicant (or a third party designated by the applicant), the board must send 
additional email notifications regarding the status of the application. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The board can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists licenses and 
certifies professional counselors, alcohol and drug counselors, marriage and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 745/ Page 2 
family therapists, professional art therapists, and behavior analysts; receives and resolves 
complaints; and sets standards for the practice of counseling and therapy. 
 
The “practice of behavior analysis” means the design, implementation, and evaluation of 
systematic instructional and environmental modifications to produce socially significant 
improvements in human behavior. “Practice of behavior analysis” includes (1) the 
empirical identification of functional relations between behavior and environmental 
factors, known as functional assessment and analysis and (2) interventions based on 
scientific research and the direct observation and measurement of behavior and 
environment. “Practice of behavior analysis” does not include psychological testing, 
diagnosis of a mental or physical disorder, neuropsychology, psychotherapy, cognitive 
therapy, sex therapy, psychoanalysis, hypnotherapy, counseling, or any subdiscipline of 
psychology as treatment modalities. 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by the board before practicing behavior analysis 
in the State. To qualify for a license, an individual must be (1) at least 18 years old; (2) of 
good moral character; (3) have current certification by the Behavior Analyst Certification 
Board or its successor organization; (4) have a master’s degree or higher from an accredited 
program; (5) be able to speak and write in English; and (6) meet any other requirements 
established by the board. 
 
A qualified applicant must submit an application to the board, pay the application fee, and 
submit to a criminal history records check to obtain a license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2