START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 746 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 746 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Transfers 
 
 
The bill authorizes the Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners, from 
June 1, 2025, to May 31, 2028, to approve the transfer of up to five Class B or Class D 
alcoholic beverages licenses in existence in an eligible transferor district on June 1, 2025, 
from the district to other election districts within the county. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The board can transfer the licenses with existing resources. 
Baltimore County revenues are not affected since no new licenses are created, only 
transferred between election districts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “eligible transferor district” means an election district in which the total 
number of Class B and Class D licenses, excluding exception licenses, is 10% or greater 
than the total number of Class B and Class D licenses allowed in an election district based 
on the rule of the board that limits the total number of licenses available in an election 
district by population. The number of licenses in existence prior to the transfer must not be 
greater than 25% more than the number of licenses that would otherwise exist in that 
election district, as specified. No more than two licenses can be transferred into any  
single election district. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 746/ Page 2 
When the board receives an application to transfer a license, the board must notify the 
county Department of Economic and Workforce Development (DEWD). 
 
When the license holder owns the property from which the license is to be transferred, the 
transfer application must include information on the status of the real property associated 
with the license and any plans for disposition and future use of the property. The board 
must deny a transfer if, based on an assessment provided by DEWD, (1) the applicant has 
not demonstrated that there is an appropriate future use of the property from which the 
license is to be transferred or (2) the transfer will result in significant negative economic 
impact to the community that surrounds the property. The board may waive this 
requirement if, with the concurrence of DEWD, the board finds that the license holder has 
undertaken good faith efforts to facilitate a future use of the property and mitigate any 
negative economic impacts to the surrounding community. 
 
When the license holder has no ownership in the property from which the license is to be 
transferred, DEWD may submit a letter to the board regarding the economic impact of the 
transfer on the community that surrounds the property from which the license is to be 
transferred. The board may deny a transfer based on such a letter unless the board finds 
that the applicant has undertaken a good faith effort to facilitate a future use of the property 
by advising the property owner of the intention to transfer the license to another location. 
The applicant may submit information to the board in support of the transfer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2