START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 729 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 729 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Use of Opioid Restitution Fund and Training Under the 
Overdose Response Program 
 
 
This bill repeals the explicit delineation of certain authorized uses of the Opioid Restitution 
Fund (ORF) and instead specifies that ORF may only be used to provide funds for the 
purposes specified in settlement agreements and judgments relating to claims by the State 
against the opioid industry for violations of State law. The bill establishes that these 
purposes may include addressing racial and socioeconomic disparities in access to 
prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery support services. The bill also alters 
training on responding to an opioid overdose – that the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) may provide under the Overdose Response Program (ORP) – to include 
emphasizing the restoration of breathing, avoiding withdrawal, and compassionate post 
overdose support and care. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing ORF funds may be 
used to align with the allowable uses under the National Settlement Agreement. No existing 
programs are affected under the bill. As such, there is no material fiscal or operational 
impact on MDH with respect to ORP. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 729/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the explicitly delineated authorized uses of ORF relating 
to providing funds for programs, services, supports, and resources for evidence-based 
substance use disorder (SUD) prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Opioid Restitution Fund 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 established ORF, a special fund to retain any revenues received by 
the State relating to specified opioid judgments or settlements, to be used only for 
11 delineated opioid-related programs and services. Chapter 270 of 2022 further specifies 
how ORF may be used – such that any of those originally delineated purposes must be a 
purpose of programs, services, supports, and resources for 
evidence-based 
SUD prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction. These delineated purposes are: 
 
 
improving access to overdose-reversal medications; 
 
supporting per support specialists; 
 
increasing access to medications that support recovery from SUDs; 
 
expanding the Heroin Coordinator Program; 
 
expanding access to crisis beds and residential treatment services; 
 
expanding and establishing safe stations, mobile crisis response systems, and crisis 
stabilization centers; 
 
supporting the behavioral health crisis hotline; 
 
organizing education campaigns to prevent opioid use; 
 
enforcing the laws regarding opioid prescriptions and sales; 
 
research regarding and training for substance use treatment and overdose 
prevention; and 
 
supporting and expanding other evidence-based interventions for overdose 
prevention and substance use treatment. 
 
Chapter 270 further specifies that ORF may also be used for: 
 
 
evidence-informed SUD prevention, treatment recovery, or harm reduction pilot 
programs or demonstration studies that are not evidence based if the advisory 
council determines that emerging evidence supports funding or that there is a 
reasonable basis for funding with the expectation of creating an evidence-based 
program and approves the use of money for the pilot program or demonstration 
study; and  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 729/ Page 3 
 
evaluations of the effectiveness and outcomes reporting for SUD abatement 
infrastructure, programs, services, supports, and resources for which the fund is 
used. 
 
Chapters 851 and 852 of 2024 authorize ORF to be used to support community-based 
nonprofit recovery organizations that provide nonclinical substance abuse recovery support 
services in the State.  
 
Overdose Response Program 
 
ORP allows for opioid overdose reversal drugs approved by the federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to be offered to specified individuals – free of charge – by multiple 
providers, programs, and entities. Subject to the limitations of the State budget, MDH must 
purchase and provide FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs, at no cost, to the 
entities who may provide the reversal drugs only if MDH provides them.  
 
MDH may authorize private or public entities to conduct education and training on opioid 
overdose recognition and response that includes (1) education on recognizing the signs and 
symptoms of an opioid overdose; (2) training on responding to an opioid overdose, 
including the administration of FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs; and 
(3) access to opioid overdose reversal drugs and the necessary supplies for the 
administration of the opioid overdose reversal drug. Individuals are not required to obtain 
the specified training and education on opioid overdose recognition and response from a 
private or public entity before a pharmacist may dispense an FDA-approved opioid 
overdose reversal drug. 
 
For more information on ORF, opioids, and substance use treatment in Maryland, see 
Appendix – Opioid Crisis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 594 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland’s Office of Overdose Response; Maryland Department 
of Health; Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 729/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 729/ Page 5 
Appendix – Opioid Crisis 
 
 
Opioid Overdose Deaths 
 
Between April 2015 and April 2024, 22,286 individuals died from overdose in Maryland. 
Approximately 89% of the deaths involved opioids, and 73% involved synthetic opioids 
excluding methadone (primarily fentanyl). During the same period, 801,436 individuals 
died from overdoses nationally, with 71.5% of those fatalities involving opioids. 
Since 2021, there has been a gradual decrease in overdose deaths both in Maryland and 
nationally. 
 
According to preliminary data covering April 2023 through April 2024, overdose deaths 
have decreased in both the United States and Maryland by approximately 1.9% and 2.4%, 
respectively. However, overdose fatalities remain high. Exhibit 1 shows the number of 
overdose fatalities recorded in a 12-month period (April to April) in Maryland and the 
United States from 2015 to 2024. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Overdose Fatalities in Maryland and the United States 
April 2015 to April 2024 
 
 
 
U.S.:  United States 
 
Note:  Data for 2022-2024 is preliminary. 
 
Source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Department of Legislative Services 
  
 
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
U.S. Overdose Fatalieies
Maryland Overdose Fatalities
Maryland Total
Maryland Opioid-related
U.S. Total
U.S. Opioid-related

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 729/ Page 6 
In Maryland, disparities in overdose fatalities persist across race, age, gender, and 
jurisdiction. Statewide, Black men, particularly those aged 55 and older, have the 
highest overdose fatality rate, which is nearly double that of white men, the group with the 
second highest overdose fatality rate. Across race groups, more than twice the number of 
males die by overdose compared to females, and individuals aged 55 and older comprise 
the highest number of overdose deaths among each race and gender category except for 
white females. The Maryland Overdose Response Advisory Council voted in June 2024 to 
reinstate the Racial Disparities in Overdose Task Force to study the causes of 
racial disparities and recommend solutions. 
 
Although opioid overdose fatalities are problematic statewide, the greatest concern is in 
Baltimore City. Between calendar 2018 and 2022, Baltimore City experienced an 
overdose fatality rate nearly twice that of any other U.S. city. According to the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), there were 1,891 overdose-related fatalities 
across the State from October 2023 to September 2024, of which 846 occurred in 
Baltimore City, representing approximately 45% of the State’s total overdose fatalities but 
just 9% of the State’s population. 
 
Maryland Actions to Address the Opioid Crisis 
 
Legislative Response:  The General Assembly has passed numerous bills to address the 
State’s opioid crisis, including prevention, treatment, overdose response, and prescribing 
guidelines. 
 
 
Chapters 573 and 574 of 2017 expand drug education in public schools to include 
heroin and opioid addiction prevention; require local boards of education to require 
each public school to store naloxone and other overdose-reversing medication; and 
require institutions of higher education that receive State funding to establish a 
policy that addresses heroin and opioid addiction and prevention. 
 
 
Chapter 570 of 2017 requires a health care provider to prescribe the lowest effective 
dose of an opioid and a quantity that is no greater than that needed for the expected 
duration of pain severe enough to require an opioid that is a controlled dangerous 
substance, with specified exceptions. 
 
 
Chapters 215 and 216 of 2018 require a health care provider to advise a patient of 
the benefits and risks associated with a prescribed opioid or co-prescribed 
benzodiazepine. 
 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 establishes the Opioid Restitution Fund (ORF), a special fund 
to retain any revenues received by the State relating to specified opioid judgments 
or settlements, which may be used only for opioid-related programs and services. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 729/ Page 7 
 
Chapter 82 of 2022 requires MDH to adopt a reporting system to monitor the 
prescribing of medications to treat opioid use disorders (OUDs) in the State, identify 
and reach out to prescribers who regularly prescribe nonpreferred medications, and 
identify barriers to individuals who need medication to treat an OUD to obtaining 
the medication in a timely manner. 
 
 
Chapter 224 of 2022 requires the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program to monitor 
the dispensing of naloxone medication and to maintain confidentiality with regard 
to naloxone medication data.  
 
 
Chapter 239 of 2022 broadens existing requirements and protections relating to the 
administration or provision of naloxone to encompass any opioid overdose reversal 
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and authorizes 
specified providers and organizations across the State to offer naloxone free of 
charge to individual community members. 
 
 
Chapter 408 of 2024 requires MDH to report to the legislature each year until 2026 
on (1) current opioid overdose reversal drugs approved by the FDA and (2) whether 
MDH has added each current FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to a 
standing order. 
 
 
Chapter 764 of 2024 expands the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator 
(AED) Program to include an initiative to locate up to two doses of naloxone with 
each AED in a public building. 
 
 
Chapter 886 of 2024 requires hospitals, beginning January 1, 2025, to establish 
protocols to provide appropriate care for patients admitted for opioid-related 
conditions, including overdose, possess specified medication for the treatment of 
OUD, and treat a patient who presents in an emergency room for opioid-related 
overdose or emergency medical condition, as specified. 
 
Maryland has a statewide standing order for opioid overdose reversal drugs that authorizes 
any Maryland-licensed pharmacist to dispense unlimited prescriptions and refills of 
naloxone and devices for its administration to any individual, as specified. A pharmacist 
must provide consultation with the individual regarding the naloxone dosage that is most 
appropriate, select and dispense two doses of naloxone, and provide directions for use. If a 
patient cannot afford naloxone or related copayments, or does not wish to use insurance 
coverage, pharmacists are instructed to refer them to the Opioid Response Program, where 
they can obtain a naloxone kit free of charge. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 729/ Page 8 
Legal Actions Related to the Opioid Crisis:  In October 2020, the U.S. Department of 
Justice announced a global resolution of its criminal and civil investigations of opioid 
manufacturer Purdue Pharma. However, the resolution was subject to approval by the 
bankruptcy court for the Southern District of New York, which rejected the bankruptcy 
settlement in December 2021. After multiple rejected settlements, including a  
$6 billion settlement rejected by the Supreme Court, in January 2025, Purdue agreed to a 
$7.4 billion settlement, which still requires court approval. If the deal proceeds, the 
Sackler family must also give up ownership of Purdue. 
 
Maryland and a coalition of states were part of the $21 billion Janssen settlement, a 
settlement with opioid manufacturer Johnson & Johnson and three of its distributors – 
McKesson, Cencora (formerly Amerisource Bergen), and Cardinal Health. Maryland’s 
share of the settlement is approximately $395 million over 18 years.  
 
Maryland and several other states also reached a $573 million settlement with 
McKinsey & Company in 2021. Maryland’s share of the settlement is about $12.0 million, 
the final installment of which was received in July 2024. The State was part of several other 
settlements, including ones with Walmart, Walgreens, Allergan, Teva, and Publicis Health. 
All settlement revenues are allocated to ORF, as described below. 
 
Opioid Restitution Fund:  Exhibit 2 shows the actual and projected ORF revenue from 
opioid settlements from fiscal 2022 through 2039, which is expected to total $668 million. 
 
MDH distributes this funding to local health departments, correctional facilities, and 
community organizations through block grants and competitive grants, and annually 
reports its spending to the General Assembly. The ORF Advisory Council meets 
throughout the year to discuss the best uses of funding and submit recommendations on 
spending priorities. Per the various settlement agreements, most ORF funding will be 
expended through competitive grants, and some will be distributed to local governments 
as block grants through a formula. Some ORF funding is expended at the discretion of the 
Secretary of Health who, in 2024, committed to distributing all discretionary funds through 
grants to local governments and organizations. 
 
While each Maryland county will receive block grant funding through ORF, 
Baltimore City will only receive ORF funds from just one settlement, as it opted out of all 
other settlements to pursue separate litigation in pursuit of higher award amounts. As of 
December 2024, Baltimore City has announced approximately $409.7 million in settlement 
awards, with additional settlements in progress. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 729/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 2 
Sources of Opioid Restitution Fund Revenue 
Fiscal 2022-2039 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Funding to Address the Opioid Crisis:  Maryland receives federal funding to address 
opioid misuse and overdose. Active federal grants include the Substance Abuse Block 
Grant (SABG) to address substance use disorder (SUD) and the State Opioid Response 
Grant Program targeted to address opioid misuse. MDH distributes SABGs to each 
jurisdiction for activities related to substance abuse prevention, education, and treatment, 
including for alcohol. Federal regulations require that 20% of each SABG be directed 
toward supporting prevention activities. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes nearly $485 million 
for substance abuse treatment programs, overdose response, behavioral health investment, 
and other substance abuse-related programs. There is $67.6 million budgeted for ORF, 
$10.0 million for the Office of Overdose Response, and $959,020 for the Lieutenant 
Governor’s Heroin and Opioid Task Force, all from general funds. The fiscal 2026 budget 
$71.0
$24.2
$37.0
$55.6
$44.0$41.2
$48.6 $49.3 $49.3
$36.9
$27.7$27.7
$27.7$27.7$27.7$27.7
$22.3$22.3
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
$80
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
Distributors
Janssen
McKinsey & Co.
Teva
Allergan
Walmart
Walgreens

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 729/ Page 10 
also includes $71.7 million in general funds invested in the Behavioral Health 
Administration, which can be used for a variety of purposes, including crisis services, 
inpatient services, hospital overstay, and SUD prevention and treatment. Lastly, between 
general funds, special funds, federal dollars, and reimbursable expenditures, there is a total 
$334.6 million budgeted for substance abuse-related grant programs, including SABG and 
the State Opioid Response Grant Program. 

END OF PAGE 10