START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 755 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 755 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Common Ownership Communities - Recreational Common Areas - Sensitive 
Information as Condition for Access 
 
 
This bill prohibits a cooperative housing corporation, condominium association, or 
homeowners association (HOA) from requiring certain sensitive information from a 
member, owner, or occupant (or the guest or child of such an individual) as a condition for 
accessing or using a recreational common area (e.g., reading lounge, game room, 
playground, swimming pool, etc.). “Sensitive information” means an individual’s 
(1) Social Security card or number; (2) Taxpayer Identification Number; (3) birth 
certificate; (4) racial or ethnic origin; (5) national origin; (6) citizenship or immigration 
status; (7) religious or philosophical beliefs; or (8) medical records. However, sensitive 
information does not include an individual’s government-issued photo identification, such 
as a driver’s license.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not explicitly address the provisions in the bill. Generally, 
State statute includes the Maryland Condominium Act, the Maryland Homeowners 
Association Act, and the Maryland Cooperative Housing Corporation Act, all of which 
regulate various aspects of operations. For example, the Maryland Condominium Act 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 755/ Page 2 
establishes that common elements may only be used for their intended purpose and, unless 
otherwise stated in the governing documents, are subject to mutual rights of support, 
access, use, and enjoyment by all unit owners.  
 
For more information on condominiums, HOAs, and cooperative housing corporations, 
commonly known as common ownership communities, see the Appendix – Common 
Ownership Communities.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 540 (Senator Charles, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 755/ Page 3 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COC). In Maryland, 
a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are located in some 
form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the 
exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation for Community 
Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community associations with an 
estimated 1.0 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023.  
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article.  
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article.  
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article.  
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action.  
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 755/ Page 4 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. While a small number of local governments 
(Charles and Montgomery counties) created such offices before the report’s publication, 
some local jurisdictions have since created programs to regulate or provide oversight of 
COCs. For example, Prince George’s County created its Common Ownership 
Communities Program in 2007 to assist governing bodies, as well as owners and residents 
of HOAs, residential condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with 
education, training, and alternative dispute resolution.  

END OF PAGE 4