START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 888 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 888 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Initial Teacher Certification - Qualifications 
 
 
This bill expands the options for meeting the portfolio-based assessment requirements for 
an initial teacher certificate by allowing a candidate to qualify through a portfolio-based 
assessment from a nationally accredited teacher preparation program. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding the options for graduates of approved or alternative teacher 
preparation programs to qualify for a teaching certificate through a portfolio-based 
assessment has no material fiscal effect on State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  There is no material fiscal effect on local school systems; however, there 
may be more licensed teachers available to hire. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Beginning July 1, 2025, for initial teacher certification, graduates from 
approved or alternative teacher preparation programs must:   
 
 
meet one of the following criteria:  (1) pass a nationally recognized, portfolio-based 
assessment of teaching ability; or (2) complete a local school system’s rigorous 
teacher induction program, lasting either three years or the duration a teacher can 
hold a conditional certificate, whichever is less; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 888/ Page 2 
 
meet one additional qualification from among the following:  (1) pass a basic 
literacy skills assessment approved by MSDE; (2) hold a degree from a regionally 
accredited institution with a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.0 or its equivalent; or 
(3) provide satisfactory documentation of effective evaluations from a local school 
system for three years.  
 
In addition, an individual must pass a subject specific exam and meet any other 
requirements set by the State Board of Education. 
 
Additional Comments:  As of April 1, 2024, MSDE has introduced new licenses and 
licensing requirements for educators, replacing the prior certification system. Although 
current law and the bill refer to “teacher certification,” such language is assumed to apply 
to current teacher licensure standards adopted by MSDE. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Accountability and Implementation Board; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2