START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 844 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 844 
(Delegate Otto, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Somerset County - Salaries of Local Officials - Increase 
 
 
This bill increases the salaries of certain public officials in Somerset County. Pursuant to 
constitutional requirements, the salary increases take effect at the beginning of the next 
terms of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase by at least $23,300 in FY 2027 and 
$40,000 annually thereafter. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Current and proposed salary changes for public officials in 
Somerset County are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public official from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 844/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Proposed Salary Changes for Somerset County Officials 
 
Public Official  
Current Salary 
Proposed Salary 
Sheriff 
$85,000  
$105,000  
County Commissioner 
10,000 
12,000 
County Commissioner – President 
11,000 
13,000 
County Roads Board – Member 
10,000 
12,000 
County Roads Board – President 
11,000 
13,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Expenditures:  Somerset County expenditures increase by at least $23,300 in 
fiscal 2027 and by a minimum of $40,000 annually thereafter, which accounts for the 
relevant terms of office beginning December 2026. As Somerset County did not respond 
to a request for information on the fiscal impact of the bill, the estimate does not account 
for any applicable fringe benefits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 717 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2