START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 861 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 861 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Transportation Network Companies - Weekly Fare and Earnings Summary and 
Operator Data Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires a transportation network company (TNC) to provide each transportation 
network operator with a weekly fare and earnings summary, as specified. By February 1 
each year, each TNC must submit specified information on its fares, its operators, and their 
earnings to the Public Service Commission (PSC). Any information obtained by PSC in a 
report that is not otherwise publicly available is considered a trade secret, confidential and 
proprietary, and not subject to disclosure under the Public Information Act. A report may 
be made available to the General Assembly on request, provided that the report remains 
confidential and exempt from public disclosure. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. TNCs are generally not small businesses. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The weekly fare and earnings summary must include:   
 
 
the total fares collected by the TNC for the transportation network services provided 
by the company’s operators in a given week;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 861/ Page 2 
 
the total amount of any additional fees that were charged to passengers by the TNC 
for the transportation network services provided by the company’s operators in a 
given week; 
 
the total amount the operator earned that week; 
 
the total amount the operator earned from the total fares collected that week, 
expressed as a percentage of the total fares collected; and 
 
the total amount the operator earned from the additional fees collected that week, 
expressed as a percentage of the total additional fees charged. 
 
The weekly summary may include (1) amounts earned by an operator other than amounts 
earned from providing transportation network services or (2) any additional information 
the TNC considers appropriate. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation 
network services that encompasses TNCs (i.e., companies such as Uber and Lyft) and 
transportation network operators (i.e., the drivers), including licensing, criminal history 
records checks, insurance requirements, and assessments. A TNC may not operate in the 
State unless PSC has issued a permit to the company. Generally, a transportation network 
operator may not provide transportation network services unless PSC has authorized the 
operator to operate on a provisional basis or has issued a valid temporary or permanent 
transportation network operator’s license to provide transportation network services. 
 
Neither statute nor regulations require or otherwise specifically address weekly fare and 
earnings summaries. TNCs are required to file an annual report with PSC related to 
accessibility of their services and related complaint information. 
 
“Transportation network company” means a company that operates in the State using a 
digital network to connect passengers to transportation network operators or transportation 
network partners for transportation network services. 
 
“Transportation network operator,” “transportation network partner,” or “transportation 
network driver” means an individual who:   
 
 
has been issued a transportation network operator’s license or is otherwise 
authorized, by PSC to provide transportation network services; 
 
receives, through a TNC’s digital network application, a connection to a potential 
passenger to transport the passenger between points chosen by the passenger in 
exchange for the payment of a fee to the TNC; and 
 
uses a motor vehicle that is owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the 
individual and is approved for use in providing transportation network services by 
PSC. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 861/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  According to PSC’s most recent annual report, there are 
approximately 175,000 transportation network operators in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1018 (Senator Kramer) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 9, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 9, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3