START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 820 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 820 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Utilization Review - Use of Artificial Intelligence 
 
   
This bill requires a “carrier,” a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM), or a private review 
agent (PRA) that uses “artificial intelligence” (AI), algorithms, or other software tools for 
utilization review (including working through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that 
such tools are used in a specified manner. The bill also alters the information a carrier must 
currently submit in its quarterly adverse decisions and grievances report to include whether 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in making an adverse decision.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) beginning in FY 2026 from PRA application fees. MIA can largely 
implement the bill using existing budgeted resources, as discussed below; however, special 
fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate but potentially significant amount for 
contractual services beginning in FY 2026 for compliance oversight, the cost of which may 
be passed on to carriers, PBMs, and PRAs under examination.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Artificial intelligence” means an engineered or machine-based system 
that varies in its level of autonomy and that can, for explicit or implicit objectives, infer 
from the input it receives how to generate outputs that can influence physical or virtual 
environments. “Carrier” means an insurer, nonprofit health service plan, health 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 820/ Page 2 
maintenance organization, dental plan organization, or any other person that provides 
health benefit plans subject to regulation by the State.  
 
A carrier, PBM, or PRA must ensure that: 
 
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool bases its determinations on an enrollee’s 
medical or other clinical history, individual clinical circumstances as presented by 
a requesting provider, or other relevant clinical information; 
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool does not base its determinations solely on a 
group dataset; 
 
the criteria and guidelines for using an AI, algorithm, or other software tool for 
making determinations comply with the requirements of the Insurance Article; 
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool does not replace the role of a health care 
provider in the PRA process; 
 
the use of an AI, algorithm, or other software tool does not result in unfair 
discrimination; 
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool is fairly and equitably applied, including in 
accordance with any applicable federal regulations and guidance; 
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool is open to inspection for audit or compliance 
reviews by the Insurance Commissioner; 
 
specified written policies and procedures are included in the utilization review plan 
that a PRA must submit to the Commissioner; 
 
the performance, use, and outcomes of an AI, algorithm, or other software tool are 
reviewed and revised, if necessary and at least on a quarterly basis, to maximize 
accuracy and reliability; 
 
patient data is not used beyond its intended and stated purpose; and  
 
an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not deny, delay, or modify health care 
services.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Adverse Decisions and Grievances Reporting 
 
On a quarterly basis, each carrier must submit a report to the Commissioner that describes 
specified activities regarding appeals and grievances, including:  
 
 
the number of members entitled to health care benefits under a policy, plan, or 
certificate issued or delivered in the State by the carrier; 
 
the number of clean claims for reimbursement processed by the carrier; 
 
the outcome of each grievance filed with the carrier;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 820/ Page 3 
 
the number and outcomes of cases that were considered emergency cases and 
subject to an expedited procedure;  
 
the time within which the carrier made a grievance decision on each case, including 
emergency and nonemergency cases;  
 
the number of grievances filed with the carrier that resulted from an adverse decision 
involving length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to the medical 
procedure involved; and  
 
the number of adverse decisions issued by the carrier for a nonemergency case and 
the type of service at issue in the adverse decisions. 
 
The report must also describe the number and outcome of all other cases that resulted from 
an adverse decision involving the length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to 
the medical procedure involved. 
 
The Commissioner must compile an annual summary report based on the information 
provided by carriers (and information provided by the Secretary of Health regarding health 
maintenance organizations) and provide copies of the summary report to the Governor and 
the General Assembly. 
 
Examination by Commissioner 
 
The Commissioner must conduct specified examinations of an insurer, a health 
maintenance organization, a PBM, and a PRA. The expense of these examinations must be 
paid by the person examined to cover the travel expenses, a living expense allowance, and 
a per diem as compensation for examiners, actuaries, and typists to the extent incurred for 
the examination and at reasonable rates set by the Commissioner. 
 
State Revenues:  Under the bill, PRAs must file new policies and procedures with their 
PRA applications. Each application is subject to a $1,500 filing fee. Thus, MIA special 
fund revenues increase by a minimal amount beginning in fiscal 2026 from new and 
renewal PRA filing fees. 
 
State Expenditures:  MIA must draft new regulations to provide guidance on how a policy 
or procedure complies with the bill and review additional PRA filings. MIA advises that 
promulgation of regulations and review of additional filings can be handled with existing 
budgeted resources. However, MIA must also audit or conduct compliance oversight of the 
AI, algorithm, or other software tools used by carriers, PBMs, and PRAs. MIA advises that 
it must hire or contract with subject matter experts to audit or conduct such compliance, 
which may have a significant cost. MIA is unable to quantify a cost associated with these 
contractual services at this time. However, MIA may be able to pass such costs on to those 
carriers, PBMs, and PRAs being examined. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 820/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  According to the National Association of Insurance 
Commissioners (NAIC), AI has the potential to impact the insurance industry in multiple 
ways. Claims management can be augmented using AI and machine learning techniques. 
In 2020, an NAIC Big Data and Artificial Intelligence Working Group developed 
regulatory guidance on AI that was adopted by the full NAIC membership. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4