START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 869 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 869 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Preserve Telehealth Access Act of 2025 
 
This bill makes permanent the provisions of law that specify that (1) “telehealth” includes 
specified audio-only telephone conversations between a health care provider and a patient 
and (2) reimbursement for a telehealth service must be made on the same basis and at the 
same rate as if the service were delivered in person. These provisions apply to both 
Medicaid and commercial health insurance. The bill authorizes a health care practitioner 
to prescribe a Schedule II opiate for the treatment of pain through telehealth under specified 
circumstances. The Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) must submit a specified 
report on telehealth to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2026, and 
every four years thereafter. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration decrease minimally in FY 2026 only. MHCC special fund expenditures 
increase by $100,000 in FY 2027 (and every four years thereafter) to complete the report. 
Medicaid expenditures (and federal fund revenues) for telehealth services continue beyond 
FY 2025. Any impact on overall Medicaid expenditures is indeterminate. No material 
impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$100,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($100,000) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for some local governments to continue 
to reimburse for certain telehealth services. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 869/ Page 2 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Medicaid 
 
Under current law, the definition of “telehealth” includes (1) synchronous and 
asynchronous interactions; (2) from July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2025, an audio-only 
telephone conversation between a health care provider and a patient that results in the 
delivery of a billable, covered health care service; and (3) remote patient monitoring 
services. “Telehealth” does not include the provision of health care services solely through 
an audio-only telephone conversation (with the exception of the temporary provision for 
fiscal 2022 through 2025), an email message, or a facsimile transmission. 
 
From July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2025, Medicaid must provide reimbursement for 
services appropriately provided through telehealth on the same basis and at the same rate 
as if the health care service were delivered in person. Reimbursement does not include 
(1) clinic facility fees, except as specified or (2) any room and board fees. 
 
The bill makes permanent the inclusion of an audio-only telephone conversation between 
a health care provider and a patient that results in the delivery of a billable, covered health 
care service in the definition of “telehealth” and requires Medicaid to permanently 
reimburse for services appropriately provided through telehealth, as specified. 
 
Health Insurance 
 
The definition of “telehealth” includes, from July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2025, an 
audio-only telephone conversation between a health care provider and a patient that results 
in the delivery of a billable, covered health care service. 
 
From July 1, 2021, through June 30, 2025, a carrier must provide reimbursement for a 
health care service appropriately provided through telehealth on the same basis and at the 
same rate as if the health care service were delivered in person. Reimbursement does not 
include (1) clinic facility fees, except as specified or (2) any room and board fees. 
 
The bill makes permanent the inclusion of an audio-only telephone conversation between 
a health care provider and a patient that results in the delivery of a billable, covered health 
care service in the definition of “telehealth” and requires a carrier to permanently reimburse 
for services appropriately provided through telehealth, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 869/ Page 3 
Prescribing Controlled Dangerous Substances Via Telehealth  
 
Under § 1-1003 of the Health Occupations Article, a health care practitioner may not 
prescribe a Schedule II opiate for the treatment of pain through telehealth unless (1) the 
individual receiving the prescription is in a health care facility or (2) the Governor has 
declared a state of emergency due to a catastrophic health emergency. A health care 
practitioner who, through telehealth, prescribes a controlled dangerous substance (CDS) is 
subject to any applicable regulation, limitation, and prohibition in federal and State law 
relating to the prescription of CDS. 
 
The bill authorizes a health care practitioner to prescribe a Schedule II opiate for the 
treatment of pain through telehealth if there is an established bona fide practitioner-patient 
relationship in which the health care practitioner has ongoing responsibility for the 
assessment, care, and treatment of the patient. Furthermore, the health care practitioner (or 
another health care practitioner in the same group practice) must also have previously 
conducted an in-person assessment of the patient. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission Reports on Telehealth 
 
Chapters 290 and 291 of 2023, among other actions, required MHCC to study and make 
recommendations regarding the delivery of health care services through telehealth, 
including payment parity for the delivery of health care services through audiovisual and 
audio-only telehealth technologies, and report to the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. MHCC submitted the report in October 2024. 
 
Under the bill, by December 1, 2026, and every four years thereafter, MHCC must submit 
a report to the Governor and the General Assembly on (1) advances or developments in the 
area of telehealth, including evolving modalities of telehealth delivery and changes in the 
costs of delivering telehealth services and (2) any findings or recommendations of MHCC. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHCC advises that additional resources are required to complete 
the telehealth report every four years, the first of which is due by December 1, 2026. Thus, 
special fund expenditures increase by an estimated $100,000 in fiscal 2027 (and every 
four years thereafter) for contractual services to research advances or developments in 
telehealth, evolving modalities, and changes in the cost of delivering telehealth services. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Health care providers can continue to receive reimbursement for 
telehealth services provided through audio-only conversations beyond fiscal 2025. 
Medicaid and carriers must permanently reimburse health care providers for telehealth 
services on the same basis and at the same rate as if the service were delivered in person. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 869/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 372 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4