START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 813 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 813 
(Delegate S. Johnson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration and Maryland Department of Health - 
Workgroup to Study Pharmacy Benefits Managers 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with the Prescription Drug Affordability 
Board, to convene a workgroup of interested stakeholders and third-party experts in the 
field of drug pricing in Medicaid. The workgroup must evaluate and review specified 
issues, including reimbursement for pharmacists and coverage requirements for specialty 
drugs. MIA and MDH must submit an interim report on the workgroup’s findings and 
recommendations to specified committees of the General Assembly by December 31, 2025, 
and a final report by December 31, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 
50% federal funds) increase by $51,300 in FY 2026 and $21,100 in FY 2027 for personnel 
to support the workgroup. Federal fund revenues increase correspondingly. MIA special 
fund expenditures may increase by an indeterminate amount, in FY 2026 and 2027 only, 
for consultant services. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FF Revenue 
$25,600 
$10,600 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$51,300 
$21,100 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($25,600) 
($10,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 813/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must review (1) reimbursement for pharmacists; 
(2) coverage requirements for specialty drugs; (3) exemptions for pharmacy benefits 
management regulation under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(ERISA); (4) costs associated with pharmacies contracting with commercial plans versus 
contracting with the Maryland Medicaid program; and (5) specified provisions of State law 
regarding pharmacy benefits managers (PBMs), specialty pharmacies, and anti-steering. 
 
In reviewing reimbursement for pharmacists, the workgroup must consider:   
 
 
existing Medicaid requirements for PBMs and managed care organizations related 
to dispensing fee reimbursement, PBM fees charged to pharmacies and Medicaid, 
transparency in pricing and reimbursement data, specialty drug designations, and 
appeals processes; 
 
the operation of Medicaid pharmacy benefits services in other states, including 
Ohio, Kentucky, New York, California, and West Virginia; 
 
measures that offset MDH’s costs to fund Medicaid and adopt National Average 
Drug Acquisition Cost plus the fee-for-service professional dispensing, as specified; 
and 
 
strategies for adopting pharmacy reimbursement parity and drug pricing 
transparency. 
 
With respect to coverage requirements for specialty drugs, the workgroup must review 
which drugs are considered specialty for purposes of formularies across carriers and PBMs 
and what these drugs have in common for purposes of developing a new definition for 
“specialty drug.”  
 
As part of reviewing ERISA exemptions for pharmacy benefits management regulation, 
the workgroup must consider (1) the scope of Rutledge v. Pharmaceutical Care 
Management Association and subsequent case law and federal guidance; (2) how other 
states have responded to the Rutledge decision; and (3) what, if any, other State laws should 
be amended.  
 
The workgroup must also review § 15-1611.1 (choice of pharmacy by beneficiary) and 
§ 15-1612 (reimbursement for pharmaceutical products or pharmacist services) of the 
Insurance Article and the effect of those sections on pharmacy costs in the fully insured 
market. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 813/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Specialty Drugs 
 
A “specialty drug” means a prescription drug that (1) is prescribed for an individual with a 
complex, chronic, or rare medical condition; (2) costs $600 or more for up to a 30-day 
supply; (3) is not typically stocked at retail pharmacies; and (4) requires either a difficult 
or unusual process of delivering the drug to the patient or enhanced patient education, 
management, or support before or after administration of the drug. A specialty drug does 
not include a prescription drug prescribed to treat diabetes, HIV, or AIDS; it does include 
a prescription drug prescribed to treat multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C, rheumatoid arthritis, 
cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, or multiple myeloma. 
 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 
ERISA contains a preemption clause stating that the Act “shall supersede any and all state 
laws insofar as they relate to any employee benefit plan.” These benefits include health 
care. State reforms have often come into conflict with ERISA when they relate, directly or 
indirectly, to employee benefits.  
 
In 2020, the Supreme Court ruled in Rutledge v. Pharmaceutical Care Management 
Association, 592 U.S. 80 (2020) that ERISA did not preempt an Arkansas law requiring 
PBMs to reimburse pharmacies at least their acquisition costs for prescription drugs, thus 
allowing states to regulate PBMs and drug reimbursement. In its ruling, the Supreme Court 
held that “ERISA does not preempt state rate regulations that merely increase costs or alter 
incentives for ERISA plans without forcing plans to adopt any particular scheme of 
substantive coverage.” 
 
Pharmacy Benefit Managers 
 
Title 15, Subtitle 16 of the Insurance Article governs PBMs. A PBM is a business that 
administers and manages prescription drug benefit plans for purchasers. A PBM must 
register with MIA prior to providing pharmacy benefits management services. 
 
Section 15-1611.1 of the Insurance Article prohibits a PBM from requiring that a 
beneficiary use a specific pharmacy or entity to fill a prescription if (1) the PBM or a 
corporate affiliate of the PBM has an ownership interest in the pharmacy or entity or (2) the 
pharmacy or entity has an ownership interest in the PBM or a corporate affiliate of the 
PBM. 
 
Section 15-1612 of the Insurance Article prohibits a PBM from reimbursing a pharmacy 
for a pharmaceutical product or pharmacist service in an amount less than the amount that 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 813/ Page 4 
the PBM reimburses itself or an affiliate for providing the same product or service. This 
prohibition does not apply to reimbursement for specialty drugs, mail order drugs, or to a 
chain pharmacy with more than 15 stores. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Medicaid expenditures increase by $51,292 (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) in 
fiscal 2026, which assumes a 30-day start up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective 
date. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. This estimate reflects the cost of MDH 
hiring one part-time (50%) health policy analyst to staff the workgroup and prepare the 
required reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, and one-time start-up costs. 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$44,199 
$20,855 
Operating Expenses 
7,093 
279 
Total Medicaid Expenditures 
$51,292 
$21,134 
 
Fiscal 2027 expenditures reflect a partial year salary with an annual increase and employee 
turnover, annual increases in operating expenses, and elimination of the contractual 
position on December 31, 2026, when the final report is due. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration 
 
While existing MIA staff are available to support the workgroup, MIA advises that the 
scope and complexity of the workgroup’s charge may require consultants to complete 
certain tasks. At this time, MIA advises that it cannot reliably estimate the cost of such 
services. Thus, MIA special fund expenditures may increase by an indeterminate amount 
for consultant services in fiscal 2026 and 2027 only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 813/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 438 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5