START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 841 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 841 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Gaming - Charles County Gaming Permit Review Board - Repeal 
 
   
This bill repeals the Charles County Gaming Permit Review Board, and the county attorney 
must assume the board’s duties and responsibilities. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations.     
  
Local Effect:  Repealing the Charles County Gaming Permit Review Board and 
transferring responsibilities to the Charles County attorney has no fiscal impact as the 
Charles County attorney has already assumed the board’s duties and responsibilities.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Charles County Gaming Permit Review Board consists of 
seven members, including a representative of the Charles County Sheriff’s Office, a 
representative of the Department of State Police, a representative of a fundraising 
organization in the community, an individual with a background and experience in finance, 
and three individuals appointed from the county at large. Additionally, each board member 
must be a resident of Charles County. The board’s chairperson is selected from among its 
members for a term set by the board.  
 
The board may make recommendations to the county commissioners regarding the types 
of gaming devices that may be operated in the county, the approval or denial of gaming 
permits, and any modifications of the county gaming regulations and procedures.        

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 841/ Page 2 
The board must review gaming permit applications at least quarterly, review gaming 
regulations and permit procedures, keep specified records, and undertake any other duties 
relating to gaming regulation that the county commissioners delegate. As the county 
commissioners consider appropriate, the county commissioners must provide for the board 
a clerk, legal counsel, supplies, and funding, and the county commissioners may pay 
salaries to the board members. 
 
Charles County Gaming Events 
 
A gaming event may only be conducted by a fundraising organization that has been located 
in the county for at least five years before applying for a gaming permit, and a fundraising 
organization must obtain a gaming permit for each gaming event that the fundraising 
organization conducts. A gaming event is an event that involves a game of chance, and 
includes a carnival, a bazaar, and a raffle involving prizes exceeding $1,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 730 (Charles County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2