START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 860 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 860 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Judiciary and Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Nuisance - Common Carriers - Damage to Public Infrastructure 
 
This bill prohibits a “common carrier” or an employee of the common carrier from causing 
damage to “public infrastructure” that necessitates the closure of the public infrastructure. 
A violation of this prohibition is a public nuisance, and the State (for State public 
infrastructure) or counsel designated or retained by a local government (for local 
government public infrastructure) may bring an action against a common carrier for a 
public nuisance caused by a violation. The State or a local government may seek injunctive 
relief, declaratory relief, and compensatory damages for the cost of the repair or 
replacement of the affected infrastructure. A common carrier that commits a violation may 
be liable to the State or local government for civil penalties of $1,000 per day for each day 
the public nuisance continues until the public infrastructure is sufficiently repaired for 
public use or is replaced. The State or a local government may file an action against a 
common carrier under the bill at any time following the violation giving rise to the cause of 
action and until the public infrastructure is sufficiently repaired for public use or is replaced. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As discussed below, general fund revenues may increase from penalties 
imposed on common carriers. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) finances may be impacted 
if the State is awarded and collects damages for repair or replacement of damaged public 
infrastructure. TTF and nonbudgeted expenditures may increase, at least minimally, if the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) or Maryland Transportation Authority 
(MDTA) litigate cases, respectively. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues may increase from penalties imposed on common carriers. 
Local expenditures may decrease if a local jurisdiction is awarded and collects damages 
for repairs or replacement of damaged public infrastructure and may be partially offset by 
increased expenditures for local governments to retain outside counsel to litigate cases. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 860/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Common carrier” means a person that is engaged in the public 
transportation of persons for hire by land, including, among other things, a motor bus 
company, a railroad company, and a transit company. “Common carrier” does not include 
any entity owned by the State or a local government. 
 
“Public infrastructure” means a bridge or highway owned, controlled, or maintained by the 
State or a county or municipal government. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Government Regulation of Nuisances 
 
The State has the authority to abate nuisances (generally, conditions that adversely affect 
others, through injury, discomfort, or other means) in the exercise of its police power and 
has authorized local governments to similarly guard against and address nuisances. There 
are various provisions, of varying applicability, throughout State statute addressing 
nuisances and their abatement. 
 
Public Nuisance – Torts 
 
According to § 821B of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, a public nuisance is an 
unreasonable interference with a right common to the general public. The following are 
examples of factors in a public nuisance claim:  whether the conduct involves a significant 
interference with the public health, public safety, or public convenience; whether the 
conduct is proscribed by statute or regulation; and whether the conduct is of a continuing 
nature or has produced a permanent or long-lasting effect, and, as the actor knows or has 
reason to know, has a significant effect upon the public right. 
 
Chapter 137 of 2024 
 
Chapter 137 of 2024 established procedural requirements and options for the State in 
obtaining relief in an action brought by the State arising from or related to alleged or 
threatened injuries to the environment, infrastructure, or the natural resources of the State 
associated with the March 2024 collision of the Dali cargo ship into the Francis Scott Key 
Bridge. 
 
The Act requires a judge or jury in an applicable action to (1) make a determination of the 
total liability, including damages, costs, and any other available relief; (2) assign 
comparative responsibility to each party joined in the action, based on the party’s relative 
degree of fault or responsibility for the total liability; and (3) determine the liability of a 
group of related persons on a collective basis, if required by equity. If the State does not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 860/ Page 3 
obtain complete relief from a responsible person who has resolved their liability through a 
settlement with the State, the State may continue to pursue an action against or bring a new 
action against any other responsible person who has not resolved the person’s liability to 
the State. If a responsible person resolves the person’s liability to the State in a settlement 
of an applicable action, the person may not be liable for claims for noncontractual 
contribution or indemnity regarding any action or claim resolved in the settlement. A 
settlement of an applicable action that resolves the liability of a responsible person does 
not release from liability any other responsible person except as specifically provided in 
the terms of the settlement. However, it does reduce the potential liability of all other 
responsible persons liable in whole or in part by the larger of the settling person’s 
proportionate share of liability or the amount the settling person pays to settle the action. 
 
The Maryland Uniform Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors Act does not apply to an 
action governed by the provisions within Chapter 137. The provisions within Chapter 137 
may not be construed to impair any express contractual rights; create new types of actions 
or claims; alter the burden of proof, causation standard, or elements of an action or claim 
governed by the bill; or grant authority to the State or the Attorney General to bring actions 
or claims not otherwise authorized by law. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The circumstances under which the bill applies, which then determine 
the magnitude of the bill’s fiscal impact, are unpredictable and cannot be reliably estimated 
in advance. However, should such applicable events occur, general fund revenues may 
increase from penalties imposed on common carriers; TTF and MDTA finances may also 
be impacted if the State recoups costs for repair or replacement of public infrastructure 
damaged by a common carrier. 
 
The Office of the Attorney General advises that the bill has a minimal impact on the legal 
staff at MDOT (the agency most likely affiliated with State public infrastructure). MDOT 
advises that TTF expenditures may increase for related litigation. MDTA is funded by 
nonbudgeted toll revenues; MDTA may incur nonbudgeted expenditures if it engages in 
related litigation. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues may increase from penalties imposed on common 
carriers. Local expenditures may increase to retain outside counsel; if county attorneys 
litigate these cases, then the bill has an operational effect on those offices. The bill may 
also reduce local expenditures for repairs to damaged infrastructure.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on small business common 
carriers that are sued by the State or a local jurisdiction under the bill and/or are subject to 
civil penalties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 860/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1126 and SB 785 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the 
Attorney General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4