START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 835 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 835 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Charles County - Alcoholic Beverages - Baseball Stadium License - Alterations 
 
 
This bill prohibits, in Charles County, a Class B-Stadium (baseball stadium) beer, wine, 
and liquor license holder from selling alcoholic beverages in parking areas of the stadium. 
The bill authorizes patrons to consume and carry beer, wine, and liquor anywhere on the 
stadium premises, excluding any parking areas. Finally, the bill repeals the authorization 
for a Class B-Stadium license to sell beer, wine, and liquor served in Styrofoam containers 
on the licensed premises and clarifies these alcoholic beverages must be served in plastic, 
paper, or other nonglass containers. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Charles County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A Class B-Stadium license may only be issued in Charles County to the 
owner of a professional team franchise or a private concessionaire that is under contract 
with either the county or a professional baseball team franchise. Beer, wine, and liquor may 
only be sold at the stadium to individuals attending baseball games or other events being 
held at the stadium and only for on-premises consumption. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 835/ Page 2 
Beer, wine, and liquor must be served in plastic, Styrofoam, or paper containers on the 
stadium premises, except in enclosed stadium dining areas, where beer, wine, and liquor 
may be served in a glass. 
 
A patron may consume and carry beer and wine anywhere on the stadium premises; 
however, a patron may consume liquor only in the enclosed stadium dining area or bar and 
may not carry liquor out of these areas. Individuals are not permitted to carry alcoholic 
beverages onto or from the premises. 
 
The Charles County Board of License Commissioners may adopt additional regulations on 
the number of outlets authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages, the manner of dispensing 
alcoholic beverages, and the hours and days of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the 
licensed venue. The annual license fee is $2,200. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 731 (Charles County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2