START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 894 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 894 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Endangered and Threatened Species - Incidental Taking - Bats 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Secretary of Natural Resources to issue a permit that authorizes an 
incidental taking of the Indiana bat, the northern long-eared bat, the tricolored bat, or the 
eastern small-footed bat if an applicant submits a conservation plan and the Secretary 
makes certain findings.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the Secretary to issue a permit to an applicant that 
authorizes an incidental taking of the Indiana bat, the northern long-eared bat, the tricolored 
bat, or the eastern small-footed bat if:   
 
 
the applicant submits a conservation plan to the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) that specifies (1) the impact that will likely result from the incidental taking; 
(2) the steps that the applicant will take to minimize and mitigate the impact; 
(3) the funding that will be available to implement the steps; (4) the alternative 
actions to the incidental taking that the applicant considered and the reasons that the 
alternatives were not used; and (5) any other measures that the Secretary requires as 
being necessary or appropriate for the purposes of the plan; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 894/ Page 2 
 
the Secretary finds that (1) the incidental taking will not appreciably reduce the 
likelihood of the survival or recovery of the Indiana bat, the northern long-eared bat, 
the tricolored bat, or the eastern small-footed bat in the wild; (2) the applicant will, 
to the extent practicable, minimize and mitigate the impacts of the incidental taking; 
(3) adequate funding for the conservation plan is available and the plan will be 
implemented; and (4) the applicant has obtained the required federal authorization 
for the incidental taking of the Indiana Bat, the northern long-eared bat, the 
tricolored bat, or the eastern small-footed bat.  
 
The Secretary may adopt regulations to implement and enforce the bill.  
 
Current Law:  The State’s Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, and 
DNR regulations implementing the Act, generally prohibit taking, possession, 
transportation, or trade of threatened and endangered species, subject to specified 
exceptions. “Endangered species” is defined as any species whose continued existence as 
a viable component of the State’s wildlife or plants is determined to be in jeopardy, 
including any species of wildlife or plant determined to be an endangered species pursuant 
to the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA). “Threatened species” is any species of 
wildlife or plants, which appears likely, within the foreseeable future, to become 
endangered, including any determined to be a threatened species pursuant to ESA.  
 
Under the Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, “incidental taking” means 
the taking of listed species that is incidental to, and not the purpose of, the carrying out of 
an otherwise lawful activity.  
 
The Indiana bat and the northern long-eared bat are listed as endangered species under ESA 
and are therefore endangered under the State’s Nongame Endangered Species 
Conservation Act. The eastern small-footed bat is not listed as an endangered species under 
ESA but is listed as endangered under the State’s Nongame Endangered Species 
Conservation Act. ESA allows for a permit to be issued for incidental taking of endangered 
wildlife, but the State’s Nongame Endangered Species Conservation Act does not.  
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR advises the bill could have a meaningful impact on small 
businesses that otherwise have to comply with time-of-year or other restrictions (in areas 
known to support endangered bats) on activities that could result in an incidental taking of 
endangered bats.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 894/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 946 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3