START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 853 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 853 
(Delegate Pasteur, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Postconviction Review - Procedure to Reduce Duration of Sentence (Maryland 
Second Look Act) 
 
 
This bill expands application of the Juvenile Restoration Act of 2021 (§ 8-110 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article) to allow an individual to file a motion to reduce a sentence 
under the Act’s provisions and procedures if  the individual (1) was convicted of an offense 
committed when the individual was at least age 18 but younger than age 25; (2) was not 
sentenced to life without the possibility of parole; (3) is not a sex offender, as defined in 
§ 11-701 of the Criminal Procedure Article; (4) has been imprisoned for at least 20 years 
for the offense; and (5) was not convicted of murder involving a victim who was a first 
responder who was killed in the line of duty. The bill also adds specified protections for 
victims for all proceedings under § 8‐110. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) 
increase by a minimum of $538,100 in FY 2026. Future years reflect annualization and 
inflation and account for staffing costs only, as discussed below. General fund expenditures 
for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) decrease if 
incarcerated individuals are released from State correctional facilities under the bill. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
538,100 
642,100 
670,500 
700,400 
730,300 
Net Effect 
($538,100) 
($642,100) 
($670,500) 
($700,400) 
($730,300) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase minimally for State’s Attorneys’ offices 
to handle petitions generated by the bill. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 853/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill adds the following victim protections for all proceedings under 
§ 8‐110:  (1) a victim or victim’s representative may submit a victim impact statement to 
the court regarding the impact of the crime and the proposed sentence reduction; (2) a 
victim may not be cross examined when presenting a victim impact statement; (3) the court 
must order an individual to stay away from and refrain from contact with a victim and 
victim’s family if the individual is released, unless the victim requests otherwise; and 
(4) the court may impose any other conditions of release necessary to promote victim safety 
and peace of mind. 
 
Current Law:  An individual convicted of a crime who wishes to have the sentence 
reduced has multiple alternatives. One option is the Juvenile Restoration Act 
(Chapter 61 of 2021), which provides an opportunity for an individual convicted as an adult 
for an offense committed when the individual was a minor to file a motion with the court 
to reduce the duration of the individual’s sentence.  
 
Among other provisions, the Juvenile Restoration Act authorizes an individual who was 
convicted as an adult for an offense committed when the individual was a minor to file a 
motion with the court to reduce the duration of the individual’s sentence if the individual 
(1) was sentenced for the offense before October 1, 2021, and (2) has been imprisoned for 
at least 20 years for the offense. 
 
The court must conduct a hearing on the motion. The individual must be present at the 
hearing, unless the individual waives that right. This requirement may be satisfied if the 
hearing is conducted by video conference. At the hearing, the individual may introduce 
evidence in support of the motion, and the State may introduce evidence in support of or 
in opposition to the motion. The victim or the victim’s representative must be given notice 
of the hearing in accordance with §§ 11-104 and 11-503 of the Criminal Procedure Article. 
 
After a hearing, the court may reduce the duration of a sentence imposed if the court 
determines that the individual is not a danger to the public, and the interests of justice will 
be better served by a reduced sentence. The court must consider specified factors when 
determining whether to reduce the duration of a sentence, including (1) the individual’s 
age at the time of the offense; (2) the nature of the offense and the history and 
characteristics of the individual; (3) whether the individual has completed an educational, 
vocational, or other program; (4) whether the individual has demonstrated maturity, 
rehabilitation, and fitness to reenter society sufficient to justify a sentence reduction; 
(5) any statement offered by a victim or a victim’s representative; (6) the individual’s 
family and community circumstances at the time of the offense, including any history of 
trauma, abuse, or involvement in the child welfare system; and (7) the diminished 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 853/ Page 3 
culpability of a juvenile as compared to an adult, including an inability to fully appreciate 
risks and consequence. 
 
The court must issue a written decision that addresses the specified factors. If the court 
denies or grants, in part, a motion to reduce the duration of the sentence, the individual may 
not file a second motion for at least three years. If the court denies or grants, in part, a 
second motion, the individual may not file a third motion for at least three years. With 
regard to any specific sentence, an individual may not file a fourth motion to reduce the 
duration of the sentence. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Office of the Public Defender  
 
General fund expenditures for OPD increase by a minimum of $538,061 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring four attorneys, one social worker, and one administrative employee. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start‐up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
6.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$493,848 
Operating Expenses 
44,213 
FY 2026 OPD Staffing Expenditures 
$538,061 
 
Additional legal representation will be provided by panel attorneys, law school clinics, and 
volunteer private attorneys. However, OPD advises that it cannot estimate projected costs 
for panel attorneys at this time; therefore, such costs are not included in the estimate above. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
According to DPSCS, approximately 656 incarcerated individuals in the Division of 
Correction (DOC) currently meet the bill’s eligibility criteria. Initial workloads are likely 
to be heavy as OPD compiles and evaluates casefiles for eligible individuals within the 
DOC population, prepares their motions, and presents their motions at court hearings. 
Future workloads are likely to stabilize over time and involve newly eligible incarcerated 
individuals and repeat motions for individuals whose previous motions were denied.  
 
For reference, OPD’s Post-Conviction Defenders Unit has 24 attorneys (26 by  
August 2025) and 1 unfilled attorney vacancy; the unit has 7 additional staff, including  
1 paralegal and administrative employees. OPD’s Appellate Division currently has  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 853/ Page 4 
32 attorneys (33 by August 2025); the unit has 7 additional staff, including 2 paralegals 
(1 of whom is a contractual employee) and administrative employees. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures for DPSCS decrease if the bill shortens incarcerations. The 
extent to which to this occurs depends on judicial decisions on filed motions and can only 
be determined with actual experience under the bill. Many of the factors judges must 
consider under the bill are natural considerations during the parole process. Excluding 
overhead and all health care (which is a fixed cost under the current contract), the average 
variable costs total $312 per month. 
 
For context, according to OPD’s report on its efforts in the first year of the Juvenile 
Restoration Act, courts decided 36 motions during the first year of the Act. The following 
is a summary of the outcomes in those 36 cases: 
 
 
23 cases (63.9%) – motion granted and individual released from prison; 
 
4 cases – court granted the motion in part and reduced the remaining incarceration 
time the individual must serve prior to release; 
 
7 cases – court reached the merits but denied the motion; 
 
1 case – court denied the motion without a hearing due to ineligibility; and 
 
1 case – the individual was released on parole after the motion was filed but before 
the hearing (the court modified the sentence to place the individual on probation 
with conditions designed to maximize the individual’s chances of success). 
 
As noted above, the Juvenile Restoration Act is currently limited to individuals who were 
convicted as adults for crimes they committed as minors. It is not clear at this time if the 
population eligible to file a motion under the bill will experience similar judicial outcomes. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary advises that it does not anticipate a significant operational impact from the 
bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 123 and HB 724 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 853/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5