START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 857 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 857 
(Delegate Hornberger, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Pursuing Wounded Deer After Legal Hunting Hours and 
Using a Light - Authorization 
 
 
This bill allows a person who is authorized by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
to hunt deer, who wounds a deer during legal hunting hours, to pursue and kill the deer 
after legal hunting hours, and to use a light or throw or cast the rays of a spotlight, a 
headlight, an artificial light, a battery, or any other device while pursuing the wounded 
deer. The bill requires that the person use only the means authorized for the applicable 
hunting season or permit to kill the deer. DNR must adopt regulations to implement this 
bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Restrictions on Hunting Wildlife – Generally 
 
Under § 10-410 of the Natural Resources Article, which establishes restrictions on hunting 
wildlife, a person may not hunt any game bird or mammal, except raccoon and opossum, 
at nighttime. “Nighttime” means the time beginning one-half hour after sunset and ending 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 857/ Page 2 
one-half hour before sunrise the following day, as published in DNR’s hunter’s guide, 
unless otherwise provided by statute. In addition, Sunday hunting, on certain Sundays, in 
certain counties, is restricted to morning hours, from one-half hour before sunrise until 
10:30 a.m.  
 
Section 10-410 also prohibits (1) a person or two or more persons together from hunting 
or attempting to hunt at nighttime any species of wild bird or wild quadruped with a light, 
including the headlights of any vehicle, and (2) a person from casting the rays of any 
artificial light when the rays emanate from a vehicle on any woods, fields, orchards, 
livestock, wild animals or birds, dwellings, or buildings. These prohibitions do not apply 
to, among other things, the normal use of headlights of a vehicle traveling on any public or 
private road in a normal manner. In addition, raccoons, fox, or opossum may be hunted on 
foot at nighttime during open season with the use of a dog or light, or both. 
 
Deer Hunting – Prohibited Methods 
 
A person or two or more persons together may not throw or cast the rays of a spotlight, 
headlight, artificial light, battery, or other device on any highway or in any field, woodland, 
or forest while possessing or having under control a firearm or other implement by which 
any deer could be killed, even though the deer is not shot at, injured, or killed. This 
prohibition does not apply where the headlight of a motor vehicle, operated by any person 
traveling on a highway in the usual way, casts a light upon deer on or adjacent to the 
highway and there was no attempt or intent to locate the deer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 100 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 857/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 25, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3