START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 887 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 887 
(Delegate Valderrama, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Accountants - Licensed Out-of-State Practice Privileges - Qualifications 
 
 
This bill alters the qualifications for an individual licensed as a certified public accountant 
(CPA) in another state to practice certified public accountancy in Maryland. Specifically, 
the bill repeals a requirement that the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy 
(NASBA) verify that the requirements of the other state be substantially equivalent with 
the licensure requirements of the Uniform Accountancy Act. Instead, the bill requires that 
the individual pass the Uniform CPA Examination to qualify for the license in the other 
state (in addition to holding a valid license as a CPA from the other state, pursuant to 
current requirements). The bill also repeals related provisions regarding NASBA standards 
for out-of-state CPAs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Public Accountancy can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing resources. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are likely 
not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Public Accountancy regulates and licenses individuals 
acting as CPAs and issues permits to business entities that provide public accountancy 
services. Practicing certified public accountancy means, among other things, to (1) conduct 
an audit; (2) conduct any examination, review, or agreed-upon procedures engagement to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 887/ Page 2 
be performed in accordance with the Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements 
issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; or (3) provide a written 
certificate or opinion offering positive or negative assurance or full or limited assurance on 
the correctness of the information or on the fairness of the presentation of the information 
in certain documentation. 
 
Licensed Out-of-state Accountants 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by the board to practice certified public 
accountancy in the State. However, an individual whose principal place of business is 
outside the State is exempt from that requirement and must be considered to have 
qualifications that are substantially equivalent to a Maryland licensee if (1) the individual 
holds a valid license as a CPA from another state and (2) the requirements of that state have 
been verified by NASBA as substantially equivalent with the licensure requirements of the 
Uniform Accountancy Act. An individual who qualifies for an exemption in this manner 
may exercise all of the privileges of a licensed CPA in Maryland. 
 
An individual who is licensed by a state that the NASBA National Qualification Appraisal 
Service has not verified to be in substantial equivalence with the CPA licensure 
requirements of the Uniform Accountancy Act may exercise all of the privileges of a 
licensed CPA if the individual (1) retains a principal place of business outside of the State; 
(2) holds a valid license as a CPA; and (3) has qualifications that the NASBA National 
Qualification Appraisal Service has determined to be substantially equivalent to the 
CPA licensure requirements of the Uniform Accountancy Act. An individual who has 
passed the Uniform CPA Examination and holds a valid license issued by another state 
prior to January 1, 2012, may be exempt from the education requirements in the 
Uniform Accountancy Act. The bill repeals these requirements. 
 
Regardless of any other provision of law, an individual who qualifies for a practice 
privilege under these provisions may practice certified public accountancy in the 
State (1) by any means, including mail, telephone, or electronic communication and 
(2) without any notice, fee, or other submission to the board.  
 
As a condition of the practice privilege, an individual who is licensed by another state and 
qualifies pursuant to the above requirements must consent to (1) the personal and subject 
matter jurisdiction and disciplinary authority of the board; (2) complying with State public 
accountancy laws and regulations adopted by the board; (3) the appointment of the board 
that issued the individual’s license to practice certified public accountancy as the agent 
upon which process may be served in any action or proceeding by the board against the 
individual; and (4) ceasing to offer or provide services in Maryland (i.e., that are subject to 
State regulation) if the license issued by the state in which the individual’s principal place 
of business is located is no longer valid. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 887/ Page 3 
An individual authorized to practice certified public accountancy under these provisions 
and under the practice privilege may represent to the public (by use of specified titles, by 
description of services, methods, or procedures, or otherwise) that the individual is 
authorized to practice certified public accountancy in Maryland. However, a sole 
practitioner who is practicing in Maryland under the practice privilege may only perform 
attest services, as specified, through a firm that holds a permit issued under State law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 51 (Senator Ellis) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3