START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 886 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 886 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System – Deferred Vested Former Members – 
Return to Service 
 
This bill allows, as specified, members of the State Police Retirement System (SPRS), 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS), and Law Enforcement Officers’ 
Pension System (LEOPS) who were members on or before June 30, 2011, had a specified 
break in service, and return to service after that date to be subject to the same benefits as a 
member who did not have a break in service. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Likely no discernible effect on State retirement liabilities and contribution 
rates, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Likely no discernible effect on retirement liabilities and contribution rates 
for participating governmental units. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To be eligible to resume membership in the pre-2011 benefit structures, a 
member of SPRS, CORS, or LEOPS must:   
 
 
be separated from employment for at most four years; 
 
be separated from employment for specified military service and resume 
employment within one year of leaving military service; or 
 
have been vested at the time of the break in service. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 886/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Among other changes, Chapter 397 of 2011 altered the vesting requirement 
(from 5 years to 10 years) and the calculation of average final compensation (from the 
average of the 3 highest years to the average of the 5 highest years) for members of all 
State plans hired on or after July 1, 2011. (Chapter 397 also raised the years of service 
required for retirement from SPRS from 22 years to 25 years for members hired on or after 
July 1, 2011.) Thus, there is a less generous benefit structure for members of SPRS, CORS, 
or LEOPS who (1) were members on or before June 30, 2011; (2) have a break in service; 
and (3) return to covered employment under the new benefit structure. There is no 
provision allowing them to re-enroll in their prior benefit structures (as there is for 
members of the Employees’ Pension System and Teachers’ Pension System). 
 
State Expenditures:  Based on a query of its membership records, the State Retirement 
Agency (SRA) identified 16 members of LEOPS who would benefit from the bill; SRA 
found no members of CORS or SPRS who would benefit. Given the bill’s limited 
applicability to State members, it has no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or 
contribution rates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 612 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2