START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 879 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 879 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Task Force to Improve Attendance and Reduce Chronic Absenteeism in Schools 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force to Improve Attendance and Reduce Chronic 
Absenteeism in Schools. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must 
provide staff support. Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled 
to expense reimbursement under the Standard State Travel Regulations, as provided in the 
State budget. By December 31, 2025, the task force must submit a report detailing its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly, and MSDE 
must update regulations relating to student attendance to incorporate the task force’s 
recommendations. By June 30, 2026, MSDE must distribute a toolkit for school leaders on 
identifying and preventing chronic absenteeism and provide guidance to each local school 
system on effective prevention strategies. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and 
terminates December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can staff the task force and update regulations with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school operations may be affected to the extent that any new 
regulations established by MSDE impose additional requirements. Local school finances 
are not expected to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 879/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must (1) analyze data regarding chronic absenteeism by 
students from schools in the State; (2) identify and evaluate local and national strategies 
and best practices to address chronic absenteeism; (3) identify differentiated and 
comprehensive responses for chronic absenteeism that prioritize prevention and 
intervention; (4) set a statewide goal for the reduction in chronic absenteeism throughout 
the State; (5) develop and distribute guidance on identifying and preventing chronic 
absenteeism to local school systems; (6) develop and distribute a toolkit on identifying and 
preventing chronic absenteeism for school leaders in each grade band (elementary, middle, 
and high school) that includes culturally responsive and nonpunitive strategies for reducing 
student absences; and (7) establish categories that identify reasons for chronic absenteeism 
by students, and collect data for each corresponding category for each local school system. 
Furthermore, the task force must make recommendations on (1) a single definition of 
chronic absenteeism; (2) the role that the community, public agencies, public school 
systems and schools, parents, and students have in solving the problem of chronic 
absenteeism; (3) the best practices for data collection relating to chronic absenteeism and 
tracking student attendance; and (4) the most effective practices to prevent and eliminate 
chronic absenteeism that are culturally responsive and nonpunitive. 
 
On or before December 31, 2025, MSDE must update regulations on student attendance to 
incorporate the most effective practices identified by the task force and include common 
definitions for chronic absence, chronic absenteeism, and day of attendance. 
 
On or before June 30, 2026, MSDE must distribute the toolkit (developed by the task force) 
on identifying and preventing chronic absenteeism for school leaders. MSDE must also 
distribute (to each local school system) guidance on identifying and preventing chronic 
absenteeism that (1) defines chronic absenteeism; (2) identifies and analyzes trends in data 
on attendance and chronic absenteeism at the State and local level; (3) includes an analysis 
of how student attendance is collected in local school systems across the State; and 
(4) describes the most effective practices for identifying, preventing, and eliminating 
chronic absenteeism that are culturally responsive and nonpunitive. 
 
Current Law:  MSDE and local school systems have made student attendance a priority. 
The State Superintendent of Schools has created a Student Attendance Task Force to 
examine data, identify best practices, and develop guidance to local school systems. MSDE 
indicates that each local school system is equipped with student support staff including 
school counselors, social workers, pupil personnel workers, school health services 
coordinators, and school psychologists that routinely work with students and their families 
on a wide range of issues that may lead to absences from school. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 879/ Page 3 
In January 2025, the State Superintendent of Schools provided information to both the State 
Board of Education and the Accountability and Implementation Board on the extent of 
chronic absenteeism among local school systems. Several key findings include the 
following:   
 
 
Chronic absences among students have gradually declined since 2022 but have not 
yet returned to pre-pandemic levels. 
 
Chronic absences at the high school level have seen less reductions since 2022 than 
at the elementary and middle school levels. 
 
Chronic absence rates (2023-2024 school year) were highest for Black/African 
American and Hispanic/Latino students and students in special service groups. 
 
Chronic absence rates varied significantly among local school systems with the rates 
exceeding 35% in Baltimore City, Allegany, and Dorchester counties; while the 
rates were below 20% in Calvert, Frederick, and Howard counties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3