START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 866 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 866 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class C (Theater) Beer, Wine, and 
Liquor License 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class C (theater) beer, wine, and liquor license in Frederick County 
and authorizes the Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license 
to a theater with seating. A license holder is authorized to sell beer, wine, and liquor for 
on-premises consumption from one hour before to one hour after (1) a regular performance, 
(2) a fund-raiser performance that benefits the theater, or (3) an event hosted by an outside 
group that has rented the theater. The annual license fee is $150. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent 
that theater beer, wine, and liquor licenses are issued under the bill. Frederick County can 
handle any additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potentially meaningful for a theater that is 
able to sell beer, wine, and liquor at their shows or events. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: In Frederick County, there are a number of licenses for specific types of 
organizations and venues, including, but not limited to, art galleries, conference centers, 
dinner theaters, and stadiums. The county also issues theater licenses where beer and wine 
are allowed to be sold and consumed, as specified. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 866/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 670 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2