START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 881 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 881 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Family Investment Program - Child Support 
 
 
This bill establishes that, beginning in fiscal 2028, the amount of child support collected in 
a month that passes through to a family seeking assistance under the Family Investment 
Program (FIP) must increase each fiscal year and be disregarded in computing the amount 
of assistance provided by FIP. Beginning in fiscal 2031, 100% of child support collected 
in a month must pass through to the family and be disregarded in computing the amount of 
assistance.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $2.4 million 
in FY 2028, by gradually increasing amounts through FY 2030, and by $13.9 million 
annually beginning in FY 2031, to account for the loss of the State share of certain child 
support collections and for the reimbursement to the federal government for its share of the 
collections, as further discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures decrease 
accordingly. General/federal fund expenditures also increase by $406,100 in FY 2027 only 
for programming changes; federal fund matching revenues correspondingly increase by 
$268,000. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially impact local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The amount of child support that must pass through to the family and be 
disregarded in computing the amount of assistance is the greater of $100 of any child 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 881/ Page 2 
support collected in a month for one child and $200 of child support collected in a month 
for two or more children, or:   
 
 
for fiscal 2028, 25% of any child support collected in a month; 
 
for fiscal 2029, 50% of any child support collected in a month;  
 
for fiscal 2030, 75% of any child support collected in a month; and  
 
for fiscal 2031 and after, 100% of any child support collected in a month. 
 
Current Law:  The Family Investment Administration within the Department of Human 
Services (DHS) is the central coordinating and directing agency of all public assistance 
programs in the State, including Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits as a last resort. 
TCA may be provided if the applicant or recipient (1) resides in the State; (2) has applied 
for child support services, if appropriate; (3) has engaged in job search activities as 
requested by DHS; (4) participates in work activity, as required; and (5) meets any 
requirements established by regulations. TCA provides monthly cash grants and is funded 
with general funds, federal Temporary Assistance for Needy Families funds, and certain 
child support collections.  
 
For a recipient that is an assistance unit that includes adults and children or minor parents 
and children, the amount of assistance must be designated as follows:  (1) 75% for the child 
or children in the assistance unit; and (2) 25% for the adult member or members, or minor 
parent or parents of the assistance unit. For a recipient that is an assistance unit with only 
adults, or a recipient who is a pregnant individual, 100% of the assistance must be 
designated for the adult member or members or pregnant individual.  
 
The amount of assistance must be computed by counting no more than four weeks of earned 
income in any month and disregarding 20% of that earned income. The first $100 of child 
support collected in a month for one child and the first $200 of child support collected in a 
month for two or more children must pass through to the family and be disregarded in 
computing the amount of assistance.  
 
The remaining amount of child support collected on behalf of families receiving TCA is 
retained and used to offset the cost of operating the program. The State distributes a portion 
to the federal government and retains the remainder. The amount distributed to the federal 
government, based on the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage, is 50% in Maryland. 
DHS places the retained amount in a special fund (the Child Support Offset Fund), which 
is used primarily to offset costs of TCA and for child support-related contracts.  
 
Child Support Collections 
 
The Child Support Administration (CSA) within DHS generally oversees child support 
services provided by the local departments of social services and other offices, provides 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 881/ Page 3 
technical assistance, formulates policy, develops and implements new programs, and 
ensures compliance with federal and State regulations and policy. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Family Investment Program 
 
Under current law, the first $100 of child support collected in a month for one child and 
the first $200 of child support collected in a month for two or more children must pass 
through to the family and be disregarded in computing the amount of assistance. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2028, the bill phases‐in the pass through of higher amounts of 
collections to families; beginning in fiscal 2031, all child support collected in a month is 
passed through to families (and disregarded in computing the amount of assistance). Based 
on preliminary information, in fiscal 2026, the Department of Legislative Services 
estimates that approximately $15.4 million in child support payments (relevant to the bill) 
will be collected; of this amount, approximately $1.5 million is expected to pass through 
to families under current law. Based on the phase‐in structure established in the bill, and 
assuming the amounts collected for affected families remain consistent with that estimated 
for fiscal 2026, the following amounts are therefore anticipated to be passed through to 
families: 
 
 
$3.9 million in fiscal 2028; 
 
$7.7 million in fiscal 2029; 
 
$11.6 million in fiscal 2030; and 
 
$15.4 million in fiscal 2031, and annually thereafter. 
 
The State, therefore, must use general funds to (1) account for the loss of special fund 
revenue from the State’s share of child support collected on behalf of TCA recipients that 
is no longer available in the Child Support Offset Fund and used as described above, but is 
instead passed through to custodial parents and (2) account for the reimbursement to the 
federal government of its share of the collections. Under current law, the State is not 
required to reimburse the federal government for its share of the passed through amounts. 
However, that exception is available only to $100 for the first child and $200 for two or 
more children. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by (1) $2.4 million in fiscal 2028;  
(2) $6.2 million in fiscal 2029; (3) $10.1 million in fiscal 2030; and (4) $13.9 million in 
fiscal 2031 and annually thereafter. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 881/ Page 4 
Technology Upgrades 
 
DHS advises that one-time updates costing $406,080 to both the Child Support 
Management System and the Eligibility and Enrollment System are necessary to meet the 
requirements of the bill and that certain CSA program costs, including technology 
upgrades, are eligible for a 66% federal fund reimbursement. DHS advises that the 
technology upgrades are necessary to complete in fiscal 2027, to prepare for meeting the 
bill’s requirements for fiscal 2028 and beyond. Therefore, DHS general fund expenditures 
increase by $138,067 in fiscal 2027 only; federal fund revenues and expenditures increase 
by $268,013 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 703 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4