START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 865 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 865 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Catastrophic Event Account - Transfer of Funds - State Disaster Recovery Fund 
 
 
This bill authorizes funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account, which is 
administered by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), to be transferred to 
the State Disaster Recovery Fund within the Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management (MDEM) if (1) the balance of the fund has been depleted due to use or transfer 
or (2) the estimated costs for providing adequate disaster relief for a natural disaster or 
catastrophic situation are in excess of the fund’s balance. The bill (1) makes conforming 
changes to reflect these potential fund transfers and (2) reduces, from 15 days to 10 days, 
the length of the Legislative Policy Committee’s (LPC) review and comment period before 
the Governor may transfer funds from the Catastrophic Event Account by budget 
amendment. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Catastrophic Event Account increase and 
special fund revenues for the State Disaster Recovery Fund increase correspondingly 
should a fund transfer occur. If funds are transferred, revenues to the Revenue Stabilization 
Account (Rainy Day Fund) may decrease minimally. Units of State government that 
receive funding from the Catastrophic Event Account (or from funds transferred from that 
account to the State Disaster Recovery Fund under the bill) may benefit from the shorter 
LPC review period. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to significantly affect local government finances. 
Local jurisdictions that receive funding from the Catastrophic Event Account (or from 
funds transferred from that account to the State Disaster Recovery Fund under the bill) may 
benefit from the shorter LPC review period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 865/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Catastrophic Event Account 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account, which is within the State Reserve Fund and administered 
by DBM, enables the State or a local government to respond quickly to a natural disaster 
or catastrophe that could not be addressed within existing State appropriations. It may also 
be used for federal employee financial hardship in the event of a full or partial federal 
government shutdown due to a lapse in federal appropriations. 
 
Funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account (1) may not be used to offset 
operating deficiencies in regular programs of State government but (2) as noted above, may 
be expended to assist a unit of State or local government in funding costs in connection 
with a natural disaster, a catastrophic situation, or a full or partial federal government 
shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
In the event of a natural disaster or catastrophe, prior to transferring funds by budget 
amendment to the appropriate unit of State or local government, the Governor must notify 
LPC of the proposed amendment and allow the committee to review and approve the 
proposed amendment. LPC has 15 days to review and comment. If the federal government 
is in a full or partial shutdown, after a 2-day review and comment period by LPC, the 
Governor may transfer funds by budget amendment from the account to the Federal 
Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund. 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account consists of direct appropriations in the budget bill. 
Investment earnings are credited to the Rainy Day Fund. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly projects a closing fund balance of $10.0 million for fiscal 2026, 
which has been maintained for several years. 
 
State Disaster Recovery Fund 
 
Chapter 549 of 2023 established the State Disaster Recovery Fund, administered by 
MDEM. Generally, the purpose of the fund is to provide disaster recovery assistance when 
disasters occur but a federal disaster declaration is not made. The fund is a special, 
nonlapsing fund and must be available in perpetuity for the purpose of providing disaster 
recovery assistance in accordance with the specified provisions. The fund may only be used 
if (1) the Governor has declared a state of emergency or (2) a local organization for 
emergency management requests assistance from the fund. However, a portion of the fund 
may be used to administer the fund, including providing disaster case management 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 865/ Page 3 
resources. As of April 2025, the current fund balance is $1.0 million, and the fiscal 2026 
budget includes $898,736 in general funds for the fund. 
 
MDEM must submit an annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly by  
December 31 on the use of the fund for the previous fiscal year. The most recent annual 
report was submitted on December 17, 2024. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes the transfer of funds from the Catastrophic Event 
Account to the State Disaster Recovery Fund under specified circumstances, generally 
related to the occurrence of a natural disaster. As a result, any transfer of funds under the 
bill cannot be predicted. 
 
To the extent any transfer occurs pursuant to the bill’s authorization, there is no net effect 
on State finances. In such a circumstance, special fund expenditures from the  
Catastrophic Event Account increase as funds are transferred, and revenues to the  
State Disaster Recovery Fund increase correspondingly. Additional funds are then 
available in the State Disaster Recovery Fund; however, the bill does not necessitate or 
require additional spending from the State Disaster Recovery Fund. 
 
Additionally, under current law, any interest generated by the Catastrophic Event Account 
is credited to the Rainy Day Fund. Accordingly, if a substantial amount of funding is 
transferred from the Catastrophic Event Account due to the bill, special fund revenues to 
the Rainy Day Fund decrease minimally. 
 
Units of State government that receive funding from the Catastrophic Event Account (or 
from funds transferred from that account to the State Disaster Recovery Fund under the 
bill) may benefit from the shorter LPC review period. 
 
DBM and MDEM can handle any administrative changes with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 564 (Senators Hester and Salling) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 865/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4