START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 840 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 840 
(Delegate McCaskill, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Senior Higher Education Institutions - Pregnant and Parenting Students - 
Plan Requirements (Pregnant and Parenting Student Support Act) 
 
 
This bill requires specified public senior (four-year) higher education institutions (all but 
the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Studies, the University of Maryland 
Global Campus, and the University of Baltimore) to adopt a plan regarding pregnant and 
parenting students that is consistent with Title IX of the federal Higher Education Act and 
includes certain elements. The plan must include (1) referral to on-campus or off-campus 
services regarding the availability of or eligibility for government assistance programs; 
(2) provision of information about or referral to adoption services; (3) availability of 
institutional accommodations, as specified; and (4) a referral network of health care service 
providers. By August 1, 2026, each affected institution must post the plan on its website. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Affected public four-year institutions higher education (the University 
System of Maryland – excluding the specified institutions, Morgan State University, and 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland) can adopt and post plans related to pregnant and parenting 
students that are consistent with Title IX and include specified elements using existing 
resources. As educational institutions subject to Title IX requirements, these institutions 
must already have a policy in place to accommodate students for specified 
pregnancy-related reasons. However, to the extent that additional services are provided, 
higher education expenditures may increase, by an unknown, but likely minimal or 
moderate, amount. Likewise, to the extent that more individuals receive government 
assistance entitlements such as through Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health 
Program (MCHP) due to referrals, expenditures (federal and general funds) increase, 
potentially significantly. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 840/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None; local community colleges are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill also specifies that the General Assembly finds that all students at 
an institution of higher education in the State, regardless of their gender, must enjoy 
freedom from discrimination of any kind, including pregnancy discrimination as described 
in Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972. 
 
Current Law:  Under federal law – specifically, Title IX of the Education Amendments 
of 1972 – discrimination on the basis of sex in educational programs and activities is 
prohibited for all educational institutions receiving federal funding. Every institution that 
receives federal financial assistance is bound by Title IX; however, an educational 
institution that is controlled by a religious organization is exempt from Title IX when the 
law’s requirements would conflict with the organization’s religious tenets. 
 
Federal regulations implementing Title IX prohibit discrimination against a student based 
on pregnancy, childbirth, false pregnancy, termination of pregnancy, or recovery from any 
of these conditions and prohibit a school from applying any rule related to a student’s 
parental, family, or marital status that treats students differently based on their sex. 
 
Institutions may not exclude a pregnant student from participating in any part of an 
educational program. Institutions may implement special instructional programs or classes 
for a pregnant student; participation must be completely voluntary on the part of the 
student, and the programs and classes must be comparable to those offered to other 
students. 
 
Any special services provided to students who have temporary medical conditions must 
also be provided to a pregnant student. If an institution provides special services, such as 
homebound instruction or tutoring, for students who miss instruction because they have a 
temporary medical condition, it must do the same for a student who misses instruction 
because of pregnancy or childbirth. 
 
An institution must excuse a student’s absences because of pregnancy or childbirth for as 
long as the student’s doctor deems the absences medically necessary. An institution may 
require a pregnant student or student who has given birth to submit medical certification 
for school participation only if the school also requires such certification from all students 
with physical or emotional conditions requiring the attention of a physician. When a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 840/ Page 3 
student returns to school, the student must be allowed to return to the same academic and 
extracurricular status as before the student’s medical leave began. 
 
Institutions are required to have at least one person who manages Title IX complaints, 
typically called a “Title IX coordinator.” 
 
Medicaid 
 
Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, elderly or 
disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for Medicaid, 
applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Effective January 1, 2014, Medicaid 
coverage was expanded to persons with household incomes up to 138% of federal poverty 
guidelines, as authorized under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
MCHP is Maryland’s name for medical assistance for low-income children. MCHP 
provides all the same services as Medicaid. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 771 and SB 741 of 2024, HB 356 of 2023, and HB 164 of 2022 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 511 (Senator Henson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3