START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 809 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 809 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Out-of-Home Placement Providers - Individuals Enrolled in Higher Education 
and Vocational Training Programs 
 
 
This bill authorizes an individual enrolled in an accredited institution of higher education 
or a residential vocational training program to return to an out-of-home placement provider 
with whom the individual was previously placed under specified circumstances. At least 
30 days before a scheduled break (of the institution or program), the individual must make 
a request to a local department of social services. A local department must make a 
recommendation to the Department of Human Services (DHS) no later than 21 days before 
the scheduled break. If a local department recommends approving an individual’s request, 
DHS must make a determination regarding the local department’s recommendation no later 
than 14 days before the scheduled break. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS can make determinations regarding an individual’s request to return to 
an out-of-home placement provider using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual enrolled in an accredited institution of higher education or 
a residential vocational training program may return to an out-of-home placement provider 
with whom the individual was previously placed if (1) the individual is unable to remain 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 809/ Page 2 
on the institution’s or training program’s campus due to a scheduled break, a temporary 
closure of the institution or training program, or a temporary leave of absence; (2) the 
individual’s living arrangement is mutually agreed to by the individual, the out-of-home 
placement provider, and the provider agency; and (3) DHS has reviewed and approved the 
individual’s request to return to the out-of-home placement provider. 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through its Social Services Administration, has the primary 
responsibility for child welfare services throughout the State, which are provided primarily 
by the local departments of social services. In general, DHS oversees the licensing and 
regulation of provider agencies (or child placement agencies) and out-of-home placement 
providers. 
 
DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children 
(1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by 
a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, 
abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued 
residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child 
to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, 
are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement 
agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as 
specified. An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential 
care, kinship care, and a treatment foster care home. 
 
Foster youth are generally allowed to remain in care up until age 21, as long as the youth 
is in school, enrolled in a training program or other program or activity to promote or 
remove barriers to employment, employed at least 80 hours per month, or disabled. 
Independent living after-care services are available for youth exiting care after turning 
age 18 but before turning age 21, including financial assistance, assistance with utilities 
and room and board, educational and employment services, counseling, and other services 
to assist with self-sufficiency. These services are available for up to 180 days but may be 
extended, and youth may reapply for services until age 21.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 765 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 809/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 15, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3