START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 831 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 831 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Carroll County - Prospective Employees and Volunteers - Criminal History 
Records Check 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Carroll County Department of Human Resources to request a State 
and national criminal history records check from the Criminal Justice Information System 
Central Repository (CJIS-CR) for any prospective employee or volunteer of Carroll County 
by repealing a provision that limits which employees or volunteers may undergo a criminal 
background check. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. CJIS-CR can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal annual increase in Carroll County expenditures from 
additional criminal history records checks beginning in FY 2026. Carroll County revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Carroll County, the department of human resources may request a State 
and national criminal history records check from CJIS-CR for a prospective employee or 
volunteer of the county who will be assigned to a position that involves inspections; 
approval or denial of a permit, a license, or any other grant of authority; work in the offices 
of the county commissioners, sheriff, State’s attorney, circuit court, or county attorney; 
collecting or handling money; or care or supervision of a minor. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 831/ Page 2 
CJIS-CR collects, manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history records 
information for criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) 
purposes. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) charges a fee of $12 for a national 
check. CJIS-CR collects the fee from the applicant and reimburses the FBI. CJIS-CR 
submits requests for national criminal records to the FBI electronically. When State 
legislation includes a national check, the FBI requires that the bill contain certain language. 
If the FBI does not approve the language of an enacted bill, national checks will not be 
provided. Each individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a criminal history records check 
is required to pay $50 for a State and national records check, including a $20 fingerprinting 
fee, a $12 FBI fee, and an $18 fee to CJIS-CR. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 418 (Carroll County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2