START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 855 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 855 
(Delegate Hill) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Workgroup on Establishing a Science and Technology Best Practices and 
Innovation Network - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Workgroup on Establishing a Science and 
Technology Best Practices and Innovation Network, by reducing the number of appointees 
with specific expertise and affiliations. The bill also maintains the workgroup for 
two additional years, until June 30, 2027. Likewise, the deadline for the workgroup to 
report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly is 
extended by two years to December 1, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The workgroup can be staffed for two more years with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 448 of 2024 established the Workgroup on Establishing a Science 
and Technology Best Practices and Innovation Network to:   
 
 
identify and analyze options for establishing and maintaining an open access 
science, technology, and innovation network or hub of citizen scientists and experts 
in science, technology, and industry to (1) facilitate noninstitutional voluntary 
collaboration; (2) facilitate the open exchange of ideas and nonproprietary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 855/ Page 2 
state-of-the-art and evidence-based data and information; and (3) promote solution 
development and decision making based on sound science, innovation, and best 
practices;  
 
identify and evaluate methods for (1) establishing a digital or virtual referral 
network of experts in science, technology, and industry, including expansion of 
existing entities and networks; (2) registering expert participants; and (3) making 
network expertise available to the public; and  
 
make recommendations regarding the establishment of a science and technology 
best practices and innovation network.  
 
Chapter 448 requires, by December 1, 2024, the workgroup to report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly; however, that report has not 
been submitted.  
 
The workgroup is staffed by the University of Maryland Baltimore County.  
 
Additional Comments:  The bill reduces the number of representatives from institutions 
of higher education from five to two; however, it maintains another requirement for the 
Governor to appoint at least one representative each from a historically Black college or 
university, an independent institution of higher education, and a community college.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):   University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2