START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 336

Chapter 336

(House Bill 840)

AN ACT concerning

Public Senior Higher Education Institutions – Pregnant and Parenting
Students – Plan Requirements
(Pregnant and Parenting Student Support Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring certain public senior higher education institutions to adopt a
plan regarding pregnant and parenting students using certain guidelines; requiring
each public senior higher education institution to post the plan on the institution’s
website; and generally relating to pregnant and parenting students and certain
public senior higher education institutions.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 15–140
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

15–140.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PREGNANT AND PARENTING STUDENT” MEANS A STUDENT
ENROLLED AT A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION WHO:

(I) IS PREGNANT; OR

(II) EXERCISES CARE, CUSTODY, OR CONTROL OVER A CHILD.

(3) (I) “PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION”
MEANS:

1. THE CONSTITUENT INSTITUTIONS OF THE
UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF MARYLAND;

2. MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY; AND
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 336 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND.

(II) “PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION” DOES
NOT INCLUDE:

1. THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND CENTER FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES;

2. THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND GLOBAL CAMPUS;
OR

3. THE UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE.

(B) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS THAT ALL STUDENTS AT AN
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE, REGARDLESS OF THEIR
GENDER, SHALL ENJOY FREEDOM FROM DISCRIMINATION OF ANY KIND, INCLUDING
PREGNANCY DISCRIMINATION AS DESCRIBED IN TITLE IX OF THE EDUCATION
AMENDMENTS OF 1972.

(C) (1) EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION SHALL
ADOPT A PLAN REGARDING PREGNANT AND PARENTING STUDENTS THAT IS
CONSISTENT WITH TITLE IX OF THE FEDERAL HIGHER EDUCATION ACT.

(2) THE PLAN REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) REFERRAL TO ON–CAMPUS OR OFF–CAMPUS SERVICES TO
ASSIST REGARDING THE AVAILABILITY OF OR ELIGIBILITY FOR GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS, INCLUDING:

1. THE SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR WOMEN, INFANTS, AND CHILDREN;

2. THE CHILD CARE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM;

3. THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM;

4. THE MARYLAND CHILDREN’S HEALTH INSURANCE
PROGRAM; AND

5. ANY OTHER PROGRAMS, SCHOLARSHIPS, OR
SUBSIDIES FOR PREGNANT AND PARENTING STUDENTS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 336

(II) THE PROVISION OF INFORMATION ABOUT OR REFERRALS
TO RESOURCES REGARDING ADOPTION SERVICES;

(III) THE AVAILABILITY OF INSTITUTIONAL ACCOMMODATIONS
FOR PREGNANT AND PARENTING STUDENTS, INCLUDING PRIORITY CLASS
REGISTRATION AND FLEXIBLE SCHEDULING OPTIONS; AND

(IV) A REFERRAL NETWORK OF ON–CAMPUS AND OFF–CAMPUS
HEALTH CARE SERVICE PROVIDERS.

(D) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1, 2026, EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTION SHALL POST THE PLAN ADOPTED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)
OF THIS SECTION ON THE INSTITUTION’S WEBSITE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3