START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 825 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 825 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk) 
Economic Matters 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Small Business Retirement Savings Board - Membership - Alteration 
 
   
This bill adds the Comptroller, or the Comptroller’s designee, as a member of the Maryland 
Small Business Retirement Savings Board. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Adding the Comptroller, or Comptroller’s designee, as a member to 
the Maryland Small Business Retirement Savings Board does not affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 323 and 324 of 2016 established the Maryland Small Business 
Retirement Savings Board as program fiduciaries to administer the Maryland Small 
Business Retirement Savings trust and program, known as MarylandSaves. The purpose of 
the program is to promote greater retirement savings for Maryland private sector 
employees in a convenient, voluntary, low-cost, and portable manner. Private-sector 
employers participating in MarylandSaves must establish a payroll deposit retirement 
savings arrangement that allows employee participation in the program. Employers who 
participate in MarylandSaves or otherwise offer a retirement savings arrangement to their 
employees as specified under the law are exempt from the State’s annual filing fee for 
corporations and business entities.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 825/ Page 2 
The Maryland Small Business Retirement Savings Board has 11 members, 2 of whom are 
ex officio (the Treasurer and Secretary of Labor, or their respective designees); the 
Governor, President of the Senate, and Speaker of the House each appoint 3 members, who 
serve staggered four-year terms. The appointing authorities may remove a member of the 
board for incompetence or misconduct, and the board must elect a chair from among the 
members. All expenses, including employee costs, for the board are paid by the trust or 
program; however, administrative fees assessed on employee accounts to fund the program 
may not exceed 0.5% of total assets in the trust. Members of the board and its staff must 
(1) act solely in the interest of the program participants, as specified in law and (2) establish 
and annually review a written investment policy that includes a risk management and 
oversight program, as specified in law.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 41 (Senator Rosapepe) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - February 26, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2