START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 893 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 893 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Tidal Fish Licenses - Oyster Authorizations - Administrative Penalties 
 
 
This bill modifies existing provisions that allow for the revocation of a person’s 
authorization to catch oysters so that the provisions instead allow for suspension of an 
authorization for a first violation and revocation for a second or subsequent violation. The 
bill also (1) modifies one of the offenses for which, under the bill, an authorization can be 
suspended or revoked; (2) repeals a time period within which a required hearing must be 
held; and (3) requires reinstatement of a person’s entitlement to engage or work in the 
oyster fishery for a person whose authorization was revoked prior to July 1, 2025, 
beginning five years after the revocation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and special fund expenditures are expected to increase annually 
by approximately $5,300 and $6,200, respectively, beginning in FY 2026. Special fund 
revenues may decrease minimally beginning in FY 2026. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
5,300 
5,300 
5,300 
5,300 
5,300 
SF Expenditure 
6,200 
6,200 
6,200 
6,200 
6,200 
Net Effect 
($11,500) 
($11,500) 
($11,500) 
($11,500) 
($11,500) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 893/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Suspensions Replace Revocations, for a First Violation 
 
The bill modifies existing provisions that allow for the revocation of a person’s 
authorization to catch oysters if the person receives a citation for any one of several 
specified offenses, so that the provisions instead allow for (1) a suspension for up to  
five years, for a first violation and (2) revocation, for a second or subsequent violation. 
 
The bill also modifies one of the specified offenses – “taking oysters with gear that is 
prohibited in [a closed or prohibited] area” – to be “taking oysters with gear that is 
prohibited in [a closed or prohibited] area while more than 200 feet within the prohibited 
area.” 
 
The bill removes a requirement that a hearing that must be held prior to a revocation (under 
current law), or suspension or revocation (under the bill), be held within 90 days after the 
cited individual commits the offense. 
 
The bill makes provisions that apply to a revocation under current law applicable to a 
suspension or revocation under the bill, including the following: 
 
 
if the presiding officer of a hearing finds or concludes that the person knowingly 
committed the offense, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) must suspend 
or revoke the person’s authorization to catch oysters; and 
 
a person whose authorization has been suspended or revoked may not engage or 
work in the oyster fishery while suspended or revoked whether or not the work 
requires the use of another license. 
 
Reinstatement 
 
DNR must reinstate a person’s entitlement to engage or work in the oyster fishery for a 
person whose authorization to catch oysters was revoked before July 1, 2025, beginning 
five years after the date of revocation. The department may accept an application for and 
issue an oyster authorization to a person whose oyster authorization was revoked before 
July 1, 2025, beginning five years after the date of revocation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 893/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Tidal Fish License Authorizations 
 
Apart from commercial licenses to fish for Chesapeake Channa and blue and flathead 
catfish, DNR uses a single, commercial license, known as a tidal fish license, which 
authorizes a licensee to engage in each activity indicated on the license. The department 
may issue authorizations for activities listed in statute – which include catching oysters for 
sale – for which the indicated fee has been paid. DNR is authorized to set, by regulation, 
specified targets for the number of tidal fish license authorizations and may modify the 
target number of authorizations for specified reasons. The department must provide for 
reallocation of any authorizations that are revoked or voluntarily relinquished and, pursuant 
to DNR regulations, those authorizations are reallocated to individuals on the commercial 
license waiting list maintained by the department. 
 
Oyster Authorization Revocation 
 
In addition to any other penalty or fine provided, a person who holds an authorization to 
catch oysters and receives a citation for any one of several specified offenses may have the 
authorization revoked. The specified offenses include (1) taking oysters located more than 
200 feet within a closed or prohibited area and (2) taking oysters with gear that is prohibited 
in that area. 
 
Before the revocation of an authorization, DNR must hold a hearing in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) within 90 days after the cited individual commits the 
offense. If the presiding officer of a hearing finds or concludes that the person knowingly 
committed the offense, DNR must revoke the person’s authorization to catch oysters. A 
person aggrieved by DNR’s final decision may obtain judicial review in accordance with 
APA. A person whose authorization has been revoked may not engage or work in the oyster 
fishery whether or not it requires the use of another license. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund and special fund expenditures are expected to increase 
annually, on average, by approximately $5,290 and $6,210, respectively, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, for DNR to hold additional hearings with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings. 
 
General fund and special fund expenditures are expected to increase annually by those 
amounts due to the bill’s allowance – for a first violation – for suspension of an 
authorization to catch oysters, instead of revocation, each of which require a hearing. DNR 
indicates that over the last five years, it has revoked authorizations in 4 cases and declined 
to pursue revocation in another 14 cases, indicating that it generally declines to pursue 
revocation for a number of reasons, including the individual’s past violation history and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 893/ Page 4 
the egregiousness of the offense. Under the bill, DNR likely pursues additional cases, for 
a first violation; those that are not egregious enough to warrant a permanent revocation 
under current law but that warrant a suspension. 
 
DNR pays approximately $3,500 per hearing (46% of which is paid for with general funds 
and 54% of which is paid for with special funds) and indicates it may pay for approximately 
three additional hearings per year, on average, under the bill, resulting in a combined 
general fund and special fund increase of $11,500 annually ($5,290 in general funds and 
$6,210 in special funds). 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues may decrease minimally, beginning in fiscal 2026, 
due to oyster authorizations that are revoked under current law (and allocated to individuals 
on the commercial license waiting list) instead, under the bill, being suspended and held 
for the suspended individual, potentially without fees being paid during the suspension. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may meaningfully affect small business opportunities of 
individuals on the commercial license waiting list to the extent fewer oyster authorizations 
are made available to those on the list as a result of the bill’s allowance for suspension of 
authorizations instead of revocation causing authorizations that otherwise are revoked and 
reallocated to instead be suspended and held for the individual. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 76 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 18, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4