START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 814 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 814 
(Delegate Taylor) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of Juvenile Services - Report on Youth Service Bureaus 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) to report to the Senate Judicial 
Proceedings Committee and the House Judiciary Committee on or before October 1, 2025, 
and each October 1 thereafter, on (1) efforts by DJS to promote predelinquent programs, 
including youth service bureaus (YSB); (2) efforts by DJS to collaborate with and provide 
technical assistance to local governments regarding the establishment, use, and funding of 
YSBs; (3) an assessment of the programs and activities conducted by YSBs; and (4) any 
other efforts to prevent youth offenses. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DJS can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A YSB is a community-based entity that is operated to (1) provide 
community-oriented delinquency prevention, youth suicide prevention, drug and alcohol 
abuse prevention, and youth development; (2) ameliorate conditions that contribute to 
delinquency, youth suicide, drug and alcohol abuse, and family disruption; and (3) function 
as an advocate of youth needs. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 814/ Page 2 
To be eligible to receive State funding, a YSB must provide, at convenient hours and free 
of charge or at a reasonable rate based on the client’s family income: 
 
 
individual, family, or group counseling; 
 
referral and information services; 
 
crisis intervention, including intervention relating to youth suicide prevention; 
 
alcohol and drug abuse assessment and referral services by staff who have received 
specified assessment and referral training; 
 
informal counseling; and 
 
in accordance with the needs of the community and subject to the availability of 
funds, (1) tutoring; (2) alternative leisure activities; (3) employment assistance; 
(4) community education, including training and information relating to 
youth suicide prevention; (5) aftercare services; and (6) other specialized services. 
 
The State and local government must jointly fund an eligible YSB. The State must provide 
75% of the funding, as provided in the State budget. Each eligible YSB must submit a 
proposed annual budget to DJS. The proposed DJS budget must list the eligible YSBs and 
estimate the amount of State funds to be allocated to each YSB. A local governing body 
that provides matching funds for a YSB may choose to have State funds paid directly to 
the private sponsor or to the local governing body. 
 
State Expenditures:  DJS can produce the required report with existed budgeted resources. 
 
In practice, DJS does not handle oversight or funding of YSBs. Although YSBs are not 
specifically funded as a program or line item in the budget, grants are generally provided 
from the Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund (CCIF). The Governor’s Office for Children 
(reestablished as a freestanding office by Executive Order 01.01.2024.05) awards funds 
from CCIF to local management boards (LMBs). LMBs may distribute CCIF funds at their 
discretion. 
 
There are eight YSBs operating in the State in Baltimore City and Baltimore, Carroll, and 
Prince George’s counties. In fiscal 2024, five YSBs received a total of $925,032 from 
CCIF, with two YSBs receiving more than $200,000. The Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy (formerly the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and 
Victim Services) provided a $50,000 grant to the District Heights Family & Youth Services 
Bureau, for total YSB funding of $975,032. Two YSBs did not receive any State funding. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 814/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3