START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 871 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 871 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission - Community Benefits - Community 
Health Worker Workforce Program 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “community benefit” to include a community health worker 
(CHW) workforce program between a nonprofit hospital and a community-based 
organization. The purpose of a CHW workforce program must be to provide services to 
patients of a nonprofit hospital that are intended to improve health outcomes and address 
social determinants of health. A nonprofit hospital and a community-based organization 
may collaborate to identify financial resources to address costs associated with increasing 
administrative capacity within the community-based organization necessary to participate 
in the partnership. Subject to other provisions of law governing community benefits and 
on the agreement of the parties, a nonprofit hospital may provide financial support to a 
community-based organization to cover such costs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A partnership between a nonprofit hospital and a community-based 
organization to establish a CHW workforce program may be executed through a 
memorandum of understanding, which must include:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 871/ Page 2 
 
the program design; 
 
goals for patient health outcomes; 
 
implementation procedures; 
 
criteria for evaluation and impact measurement; 
 
data collection, management, and reporting standards and protocols that are in 
accordance with applicable federal and State laws and regulations; and 
 
an agreement between the nonprofit hospital and the community-based organization 
identifying which party will be responsible for (1) recruiting and employing the 
CHW workforce; (2) supervising the workforce in the settings in which the 
CHWs will provide services to patients; (3) training the workforce; and  
(4) providing employer-sponsored health insurance coverage to each CHW. 
 
A partnership may provide health insurance coverage to each CHW for the duration of the 
program if the individual does not have health insurance coverage and requests coverage. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Community Health Workers 
 
“Community health worker” means a frontline public worker who (1) is a trusted member 
of, or has an unusually close understanding of, the community being served; (2) serves as 
a liaison to, link to, or intermediary between health and social services and the community 
to facilitate access to services and improve the quality and cultural competence of service 
delivery; and (3) builds individual and community capacity by increasing health knowledge 
and self-sufficiency through a range of activities, including outreach, community 
education, the provision of information to support individuals in the community, social 
support, and advocacy. 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may certify an individual to practice as a 
CHW in the State. However, certification is not required to work as a CHW. To qualify for 
certification, an applicant must (1) have completed a CHW training program accredited by 
MDH and meet any other requirements established by MDH or (2) be exempted by MDH 
from the training. To apply for certification, an applicant must submit an application to 
MDH, pay any fee, and submit any additional materials. MDH must issue a certificate to 
any applicant who meets these requirements. 
 
Community Benefit Requirements 
 
“Community benefit” means a planned, organized, and measured activity that is intended 
to meet identified community health needs within a service area. “Community benefit” 
may include (1) a community health service; (2) health professional education; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 871/ Page 3 
(3) research; (4) a financial contribution; (5) a community-building activity, including 
partnerships with community-based organizations; (6) charity care; (7) an activity funded 
by a foundation; (8) a mission-driven health service; (9) an operation related to a 
community benefit; and (10) financial or in-kind support of the Maryland Behavioral 
Health Crisis Response System. 
 
“Community health needs assessment” (CHNA) means the process required by the 
federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act by which unmet community health care 
needs and priorities are identified by a nonprofit hospital in accordance with federal law. 
Each nonprofit hospital must solicit and take into account input received from individuals 
who represent the broad interests of that community, including individuals with special 
knowledge of or expertise in public and behavioral health. 
 
Each nonprofit hospital must conduct an annual CHNA and submit an annual community 
benefits report to the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) detailing the 
community benefits provided by the hospital during the preceding year. The community 
benefit report must include:   
 
 
the mission statement of the hospital; 
 
a list of the initiatives that were undertaken by the hospital to identify community 
health needs within the hospital’s community; 
 
the cost to the hospital of each community benefit activity; 
 
a description of how each of the listed activities addresses the community health 
needs of the hospital’s community; 
 
a description of efforts taken to evaluate the effectiveness of each community 
benefit activity; 
 
a description of gaps in the availability of providers to serve the community; 
 
a description of the hospital’s efforts to track and reduce health disparities in the 
community that the hospital serves; 
 
a list of the unmet community health needs identified in the most recent CHNA; and 
 
a list of tax exemptions the hospital claimed during the immediately preceding 
taxable year. 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission 
 
HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH established to contain hospital costs, 
maintain fairness in hospital payment, provide access to hospital care, and disclose 
information on the operation of hospitals in the State. HSCRC is responsible for 
implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the successor to the Maryland All-Payer 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 871/ Page 4 
Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based revenues (commonly 
referred to as global budgets). 
 
Additional Comments:  HSCRC compiles the required community benefits reports and 
issues an annual Maryland Hospital Community Health Benefit Financial Report. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 9, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 9, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4