START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 808 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 808 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Columbia Association - Lease Requirements and Governing Documents  
Ho. Co. 14-25 
 
 
This bill establishes specified requirements for landlords of real property in 
Howard County that require tenants to pay all (or a part) of an “annual charge” as a part of 
the rent. “Annual charge” means the charge assessed by the Columbia Association on 
residential or commercial real property in Howard County that is subject to 
Columbia Association covenants. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Howard County operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a landlord requires a tenant to pay all or part of an annual charge as a 
part of the rent, the landlord must use a written lease that includes (1) notice of the amount 
of the annual charge that is included in the rent and (2) a description of how the 
annual charge is calculated. 
 
A landlord must use a written lease that includes a description of, or instructions on where 
to find a description of, the rights and privileges afforded to (1) for a residential lease, the 
tenant as a resident of real property that is subject to Columbia Association covenants and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 808/ Page 2 
governing documents or (2) for a commercial lease, the tenant’s employees assigned to the 
site that is subject to Columbia Association covenants and governing documents. 
 
When a tenant signs a lease, the landlord must provide the tenant with a copy of (1) the 
Columbia Association covenants and governing documents and (2) if the lease is for 
residential property, the governing documents of the village association or town center, as 
appropriate. A landlord may satisfy this requirement by providing a physical copy, digital 
copy, or a permanent link to a digital copy of the covenants and governing documents. 
 
These requirements only apply to leases for residential and commercial real property in 
Howard County that are subject to Columbia Association covenants. 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not specifically address the provision of the documentation as 
required by the bill. Generally, under current law, purchasers of property within a 
homeowners association must be provided certain documents during the initial sale or 
resale of the property, including a copy of the declaration and all recorded covenants, as 
specified. This requirement, however, is not extended to tenants. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1452 and SB 1146 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer 
Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2