START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 833 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 833 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Carroll County - Public Facilities Bond 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Carroll County Commissioners to issue up to $36.9 million in 
general obligation (GO) bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or 
renovation of public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity 
of the bonds cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County receives up to $36.9 million in bond proceeds. County debt 
service expenditures increase by an estimated $2.6 million annually over a 20-year period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. Carroll County 
is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of government. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2015, Carroll County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $316.4 million in GO bonds for public facilities, as shown 
in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects in Carroll County for 
fiscal 2026. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 833/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for Carroll County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter Number 
Authorized Amount 
2015 
Chapter 84 
$17.0 
2016 
Chapter 254 
31.0 
2017 
Chapter 435 
25.0 
2018 
Chapter 89 
32.7 
2019 
Chapter 184 
28.5 
2020 
Chapter 285 
38.3 
2021 
Chapter 730 
48.5 
2023 
Chapter 81 
65.6 
2024 
Chapter 684 
29.8 
Total 
 
$316.4 
 
 
Carroll County revenues increase by up to $36.9 million from bond proceeds. Annual debt 
service costs for the bonds total approximately $2.6 million. This estimate is based on a 
3.72% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, debt service expenditures 
would adjust accordingly. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2023, Carroll County had approximately $287.2 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.3% of the county’s assessable base and 
$1,637 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AAA credit rating from  
Standard & Poor’s, an Aaa credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AAA credit rating from Fitch Ratings. 
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can 
be found in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2025 report can 
be found on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 833/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
Carroll County Bond Authorization Request 
Fiscal 2026 
 
Project Description 
Project Amount 
Public Schools 
Freedom Elementary Addition 
$2,218,500 
HVAC System Replacement – Carroll Springs 
738,000 
Prekindergarten Additions 
7,071,000 
Roof Replacement – Shiloh Middle 
3,466,000 
Sykesville Middle Addition 
5,514,500 
Total Public Schools 
$19,008,000 
Conservation and Open Space 
Agricultural Land – Maryland Agriculture Land Preservation Program 
$1,333,400 
Stormwater Facility Renovation 
310,000 
Watershed Assessment and Improvement (NPDES) 
3,000,000 
Total Conservation and Open Space 
$4,643,400 
Public Works 
Monroe Avenue Extension 
$1,364,000 
Pavement Management Program 
7,820,562 
Ramp and Sidewalk Upgrades 
103,000 
Ridenour Way Extension 
1,155,000 
Small Drainage Structures 
210,000 
Gaither Road Over South Branch Patapsco 
96,000 
Hughes Shop Road Over Bear Branch Road 
40,000 
McKinstry’s Mill Road Projects 
236,002 
Patapsco Road Over East Branch Patapsco 
29,000 
Stone Chapel Road Over Little Pipe Creek 
50,000 
Woodbine Road Over South Branch Patapsco 
224,200 
Total Public Works 
$11,327,764 
General Government 
County Building Systemic Renovations 
$1,575,000 
Fire and EMS – Regional Water Supply 
160,000 
Generator Replacements 
150,000 
Total General Government 
$1,885,000 
Grand Total 
$36,864,164 
 
EMS:  emergency medical services 
HVAC:  heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
NPDES:  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  
 
Source:  Carroll County Government 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 833/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 416 (Carroll County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4