START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 337

Chapter 337

(House Bill 888)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Initial Teacher Certification – Qualifications

FOR the purpose of altering the qualifications for an initial teacher certificate to include
passing a portfolio–based assessment of a nationally accredited teacher preparation
program; and generally relating to initial teacher certification.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–126(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–126(a)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

6–126.

(a) (1) This subsection applies to individuals who have graduated from a
teacher preparation program or an alternative teacher preparation program.

(2) Beginning on July 1, 2025, to qualify for an initial certificate an
individual shall:

(i) Pass the subject–specific examinations under § 6–125 of this
subtitle;

(ii) Meet one of the following qualifications:

1. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, pass [a]:

A. A nationally recognized, portfolio–based assessment of
teaching ability; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 337 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

B. A PORTFOLIO–BASED ASSESSMENT OF A NATIONALLY
ACCREDITED TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM; OR

2. Subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, complete a
rigorous local school system teacher induction program that lasts for the lesser of:

A. 3 years; or

B. The amount of time a teacher may hold a conditional
teacher certificate;

(iii) Meet one of the following qualifications:

1. Pass a basic literacy skills assessment approved by the
Department under § 6–125 of this subtitle;

2. Hold a degree from a regionally accredited educational
institution and have earned a minimum overall cumulative grade point average of 3.0 on a
4.0 scale or its equivalent on the most recently earned degree; or

3. Submit documentation to the Department of having
received effective evaluations from a local school system for 3 years;

(iv) Pass a rigorous State–specific examination of mastery of reading
instruction and content for the grade level the individual will be teaching; and

(v) Satisfactorily complete any other requirements established by
the State Board.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2