START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 859 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 859 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Finance 
 
Access to Health Insurance for Child Care Professionals - Outreach 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) to promote access to 
health insurance for child care professionals by (1) partnering with the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE), prekindergarten provider hubs, child care associations, 
and relevant nonprofit organizations; (2) helping child care professionals obtain health 
insurance though MHBE or Medicaid; (3) assisting child care professionals who lose 
Medicaid coverage with finding alternative health insurance options; (4) helping ensure 
health plan options meet the budgets and health insurance needs of child care professionals 
and child care employers; (5) providing informational resources; and (6) assessing current 
levels of health care access across the child care community by conducting a survey 
developed in consultation with MSDE and relevant nonprofit organizations and with a 
particular emphasis on providers who accept child care scholarship (CCS) vouchers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Department of Commerce increase by 
$250,000, and special fund revenues and expenditures for MHBE increase by $250,000 in 
FY 2026 only, reflecting contingent language in the FY 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly (discussed below). MSDE can partner with MHBE using existing 
resources. Any ongoing expenses for MHBE can be absorbed within existing resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$250,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$500,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 859/ Page 2 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
 
MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for individuals and 
small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the Maryland Health 
Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, compare rates, and 
determine their eligibility for federal advanced premium tax credits and Medicaid. 
 
Child Care 
 
“Prekindergarten provider hub” means a coordinated partnership between eligible 
prekindergarten providers and other entities established by MSDE. 
 
The State oversees a variety of early education services that are provided to Maryland 
children and their families in cooperation with local governments, local school systems, 
and private child care providers. 
 
The CCS Program (formerly known as the Child Care Subsidy Program) provides financial 
assistance with child care costs to low-income families that meet applicable State or federal 
requirements. The program is funded through a combination of State funds and the federal 
Child Care and Development Block Grant. All participating parents or guardians must meet 
a variety of technical requirements and must be working or enrolled in school, a training 
program, or a work-related activity. 
 
Child Care Capital Support Revolving Loan Fund 
 
Chapter 466 of 2022 established the Child Care Capital Support Revolving Loan Fund to 
provide no-interest loans for capital expenses to child care providers who participate in the 
CCS Program. The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by Commerce, with 
support from MSDE. Allowable expenses for the loans include acquisition, expansion, 
renovations, and new construction related to a child care facility. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Estimated Cost for the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
 
Under the bill, MHBE must promote access to health insurance for child care professionals, 
help child care professionals obtain health insurance, assist child care professionals who 
lose Medicaid coverage find alternative coverage, help ensure health plan options meet the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 859/ Page 3 
budgets and health insurance needs of child care professionals and employers, provide 
informational resources, and assess current levels of health care access across the child care 
community by conducting a specified survey. To complete these requirements, MHBE 
advises that it will prepare and conduct a targeted outreach campaign to help child care 
workers enroll in health insurance and conduct a survey of the landscape and availability 
of health insurance among child care providers at an estimated total cost of $250,000 in 
fiscal 2026 only. Work will be completed by existing MHBE staff in coordination with 
statewide Connector Entity partners. This estimate includes the cost of conducting the 
outreach campaign and survey, as well as associated printing, mailing, and 
communications costs. 
 
Funding Included in the Fiscal 2026 Budget 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly authorizes $250,000 in 
special funds from Commerce’s Child Care Capital Support Revolving Loan Fund to be 
transferred by budget amendment to MHBE. Funds may be used only to conduct a targeted 
outreach campaign to help child care workers enroll in health insurance and a survey of the 
landscape and availability of health insurance among child care providers. The transfer is 
contingent on the enactment of House Bill 859 or Senate Bill 611 promoting access to 
health insurance for child care professionals. Funds not expended for this purpose must be 
canceled. 
 
As the bill effectuates this contingency, Commerce special fund expenditures increase by 
$250,000 in fiscal 2026 to transfer funds to MHBE, while MHBE special fund revenues 
and expenditures increase by $250,000 in fiscal 2026 to reflect receipt of the transfer and 
associated spending to complete the required outreach campaign and survey. Any funds 
not expended for the outreach campaign or survey must be canceled and revert to 
Commerce’s Child Care Capital Support Revolving Loan Fund. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although not specified in the bill, the fiscal 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly requires MHBE to submit a report to the budget committees on 
the survey findings by January 1, 2026.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 611 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 859/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 5, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4