START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 877 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 877 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prison Education Delivery Reform Commission - Reporting and Sunset 
Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of the Prison Education Delivery Reform 
Commission by three years (from June 30, 2026, to June 30, 2029). The bill also extends 
by three years the deadlines by which the commission must submit (1) an interim report of 
its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly (from June 1, 2025, to 
June 1, 2028) and (2) a final report of its findings and recommendations (from 
January 1, 2026, to January 1, 2029). The bill takes effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by $28,500 in 
FY 2026 to maintain contractual staff for longer. Future years reflect annualization, 
inflation, and the elimination of the contractual position during FY 2029, after the final 
report is due. No effect on revenues.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
28,500 
65,600 
68,400 
42,100 
Net Effect 
$0 
($28,500) 
($65,600) 
($68,400) 
($42,100)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 877/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 945 and 946 of 2024 established the Prison Education Delivery 
Reform Commission, staffed by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
(GOCPP). The commission must (1) convene an advisory stakeholder group, as specified; 
(2) work with the advisory stakeholder group, including conducting roundtable discussion 
forums seeking public input in all geographic regions of the State; (3) develop an 
education-focused statewide framework of policies to invest in strategies to increase public 
safety and reduce recidivism of adult offenders, using a data-driven approach; (4) research 
best practices for the primary, secondary, postsecondary, and career or vocational 
education of those who are subject to the criminal and juvenile justice systems; (5) identify 
measures to mitigate risk factors that contribute to adult contact with the criminal justice 
system, with a focus on education; (6) evaluate current workforce programs and their 
effectiveness, as specified; and (7) request technical assistance from specified 
organizations. Members may not receive compensation. The commission must submit an 
interim report of its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly by 
June 1, 2025; a final report is due by January 1, 2026. The commission terminates 
June 30, 2026.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for GOCPP increase by $28,451 in 
fiscal 2026, which reflects costs to maintain one contractual program coordinator to 
continue providing support for the commission beyond January 31, 2026, the date the 
fiscal and policy notes for Chapters 945 and 946 (Senate Bill 623/House Bill 209) assumed 
the contractual staff would otherwise be eliminated. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$27,998 
Operating Expenses 
       453 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$28,451 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and termination of the 
contractual position on January 31, 2029, after submission of the commission’s final report.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
Any additional expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 877/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3