START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 819 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 819 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Procurement - Employee Stock Ownership Plan Preference - Pilot 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA), Morgan State University 
(MSU), St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC) to establish a procurement evaluation factor of up to 10%, subject to approval by 
the Board of Public Works (BPW), for offerors that use an employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP). The evaluation factor applies only to “covered” contracts that are (1) valued at 
less than $80 million and (2) solicited on or before June 30, 2030. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates on June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (general, nonbudgeted, and higher education funds) may 
increase by up to 10% for each procurement contract to which MSA, MSU, SMCM, and 
BCCC elect to apply the ESOP evaluation factor. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
“ESOP offeror” means a responsible offeror that uses an ESOP approved under § 401(A) 
of the Internal Revenue Code when making an offer on a procurement contract.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 819/ Page 2 
For competitive sealed proposals, a unit may include an ESOP evaluation factor in the 
technical evaluation for a competitive sealed proposal on a covered State procurement. If 
a point system is used for evaluation of proposals, the ESOP evaluation factor may be up 
to the percentage of the total allocable technical points (not to exceed 10%). If a point 
system is not used for evaluation of proposals, the ESOP evaluation factor may be ranked 
in its relative order of importance. 
 
As a condition of receiving a contract with an ESOP preference, a contractor must submit, 
with its proposal, written verification of the Internal Revenue Service determination letter 
for its ESOP. 
 
By December 1, 2028, MSA, BCCC, MSU, and SMCM must submit a report to the 
Legislative Policy Committee, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and the 
House Health and Government Operations Committee containing (1) the number and 
dollar value of contracts awarded to ESOP offerors in accordance with the bill during 
fiscal 2026 through 2028 and (2) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the ESOP preference 
program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Employee Stock Ownership Plan 
 
Under § 401(A) of the Internal Revenue Code, ESOPs are a type of defined contribution 
retirement plan similar to 401(k) plans, but instead of investing in a portfolio of assets, the 
plan gives employees ownership interest in the company they work for. 
 
Percentage Price Preferences 
 
Evaluation factors work similarly to percentage price preferences in that the evaluation 
factor allows a specified category of businesses to receive a preference in the bidding 
process in the form of additional points or higher ranking. Current law provides  
two percentage-based price preferences:  one for small businesses and another for locally 
grown foods. Under the Small Business Preference (SBP) program, and subject to approval 
by BPW, small businesses may receive a percentage preference of up to 8%, comprised of 
a base preference of 5% with an additional 2% for veteran-owned small businesses or  
3% for disabled veteran-owned small businesses. This percentage preference applies only 
to competitive sealed bids but not competitive sealed proposals. Additionally, State schools 
and facilities must establish a percentage preference of up to 5% for food grown in the 
State. However, this preference cannot be combined with any other percentage-based 
preference. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 819/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Procurement expenditures (general, higher education, and 
nonbudgeted funds) by MSA, BCCC, MSU, and SMCM may increase by up to 10% for 
each contract for which the evaluation factor is applied. As the application of the evaluation 
factor is optional, the number and value of covered contracts cannot be known in advance, 
and the evaluation factor applied may be less than 10%, a reliable estimate of the overall 
effect is not feasible. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s optional evaluation factor potentially benefits some 
small businesses but may disadvantage others to the extent the evaluation factor is used by 
the applicable agencies. Many small businesses are privately owned and therefore unable 
to provide an ESOP to employees, putting them at a competitive disadvantage when 
competing with publicly owned businesses that do offer ESOPs. While small businesses 
receive up to a 5% preference under SBP, this advantage may be offset when competing 
with larger companies that offer ESOPs. However, small businesses that do offer ESOPs 
benefit from the bill. It is unclear if the evaluation factor authorized by the bill can be used 
in conjunction with a preference awarded under SBP. If it can, small businesses that offer 
ESOPs have a substantial advantage over competitors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 653 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; Maryland Stadium Authority; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3