START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 850 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 850 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Workgroup on the Creation of a Data Dashboard for Public Work Contracts and 
Apprentices - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on the Creation of a Data Dashboard for Public Work 
Contracts and Apprentices to study and make recommendations regarding the most 
efficient and cost-effective method to create a publicly available dashboard that 
disaggregates information regarding public work contracts with the State. The  
Presiding Officers must designate co-chairs of the workgroup, and the Commissioner of 
Labor and Industry within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) must provide 
staff for the workgroup. Members of the workgroup may not be compensated but are 
entitled to expense reimbursements. By January 7, 2027, the workgroup must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025, and terminates January 31, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MD Labor can staff the workgroup with existing resources. It is assumed 
that expense reimbursements for members of the workgroup are minimal and also 
absorbable within existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  At the workgroup’s first meeting, it must vote to adopt a code of conduct 
providing for the acceptable conduct of workgroup members. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 850/ Page 2 
The workgroup must study the most efficient and cost-effective method to create a 
dashboard that includes, for public work contracts, information on: 
 
 
the name of each contractor and subcontractor; 
 
wages, including overtime wages, and benefits paid to each employee; 
 
the job classification of each employee; 
 
apprentices working under each contractor or subcontractor, as specified; 
 
each apprenticeship program sponsored by each contractor or subcontractor. 
 
The workgroup must make recommendations regarding: 
 
 
where the data dashboard should be located; 
 
necessary costs associated its development and maintenance; and 
 
time frames during which the data dashboard can be developed and implemented 
and the frequency with which the information can be updated. 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of Maryland’s prevailing wage law, including the 
definition of “public work,” please see the Appendix – Prevailing Wage Law. Also, for 
a description of apprenticeships in Maryland, please see the Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 3 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 850/ Page 3 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland, 
including mechanical service contractors that are part of public works projects, must pay 
their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, including 
a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that are 
constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
Eligible public works projects are: 
 
● 
those carried out by the State; 
● 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; 
● 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
● 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
Applicability in Maryland 
 
Generally, any public works contract valued at less than $250,000 is not required to pay 
prevailing wages. However, the prevailing wage law was amended in 2022 to include 
mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. Mechanical service contracts are 
defined as contracts for (1) heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, including duct work; 
(2) refrigeration systems; (3) plumbing systems, as specified; (4) electrical systems, as 
specified; and (5) elevator systems, as specified. 
 
The State prevailing wage rate also does not apply to (1) any part of a public works contract 
funded with federal funds for which the contractor must pay the prevailing wage rate 
determined by the federal government; (2) specified construction projects carried out by 
public service companies under order of the Public Service Commission (except the 
underground projects mentioned above); or (3) local House or Senate initiatives that 
receive State funds in the capital budget. 
 
Prevailing wages are wages paid to at least 50% of workers in a given locality who perform 
the same or similar work on projects that resemble the proposed public works project. If 
fewer than 50% of workers in a job category earn the same wage, the prevailing wage is 
the rate paid to at least 40% of those workers. If fewer than 40% receive the same wage 
rate, the prevailing wage is calculated using a weighted average of local pay rates. The  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 850/ Page 4 
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry is responsible for determining prevailing wages 
for each public works project and job category based on annual wage surveys, in which 
contractors and subcontractors working on both public works and private construction 
projects may participate. 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland, and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) are all exempt from the 
prevailing wage law. However, USM and MSU advise that they voluntarily comply with 
prevailing wage requirements for contracts that exceed the $250,000 threshold. MSA 
largely administers its own prevailing wage program, using wage rates borrowed from the 
commissioner’s annual wage survey. 
 
Enforcement 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including issuing a stop work order if the commissioner makes an initial 
determination that a contractor or subcontractor may have violated the prevailing wage 
requirements. Contractors found to have violated the prevailing wage law must pay 
restitution to the employees and liquidated damages to the public body in the amount of 
$20 a day for each worker who is paid less than the prevailing wage, or $250 per worker 
per day if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the obligation to pay the 
prevailing wage. If an employer fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to pay 
restitution, either the commissioner or an employee may sue the employer to recover the 
difference between the prevailing wage and paid wage. The court may order the employer 
to pay double or triple damages if it finds that the employer withheld wages or fringe 
benefits willfully and knowingly or with deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the 
law. 
 
The Governor must include at least $385,000 in the budget each year for the Prevailing 
Wage Unit within the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor). 
 
The number of prevailing wage projects rose dramatically following the Great Recession 
and has remained high each year since. MD Labor advises that, during fiscal 2024, its 
Prevailing Wage Unit monitored 948 projects, slightly up from the 913 projects in 
fiscal 2023 and 921 projects in fiscal 2022, but significantly more than the 496 projects in 
fiscal 2014. To accommodate the increase in projects, the number of prevailing wage 
investigators has increased, starting with doubling investigative staff in the unit from  
3 to 6 in fiscal 2016. In fiscal 2024, the legislature again increased staffing for the division 
allowing for 8 investigators in the unit. The fiscal 2025 budget provided  
9 new wage and hour positions for the division, 8 of which were assigned to the Prevailing 
Wage Unit. As of January 2025, the unit has 10 investigators, including 3 bilingual Spanish 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 850/ Page 5 
speakers, and is recruiting for an additional 5 investigators and a bilingual (Spanish) 
interpreter. 
 
History of the Prevailing Wage 
 
The federal Davis-Bacon Act, originally enacted in 1931, requires contractors working on 
federal public works contracts valued at more than $2,000 to pay their employees the 
prevailing local wage for their labor class, as determined by the U.S. Secretary of Labor. 
The general intent of the law, and similar state and local laws, is to stabilize local wage 
rates by preventing unfair bidding practices and wage competition. Thirty-two states and 
the District of Columbia currently have prevailing wage laws; since 1979, nine states have 
repealed their prevailing wage laws. 
 
Maryland adopted a prevailing wage law in 1945 (Chapter 999), but it only applied to road 
projects in Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. In 1969, the statute was amended 
to include State public works contracts of $500,000 or more. There have been periodic 
changes to the law and the definition of “prevailing wage.” In 1983, the law was broadened 
to include public works projects in which the State funds 50% or more of the total project 
costs and 75% or more in the case of public schools. Chapter 208 of 2000 reduced the 
prevailing wage threshold for public schools from 75% to 50% of construction costs, 
thereby bringing school construction projects in line with prevailing wage requirements for 
other public works projects. Chapters 281 and 282 of 2014 further lowered the State 
funding threshold for school construction projects to 25% of total construction costs, 
thereby requiring the vast majority of public school construction projects in the State to 
pay the prevailing wage, subject to the $500,000 contract value threshold.  
Chapters 57 and 58 of 2021 lowered the State funding threshold for all public works 
projects (including school construction) to 25% of total construction costs and lowered the 
contract value threshold for payment of prevailing wages to $250,000; however, legislative 
bond initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget are exempt from the 
requirement to pay prevailing wages. As noted above, Chapter 51 of 2022 extended the 
prevailing wage requirement to mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. 
 
Six Maryland jurisdictions – Allegany, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City – have local prevailing wage laws requiring 
public works projects in the jurisdiction to pay prevailing wages. 
 
Research on the Effects of Prevailing Wage on Contract Costs 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has reviewed research on the effect of 
prevailing wage laws on the cost of public works contracts and has found inconsistent 
and/or unreliable results. The primary challenge confronted by all prevailing wage 
researchers is identifying an appropriate “control group” consisting of projects of similar 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 850/ Page 6 
type, timing, and location that do not pay the prevailing wage. In most jurisdictions that 
require a prevailing wage, all projects of a specified type and size are subject to it, so there 
is no natural control group. Some researchers have compared project costs in states or 
localities before and after they adopted prevailing wage requirements, but their findings 
are clouded by the difference in time, during which construction costs changed and other 
factors were not consistent. Another deficiency in the research is that it almost always relies 
on project bid prices (i.e., the anticipated cost prior to the beginning of construction) rather 
than actual final costs. As most construction projects experience change orders or cost 
overruns affecting their cost, reliance on bid prices negatively affects the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, research findings related to the effect of the prevailing wage on project 
costs are inconsistent and often inconclusive. A similar review of research conducted by  
MD Labor (at the time, the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) for the  
Task Force to Study the Applicability of the Maryland Prevailing Wage Law also 
concluded that “data limitations create difficulty for researchers on both sides of the issue.” 
 
Local school systems occasionally solicit side-by-side bids with and without prevailing 
wages to help them decide whether they want to accept the full State match (and, thus, be 
subject to the prevailing wage) or a lesser State match without being subject to the 
prevailing wage. Data provided to the Public School Construction Program by 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Frederick, Howard, and Washington counties, from 2012 through 
2015, shows that the cost differential between bids with and without prevailing wages for 
266 individual bids submitted for 26 different school construction and renovation projects 
averaged 11.7%, with a range from 0% to 49%. As with other research data, these represent 
bid prices, not actual construction costs. An independent analysis of the Maryland 
side-by-side bid data concluded that factors other than prevailing wages, including bid 
timing and the level of competition for the bids, accounted for most of the differences 
between the prevailing wage and nonprevailing wage bids. 
 
One area of the research in which there is a general consensus, and which is supported by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, is that labor costs represent between 20% and 30% of 
construction costs (with materials and site costs making up most of the rest). Therefore, a 
10% gap between prevailing wages and market wages could theoretically increase total 
contract costs by about 2.5%, and a 20% gap in wages could increase total contract costs 
by about 6%. Given the empirical evidence that prevailing wages tend to be higher than 
nonprevailing wages and that labor costs are a significant portion of overall project costs, 
DLS believes that it is reasonable to expect that the prevailing wage requirement adds 
between 2% and 5% to the cost of a public works project. Given the inconsistency and 
inconclusiveness of the empirical research, however, actual effects may vary by project, 
with some projects exhibiting higher cost differences and others experiencing negligible 
differences. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 850/ Page 7 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 850/ Page 8 
At the end of 2023, there were 11,271 apprentices registered in 124 different occupations. 
There were 2,016 Certificates of Completion for apprentices in 2023. The State added 
41 new apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship 
system has also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The 
percentage of minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 43% in 
December 2023. Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in 
November 2016 to 7.6% in December 2023. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met 4 times in 2023 and 10 times in 2024 and 
published the Interim Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. A final report is 
expected during calendar 2025. 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 

END OF PAGE 8