START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 939 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 939 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Commission for Women - Maryland Collaborative to Advance 
Implementation of Coverage of Over-the-Counter Birth Control 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Commission for Women to establish the Maryland 
Collaborative to Advance Implementation of Coverage of Over-the-Counter Birth Control. 
The commission must provide staff for the collaborative. A member of the collaborative 
may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The 
collaborative must submit to the Governor and the General Assembly (1) an interim report 
by January 1, 2026, and (2) a final report by December 1, 2027. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2028.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The commission can staff the collaborative with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the collaborative is to study and make recommendations 
to advance access to over-the-counter (OTC) birth control through (1) implementation of 
State coverage requirements for OTC birth control at pharmacies; (2) advancement of 
point-of-sale coverage options at retail counters, virtual retail platforms, and vending 
machines; (3) identification of public health initiatives to increase access to 
OTC birth control for individuals who do not have OTC birth control coverage or cannot 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 939/ Page 2 
access OTC birth control coverage; and (4) enhancement of education and engagement of 
consumers, health care practitioners, public health and community programs, and health 
care industry stakeholders. 
 
The collaborative must study (1) responses to the request for information on OTC coverage 
of preventive services published on October 4, 2023, by the U.S. Department of Labor, the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, and the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS); (2) responses to the proposed rule on OTC coverage issued by HHS on 
October 21, 2024; (3) a specified report on strategies for making OTC coverage work; and 
(4) other reports and materials on implementing coverage for OTC birth control. The 
collaborative may consult with specified organizations, entities, and stakeholders. The 
collaborative must make recommendations on its findings. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Over-the-counter Birth Control 
 
Under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), coverage of 
OTC preventive services without cost sharing is only required when prescribed by a health 
care provider. However, proposed federal rules issued in October 2024 would, among other 
things, require plans and issuers to cover recommended OTC contraceptive items without 
requiring a prescription and without imposing cost-sharing requirements. The proposed 
rules would be applicable to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
Maryland Commission for Women 
 
The Maryland Commission for Women in the Department of Human Services works to 
advance solutions and to expand social, political, and economic opportunities for all 
women. The commission must: 
 
 
stimulate and encourage study and review of the status of women in the State; 
 
strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems confronting women 
as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers; 
 
recommend methods of overcoming discrimination against women in public and 
private employment; 
 
encourage women to become candidates for public office; 
 
promote more effective methods for enabling women to develop their skills, 
continue their education, and be retrained; 
 
secure appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and contributions to 
the State; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 939/ Page 3 
 
work to develop healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s 
responsibilities; and 
 
inform the Executive and Legislative branches on issues concerning women, 
including offering testimony on these issues. 
 
The commission may (1) act as a clearinghouse for activities to avoid duplication of effort 
and (2) make surveys and appoint advisory committees in the fields of education, social 
services, labor laws and employment policies, law enforcement, health and safety, new and 
expanded services, legal rights, family relations, human relations, and volunteer services. 
The commission must submit an annual report to the Governor and General Assembly. The 
commission’s fiscal 2024 report can be found here.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 674 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Human 
Services; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3