START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 189

Chapter 189

(House Bill 943)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – Crimes of Malicious or Fraudulent Burning – Prohibitions and
Penalties

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from committing a certain crime of malicious or
fraudulent burning that results in the death of or serious physical injury to a
firefighter; and generally relating to crimes of malicious or fraudulent burning.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Law
Section 6–112
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

6–112.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CRIME OF MALICIOUS OR FRAUDULENT BURNING” MEANS A
VIOLATION OF § 6–104, § 6–105, OR § 6–106 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) “SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
3–201 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) A PERSON MAY NOT COMMIT A CRIME OF MALICIOUS OR FRAUDULENT
BURNING THAT RESULTS IN THE DEATH OF OR SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY TO A
FIREFIGHTER.

(C) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A FELONY AND
ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 10 YEARS.

(D) A SENTENCE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE SEPARATE FROM
AND CONSECUTIVE TO OR CONCURRENT WITH A SENTENCE IMPOSED FOR ANY
CRIME BASED ON THE ACT ESTABLISHING THE VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 189 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2