START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 953 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 953 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Sales - Homeowner Protection Program - Funding and Alterations 
 
This bill makes several changes relating to the Homeowner Protection Program (HPP), 
including requiring (1) additional information to be collected and reported; (2) additional 
efforts to encourage participation in the program; and (3) an annual appropriation of 
$250,000 of the interest on overdue State property tax, and annual county payments totaling 
$500,000, to the Homeowner Protection Fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually and special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase by $750,000 annually beginning in FY 2026. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
GF Expenditure 
$0.25 
$0.25 
$0.25 
$0.25 
$0.25 
SF Expenditure 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
$0.75 
Net Effect 
   ($0.25) 
($0.25) 
 ($0.25) 
($0.25) 
($0.25)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  County expenditures increase, collectively, by $500,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2026. County revenues are not expected to be materially affected. This bill imposes 
a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill makes the following changes relating to HPP:   
 
 
Description and link included on tax collector websites – The bill requires each 
county tax collector that maintains a website to include on the website in a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 953/ Page 2 
conspicuous location (1) a concise description of HPP and (2) a link to the 
application for the program. 
 
Additional information collected – In addition to existing data the State Department 
of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) must collect regarding each county’s tax sale 
process, SDAT must also obtain (1) the total number of real property tax accounts 
in each county during the second immediately preceding taxable year and the total 
number of real property tax accounts that became delinquent during the 
second immediately preceding taxable year and (2) the total amount of interest on 
overdue county real property taxes collected during the second immediately 
preceding taxable year. 
 
Additional information reported – In addition to existing information SDAT must 
include in its annual tax sale report concerning the activities of the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman, the department must include (1) the total number of persons making 
a voluntary donation to HPP through the website maintained by the department for 
such donations; (2) the total amount of voluntary donations made to HPP through 
the website; and (3) the balance of funds in the Homeowner Protection Fund as of 
the date of the report, and a detailed accounting of revenues received by the fund 
and expenditures made from the fund in the preceding taxable year. 
 
Maximizing enrollment – The State Tax Sale Ombudsman must prioritize 
maximizing enrollment in HPP through existing requirements to raise awareness of 
the program and disseminate applications through the ombudsman’s website and 
specified collaboration, and by (1) strongly encouraging all homeowners who meet 
the eligibility requirements to enroll in the program and (2) screening each 
homeowner who contacts the ombudsman for eligibility for HPP and, if the 
homeowner appears to be eligible, strongly encouraging the homeowner to complete 
an application for the program. 
 
Repeal of authorization to charge interest – The bill repeals an authorization, under 
HPP, for SDAT to charge interest on unpaid taxes owed to the department. 
 
Appropriation of interest on overdue State property tax – The Governor must 
include in the annual budget bill for each fiscal year an appropriation to the 
Homeowner Protection Fund (under HPP) of $250,000 of the interest on overdue 
State property tax. 
 
County government payments – The bill requires that county governments 
collectively pay $500,000 to the Homeowner Protection Fund each fiscal year that 
is (1) allocated among the counties based on the number of real property accounts 
in each county as a percentage of the total number of real property accounts 
statewide as of July 1 of the preceding fiscal year; (2) derived from interest on 
overdue county property tax; and (3) remitted to SDAT by each county on the first 
day of each fiscal year. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 953/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Homeowner Protection Program 
 
Chapter 382 of 2021 established HPP, administered by the State Tax Sale Ombudsman, 
and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. The program diverts 
vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an alternative program 
– through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after the lien is sold at a 
tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; (2) assist 
homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their homes. 
 
Chapter 856 of 2024 requires SDAT to maintain a website that any person may use to 
donate to HPP and requires local tax collectors to include a separate insert, provided by the 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman, with property tax bills that encourages taxpayers to donate to 
HPP through the website. 
 
The ombudsman must (1) prominently advertise the program and make applications 
available on the ombudsman’s website and (2) collaborate with local governments, 
community organizations, and public and private providers of social services and benefits 
to raise awareness of the program and disseminate applications. 
 
SDAT is authorized to charge interest on unpaid taxes owed to the department under the 
program, at a rate of up to 6%; however, the ombudsman may set a lower interest rate or 
waive interest entirely at the ombudsman’s discretion. 
 
The Homeowner Protection Fund consists of (1) tax and interest payments made to the 
department by homeowners enrolled in HPP; (2) money appropriated in the State budget 
to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any other source accepted 
for the benefit of the fund. For each of fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor is required 
to include an appropriation of $750,000 for the fund in the annual budget bill. The fund 
may be used only for any expenses associated with HPP. The fund may not be used for any 
expenses of the tax sale ombudsman’s office that are not directly related to the program. 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget and the 
fund is the exclusive source of funding for the program. 
 
Annual Survey of County Tax Sale Information 
 
SDAT is required to conduct an annual survey of each county that conducts a tax sale, to 
obtain specified information, including data relating to the number of properties subject to 
tax sale and the total and average lien amounts for those properties. Each county must 
provide the information on the form that SDAT provides, and the department is required 
to issue a report each year that includes an analysis and summary of the information 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 953/ Page 4 
collected as well as specified information concerning the activities of the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman. 
 
State Property Tax 
 
The State property tax rate is established annually by the Board of Public Works, which is 
required by law to set a rate necessary to pay debt service on State general obligation (GO) 
bonds, except to the extent that funds are provided from other sources. The current State 
real property tax rate is $0.112 per $100 of assessment. The fiscal 2026 budget assumes 
$1.1 billion in State property tax revenues to the Annuity Bond Fund (ABF). In addition, 
$181.7 million in general funds are budgeted to the ABF, since the State property tax rate 
is not set high enough to cover the full cost of the debt service payments on the State’s 
GO bonds. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually and 
special fund (Homeowner Protection Fund) revenues and expenditures increase by 
$750,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. This estimate assumes:   
 
 
$250,000 in general funds is appropriated annually to fund the State’s debt service 
in place of State property tax interest revenues that are appropriated to the 
Homeowner Protection Fund under the bill. The fiscal 2026 funding (both the 
appropriation of State property tax interest revenues to the Homeowner Protection 
Fund and appropriation of general funds for debt service to replace the interest 
revenues) is at the Governor’s discretion. 
 
The Homeowner Protection Fund receives $500,000 from county payments, 
pursuant to the bill, each year beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
The full amount of funding received by the fund is spent each year under HPP. 
 
Any additional staff or other resources needed by the State Tax Sale Ombudsman’s Office 
to administer the funding is assumed to be covered by the above special fund expenditures 
from the Homeowner Protection Fund, as expenses of HPP, as authorized in statute. 
 
The bill’s repeal of the authorization for SDAT to charge interest on unpaid taxes owed to 
the department under HPP is assumed to not materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County government expenditures increase, collectively, by  
$500,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. The estimated amount for each county, which 
is based on their share of real property accounts, is shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 953/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
County Share of Required $500,000 Payment to Homeowner Protection Fund 
 
County 
Amount 
Allegany 
$8,609 
Anne Arundel 
46,815 
Baltimore City 
49,448 
Baltimore 
63,582 
Calvert 
8,988 
Caroline 
3,480 
Carroll 
14,386 
Cecil 
10,045 
Charles 
14,935 
Dorchester 
4,729 
Frederick 
22,992 
Garrett 
6,312 
Harford 
21,378 
Howard 
23,340 
Kent 
2,805 
Montgomery 
72,720 
Prince George’s 
64,798 
Queen Anne’s 
5,700 
St. Mary’s 
10,624 
Somerset 
3,531 
Talbot 
4,559 
Washington 
12,614 
Wicomico 
9,793 
Worcester 
13,816 
Total 
$500,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 953/ Page 6 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that would otherwise generate revenue from tax 
sales that no longer occur under the bill (due to greater enrollment in HPP) may be 
meaningfully affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and Garrett counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Budget and Management; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6