START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 974 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 974 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Preventive Services - High Deductible Health Plans and 
Enforcement Authority 
 
 
This bill requires the Insurance Commissioner to enforce the requirement that each carrier 
provide coverage for specified preventive services without cost-sharing requirements 
consistent with the recommendations and guidelines in effect on December 31, 2024, as 
set by specified entities and related federal rules or guidance. Further, the Commissioner 
may adopt regulations necessary to carry out the bill, consistent with federal statutes, rules, 
and guidance in effect either on December 31, 2024, or at a later date that enhance the 
scope of preventive services to the benefit of consumers in the State. Alternatively, the 
Commissioner may adopt regulations to require carriers to provide coverage without 
cost-sharing requirements for any future preventive services recommendations and 
guidelines (issued after December 31, 2024) by specified entities and related federal rules 
or guidance. The bill is subject to an existing provision of law that permits a religious 
organization to request an exclusion from contraceptive coverage if it conflicts with the 
religious organization’s bona fide religious beliefs and practices. The bill also clarifies that, 
if an insured or enrollee is covered under a high-deductible health plan, a carrier may apply 
the deductible to specified preventive services unless the Commissioner determines 
otherwise, as specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration can adopt regulations with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 974/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each carrier must provide coverage for and may not impose any 
cost-sharing requirements, including copayments, coinsurance, or deductibles, with 
specified exception, for: 
 
 
evidence-based items or services that have in effect a rating of A or B in the current 
recommendations of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) with 
respect to the individual involved; 
 
immunizations for routine use in children, adolescents, and adults, as specified; 
 
with respect to infants, children, and adolescents, evidence-informed preventive 
care and screenings provided for in comprehensive guidelines supported by the 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA); and 
 
with respect to women, preventive care and screenings and contraceptive coverage 
as provided for in comprehensive guidelines supported by HRSA, as specified. 
 
To the extent that cost-sharing is otherwise allowed under federal or State law, a health 
benefit plan that uses a network of providers may impose cost-sharing requirements for 
evidence-based items or services that have in effect a rating of A or B in the current 
recommendations of USPSTF that are delivered by an out-of-network provider. 
 
Under § 15-826 of the Insurance Article, carriers must provide coverage for any U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration-approved prescription contraceptive drug or device, including 
coverage for the insertion or removal or any medically necessary examination associated 
with the use of a contraceptive drug or device. Carriers may not impose a different 
copayment or coinsurance for a contraceptive drug or device than is imposed for any other 
prescription. A religious organization may request an exclusion from this coverage if it 
conflicts with the religious organization’s bona fide religious beliefs and practices. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 974/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3