START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 988 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 988 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Maryland Route 200 
(Intercounty Connector)  
MC 10-25 
 
   
This bill authorizes the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) to place and use speed 
monitoring systems (speed cameras) on Maryland Route 200 (Intercounty Connector 
(ICC)) in Montgomery County. The State Highway Administration (SHA) must provide 
MDTA with access to its existing speed monitoring systems and vendor contracts to assist 
MDTA in planning and implementing its own speed cameras. All civil penalties resulting 
from citations issued from these cameras must be paid to the District Court, and the 
District Court must remit the penalty revenue to MDTA. The bill also makes a series of 
technical and conforming changes, many of which simply clarify the flow of revenues from 
all automated enforcement systems used in the State and ensure the continuation of relevant 
provisions when other Acts that previously authorized the use of automated enforcement 
systems terminate. However, the bill also requires all revenues derived from certain 
State-operated automated enforcement systems to initially be paid directly to the 
District Court. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $277,800 in FY 2026 
for one-time programming costs. To the extent that speed cameras are placed along the 
ICC in Montgomery County, nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for MDTA increase, 
potentially significantly, beginning as early as FY 2026; revenues are anticipated to fully 
offset any administrative program costs incurred by MDTA. Any additional caseload for 
the District Court can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 988/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Speed Cameras on the Intercounty Connector in Montgomery County 
 
The bill incorporates the authorization for MDTA to place and use speed cameras within 
current statutory provisions governing the usage of speed cameras in specified locations 
throughout the State. Notably and consistent with the requirements governing most other 
speed cameras used in the State:   
 
 
before activating a speed camera, MDTA must take specified steps to notify the 
general public of the placement of the speed camera; 
 
MDTA must ensure there is specified signage notifying motorists that a speed 
camera is in use; 
 
MDTA must report on its usage of speed cameras in the same manner as local 
jurisdictions do to the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission; and 
 
the maximum civil penalty for a violation recorded from a speed camera placed on 
the ICC by MDTA is $40. 
 
Collection of Automated Enforcement System Revenues 
 
The bill requires all penalty revenues from State-operated traffic control signal monitoring 
systems, work zone speed control systems, speed monitoring systems, and bus lane 
monitoring systems to be paid directly to the District Court (instead of only penalty 
revenues derived from these systems in contested cases). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Transportation Authority and State Highway Administration 
 
Since 1971, MDTA has been responsible for constructing, managing, operating, and 
improving the State’s toll facilities (for example, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the 
Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial/Senator Thomas “Mac” Middleton Bridge) and for 
financing new revenue-producing transportation projects. MDTA is a nonbudgeted State 
agency, meaning that its budget is not subject to the General Assembly’s appropriation 
process. 
 
SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately 16,800 lane miles of road, 
2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and 80 miles of sound/noise barriers 
in the State, including Maryland Route 210. It also has responsibility for planning, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 988/ Page 3 
designing, constructing, and maintaining these roads and bridges to safety and performance 
standards while considering sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. SHA must 
construct, reconstruct, and repair State highways as necessary and maintain them in good 
condition. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by SHA. Similar requirements apply to speed cameras established on 
Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of institutions of higher education 
in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, Maryland Route 175 in 
Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the Maryland Route 175/295 interchange 
and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, and at the intersection of 
Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in Talbot County. 
 
In Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties only, speed monitoring 
systems may be used on a highway in a residential district with a maximum posted speed 
limit of 35 miles per hour. The aforementioned signage requirements do not apply to these 
speed cameras. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner that includes specified information, including a copy of the recorded 
image, the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty 
imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a 
citation may:   
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 988/ Page 4 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation, directly to 
the political subdivision; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
The civil penalty may not exceed $40, and the District Court must prescribe:   
 
 
a uniform citation form that includes specified information and allows the person 
receiving the citation to pay the citation or contest the citation by standing trial, as 
specified; and 
 
a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons who 
choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the relevant political subdivision, 
in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and consequently the general 
fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Generally, from the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction 
may recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
District Court and Penalty Revenues from State-operated Systems 
 
As noted above, the bill requires all penalty revenues from specified State-operated 
automated enforcement systems to be paid to the District Court; however, under current 
law, only penalty revenues from contested cases are paid to the District Court. To 
accommodate this change and ensure its cashiering systems are capable of collecting and 
accounting for revenues from prepaid citations, the District Court must upgrade its systems 
at an estimated cost of $277,768 in fiscal 2026 only. 
 
While all civil penalties resulting from citations newly issued under the bill are collected 
by the District Court, they are subsequently remitted to MDTA. This analysis assumes that, 
although under the bill, all civil penalties from other State‐operated automated enforcement 
systems are also initially paid directly to the District Court, the District Court remits the 
penalty revenues as otherwise prescribed under statute, resulting in no general fund or 
special fund impact from that requirement. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 988/ Page 5 
Any increase in District Court caseloads from new speed cameras on the ICC in 
Montgomery County can likely be handled with existing resources. 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority  
 
MDTA advises that, under the bill, it is considering placing two speed cameras on the ICC 
within Montgomery County; MDTA anticipates administrative costs for the speed camera 
program to total about $1.5 million annually.  
 
As the bill requires all ICC citation revenues to be remitted to MDTA, if these cameras are 
installed, nonbudgeted revenues are anticipated to increase significantly. The exact number 
of citations that may be issued once the speed camera program is implemented depends on 
several factors, including the volume of traffic at each camera location and any deterrent 
effect the cameras may have. Nevertheless, the Department of Legislative Services advises 
that the number of citations issued under the bill may be significant.  
 
Based on program data from work zone speed control systems, which are managed by 
SHA, revenues received from a speed monitoring system authorization on the ICC may 
likewise be significant. In fiscal 2024, the Work Zone Safety Program issued 
367,388 citations and collected $12.8 million in penalty revenues. Thus, reflective of these 
citation levels, the fine revenues for ICC speed camera citations are likely to be more than 
sufficient to cover MDTA’s anticipated costs noted above.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1369 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Comptroller’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; 
Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5