START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 932 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 932 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Ethics - Conflicts of Interest and Blind Trust - Governor 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, within six months of taking the oath of office, to (1) place 
all of the Governor’s interests in a blind trust except those exempted by the State Ethics 
Commission (SEC), as specified, or (2) divest interests that SEC determines may pose a 
conflict of interest, as specified. SEC must adopt regulations that, among other things, 
establish standards and requirements for exempting the Governor’s interests from the blind 
trust requirement. SEC must publish on its website any blind trust agreement, 
nonparticipation agreement, and financial disclosures regarding the Governor’s interests. 
Business entities in which the Governor or specified “restricted individuals” hold interests, 
as specified, must disclose those interests to SEC if the business seeks to obtain a State 
grant, competitive award, or contract. Finally, the bill establishes a fine for noncompliance 
by the Governor and penalties for business entities that fail to comply with the disclosure 
requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $95,000 only in FY 2026 for 
contractual information technology (IT) services. The bill’s penalty provisions are not 
expected to materially affect special fund revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
95,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($95,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 932/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Blind Trust 
 
The blind trust must be approved by SEC and operated in accordance with regulations 
adopted by SEC. For good cause shown, SEC may extend the deadline to complete the 
establishment of a blind trust or divestiture by a reasonable amount of time. 
 
A Governor-elect must consult with SEC to begin the process of establishing a certified 
blind trust or divesting of private assets.  
 
The trustee of the blind trust appointed by the Governor must be a financial institution or 
organization that has at least two years of experience in managing trusts. The trustee is 
generally prohibited from providing the Governor with any information about the 
management or income of the trust during the Governor’s term of office, except that the 
trustee may provide the Governor with enough information necessary to file tax returns. 
 
Exempted Interests 
 
The Governor may not fail to include any interest in a blind trust without SEC’s written 
approval. In granting an exemption from the blind trust requirement, SEC must consider 
issues it determines appropriate to prevent conflicts of interest, including whether the 
interest:   
 
 
involves a closely held corporation or family business; 
 
is readily marketable; 
 
has an impact unique to the Governor; or 
 
is subject to certain restrictions or encumbrances. 
 
Nonparticipation Agreements for Exempted Interests 
 
For interests exempted from the blind trust by SEC, the Governor must enter into a 
nonparticipation agreement with SEC that prohibits the Governor from participating in any 
matter involving the exempted interest, including matters before the Board of Public Works 
(BPW). SEC must post the nonparticipation agreement or agreements online and provide 
copies to the Presiding Officers, the Joint Ethics Committee, and the Executive Secretary 
and General Counsel of BPW. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 932/ Page 3 
Disclosure of Business Interests 
 
A “restricted individual” is defined as (1) a spouse of the Governor; (2) a parent or 
stepparent of the Governor; (3) a sibling or stepsibling of the Governor; (4) a child, 
stepchild, foster child, or ward of the Governor; (5) a mother-in-law or father-in-law of the 
Governor; (6) a son-in-law or daughter-in-law of the Governor; (7) a grandparent of the 
Governor or the Governor’s spouse; (8) a grandchild of the Governor; or (9) except for an 
employee of the Governor, any individual who resides in the Governor’s primary 
residence. 
 
If the Governor or a restricted individual, together or separately, hold at least 10% of capital 
stock in a corporation or any interest in a limited liability partnership or limited liability 
corporation, the business entity must disclose that interest to SEC if it is seeking a State 
grant, competitive award, or contract (including the sale or purchase or real or personal 
property). SEC must post any report it receives from a business entity on its website. A 
business that fails to make the required notification to SEC is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 or imprisonment of up to one year, or both. A fine 
must be distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund. 
 
With each solicitation published on eMaryland Marketplace beginning October 1, 2025, 
the Department of General Services (DGS) must include a check-off box for a bidder or 
offeror to disclose an ownership interest by the Governor or other restricted individuals. 
 
Annual Certification 
 
The Governor must annually certify compliance with the bill’s provisions. In addition, by 
January 31 of each year, the Governor must certify to SEC that the Governor has:   
 
 
obtained no new interests in the immediately preceding year that are not included in 
the blind trust; or 
 
entered into a nonparticipation agreement with SEC for any new interest obtained 
in the immediately preceding year that was not included in the blind trust. 
 
If SEC determines the Governor has violated the bill’s blind trust and disclosure 
requirements, SEC may impose a fine of up to $5,000 on the Governor for each violation. 
  
Application 
 
By July 1, 2026, SEC must review and update its regulations governing blind trusts and 
restrictions on employment, financial interests, and participation in State matters. The bill’s 
provisions apply to the Governor when the regulations take effect, and the Governor must 
comply with the bill’s requirements within six months after the regulations take effect. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 932/ Page 4 
Current Law:  
 
“Interest,” as defined under the State Ethics Law, means a legal or equitable economic 
interest that is owned or held wholly or partly, jointly or severally, or directly or indirectly, 
whether or not the economic interest is subject to an encumbrance or condition. An interest 
does not include, among other exclusions, an interest in an insurance policy, endowment 
policy, or annuity contract, as specified, or in a mutual fund or exchange-traded fund that 
is publicly traded, as specified. 
 
Fines for violations of the State Ethics Law are paid to Fair Campaign Financing Fund. 
 
“eMaryland Marketplace” or “eMaryland Marketplace Advantage” means the 
Internet-based procurement system managed by DGS. 
 
Financial Disclosure Statements  
 
With specified exceptions, a public official, State official, or candidate for office as a State 
official must file an annual financial disclosure statement with SEC. Statements generally 
must disclose (1) interests in real property; (2) interests in corporations and partnerships; 
(3) interests in and employment by business entities doing business with the State; (4) debts 
owed to entities doing business with or regulated by an individual’s governmental unit; 
(5) family members employed by the State; (6) sources of earned income; and (7) gifts, as 
specified. A financial disclosure filer may exclude assets held in a blind trust from a 
disclosure statement.  
 
A filer must disclose an interest held by (1) a spouse or child of an individual, if the interest 
was controlled, directly or indirectly, by the individual at any time during the applicable 
period; (2) a business entity in which the individual held a 30% or greater interest at any 
time during the applicable period; or (3) a trust or estate in which, at any time during the 
applicable period, the individual held a reversionary interest, was a beneficiary, or was a 
settlor, if a revocable trust. 
 
Participation Restrictions 
 
An official or employee generally may not participate in a matter if (1) the official or 
employee or a qualifying relative has an interest in the matter and the official or employee 
knows of the interest or (2) if a business entity with a specified relationship to the official 
or employee is a party to the matter. 
 
An official or employee who otherwise would be disqualified from participation in a matter 
must disclose the nature and circumstances of the conflict and may participate or act if 
(1) the disqualification would leave a body with less than a quorum capable of acting; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 932/ Page 5 
(2) the disqualified official or employee is required by law to act; or (3) the disqualified 
official or employee is the only individual authorized to act. 
 
Board of Public Works 
 
BPW, which consists of the Governor, Treasurer, and Comptroller, approves 
appropriations from State loans authorized by the General Assembly and appropriations 
for capital improvements, except those for State roads, bridges, and highways. BPW 
approves leases, contracts, and public-private partnership agreements executed by State 
agencies and is responsible for the adoption and promulgation of rules, regulations, and 
procedures for administering the State procurement law. The amount and timing of bond 
sales are also approved by BPW. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures by SEC increase by $75,000 in 
fiscal 2026 for contractual IT services to update two separate electronic training programs 
and update programming to the agency’s website to allow for additional information to be 
publicly available. SEC advises that all updates to electronic training systems are done by 
vendors. Further, general fund expenditures for DGS increase by $20,000 in fiscal 2026 
for contractual IT services to add the check-off box to eMaryland Marketplace. Thus, State 
expenditures are expected to increase by a combined total of $95,000 only in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 723 (Senators Feldman and Kagan) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Board of Public Works; Department of General Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Governor’s Office; 
Ethics Commission; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Office of the Public Defender; Baltimore, 
Cecil, and Frederick counties; State Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5