START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 910 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 910 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Exemption for Blind Individuals - Alteration 
 
 
This bill expands an existing property tax exemption for blind individuals or their surviving 
spouses by increasing from $15,000 to $40,000, the amount of the assessed value of the 
individual’s dwelling that is exempt from State and local property taxes. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025, and applies to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund revenues decrease by approximately $40,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2026. State expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000) 
($40,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease by approximately $450,000 annually 
beginning in FY 2026. Local expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Dwelling houses owned by specified blind individuals or their surviving 
spouses are provided a property tax exemption of $15,000 from the total assessed value. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The State Department of Assessments and Taxation indicates that  
1,431 accounts received the property tax exemption for the 2024 tax year. Based on the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 910/ Page 2 
current $15,000 exemption amount and the $0.112 State property tax rate (per $100 of 
assessed value), the current property tax exemption for blind individuals reduces State 
property tax revenues by approximately $25,000 annually. By increasing the exemption 
amount to $40,000, State property tax revenues would decrease by approximately $40,000 
annually beginning in fiscal 2026. This results in a State property tax savings of $28 for 
each individual. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease by approximately 
$450,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. The estimate is based on a weighted average 
county property tax rate of $1.20 (per $100 of assessment) and assumes that all properties 
have a total assessed value of greater than $40,000. The revenue estimate has been adjusted 
to reflect the municipal portion of the individual’s property tax bill. Based on this estimate, 
the local property tax savings average $320 for each individual. 
 
In response to a request for information on the potential impact of this legislation, 
Harford County indicates that 60 homeowners currently receive the property tax exemption 
and as a result, the bill will reduce county revenues by $14,700 annually. 
Montgomery County indicates that 181 homeowners currently receive the property tax 
exemption, with county revenues decreasing by $43,400 annually due to the higher 
exemption amount. Wicomico County indicates that 25 homeowners currently receive the 
property tax exemption, with county revenues decreasing by approximately 
$8,500 annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 911 (Senator Attar, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2