START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 657

Chapter 657

(House Bill 971)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park Advisory Committee

FOR the purpose of establishing the Anne Arundel County Crownsville Hospital Memorial
Park Advisory Committee to provide advice on the planning of and make
recommendations regarding the Anne Arundel County Crownsville Hospital
Memorial Park; and generally relating to the Anne Arundel County Crownsville
Hospital Memorial Park Advisory Committee.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 33–101 and 33–102 to be under the new title “Title 33. Anne Arundel County
Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park Advisory Committee”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

TITLE 33. ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK
ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

33–101.

IN THIS TITLE, “COMMITTEE” MEANS THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

33–102.

(A) THERE IS AN ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL
MEMORIAL PARK ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(B) THE COMMITTEE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) ONE MEMBER REPRESENTING THE OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR,
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR;

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF
COMMUNITY INITIATIVES, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 657 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND COMMISSION ON
AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY AND CULTURE, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S
DESIGNEE;

(4) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND WHO REPRESENTS
THE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK IS
LOCATED, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(3) (5) TWO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES WHO
REPRESENT THE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL
PARK IS LOCATED, APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(4) (6) ONE MEMBER OF THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY COUNCIL
WHO REPRESENTS THE DISTRICT IN WHICH THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL
MEMORIAL PARK IS LOCATED;

(5) (7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY,
DESIGNATED BY THE PRESIDENT OF BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY;

(6) (8) THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY BUDGET OFFICER, OR THE
BUDGET OFFICER’S DESIGNEE;

(7) (9) THE DIRECTOR OF THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY OFFICE
OF EQUITY AND HUMAN RIGHTS, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

(8) (10) SEVEN MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE
OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY WITH AT LEAST:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH EXPERTISE IN CULTURAL
HISTORY;

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH EXPERTISE IN RECREATION
AND PARKS;

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH EXPERTISE IN
INFRASTRUCTURE;

(IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH EXPERTISE IN HEALTH AND
WELLNESS;

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WHO REPRESENTS THE
COMMUNITIES ADJACENT TO THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 657

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH EXPERTISE IN CIVIL RIGHTS.

(C) THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
SHALL SERVE AS AN EX OFFICIO NONVOTING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE.

(D) THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY SHALL
DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OF THE COMMITTEE.

(E) THE COMMITTEE SHALL:

(1) ACT AS AN ADVISORY BODY AND PROVIDE ADVICE ON THE
PLANNING PROCESS, INCLUDING COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT, FOR CROWNSVILLE
HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK TO:

(I) THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY DELEGATION TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY;

(II) THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY;

(III) THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY; AND

(IV) THE DEPARTMENTS OF THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
GOVERNMENT;

(2) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK THAT TAKE INTO ACCOUNT:

(I) THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK MASTER
PLAN;

(II) THE CULTURAL HISTORY OF THE SITE;

(III) THE HEALTH AND WELLNESS OF THE RESIDENTS OF ANNE
ARUNDEL COUNTY;

(IV) THE RECREATION AND PARK NEEDS OF THE RESIDENTS OF
ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY; AND

(V) THE INFRASTRUCTURE NECESSARY TO SUPPORT ITEMS (I)
THROUGH (IV) OF THIS ITEM;

(3) COLLECT AND COMPILE PUBLIC INPUT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THE CROWNSVILLE HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 657 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO ENSURE THAT THE CROWNSVILLE
HOSPITAL MEMORIAL PARK IS A PLACE THAT:

(I) FOCUSES ON MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH AND
WELL–BEING;

(II) IS INTENTIONAL AND EQUITABLE IN PROVIDING ACCESS TO
THE PROPERTY;

(III) IS TRUTHFUL ABOUT THE HISTORY OF CROWNSVILLE
HOSPITAL;

(IV) PRESERVES AND CELEBRATES THE NATURAL BEAUTY OF
THE PROPERTY;

(V) PROTECTS AND RESTORES THE BEST OF THE PROPERTY’S
BUILT ENVIRONMENT; AND

(VI) CULTIVATES EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES.

(F) ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY 1 EACH YEAR, THE COMMITTEE SHALL
REPORT ITS ACHIEVEMENTS, FINDINGS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COUNTY
EXECUTIVE OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, THE COUNTY COUNCIL OF ANNE
ARUNDEL COUNTY, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY DELEGATION TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of September
30, 2030, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4