START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 995 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 995 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Workgroup to Study the Rise in Adverse Decisions in the State Health Care 
System - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Workgroup to Study the Rise in Adverse Decisions in the 
State Health Care System. The Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) and 
the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) jointly must provide staff to the workgroup. 
By December 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. A member of the workgroup may not 
receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. MIA and HSCRC can generally staff the workgroup 
with existing resources; however, HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $50,000 
in FY 2026 only for contractual services to support the workgroup, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
50,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 995/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must (1) review existing State adverse decision reporting 
requirements for all health payers in the State and include specified information in its 
final report; (2) make recommendations to improve State reporting on adverse decisions, 
including specified standardized definitions, methods, and processes; (3) develop strategies 
for, and make recommendations to reduce, the number of adverse decisions; and 
(4) develop recommendations for legislation to address the rise in adverse decisions and 
standardize State reporting requirements regarding adverse decisions across all payers. 
 
The workgroup comprises (1) one member of the Senate of Maryland; (2) one member of 
the House of Delegates; (3) the Maryland Insurance Commissioner (or designee); (4) the 
Deputy Secretary of the Maryland Medicaid Program (or designee); (5) the 
Executive Director of HSCRC (or designee); (6) the Executive Director of the Maryland 
Health Care Commission (or designee); (7) the Executive Director of the Chesapeake 
Regional Information System for our Patients (or designee); (8) the Director of the Health 
Education and Advocacy Unit of the Office of the Attorney General (or designee); and 
(9) specified members appointed by the Governor, including a representative of the 
Maryland Hospital Association, the League of Life and Health Insurers, a managed care 
plan, Maryland hospitals, a pharmacy services provider, a behavioral health provider, a 
commercial carrier, a patient advocacy organization, two physicians, a representative of 
MedChi, and a representative of a federally qualified health center. 
 
Current Law:  On a quarterly basis, each carrier must submit a report to the  
Insurance Commissioner that describes specified activities about appeals and grievances, 
including:   
 
 
the number of members entitled to health care benefits under a policy, plan, or 
certificate issued or delivered in the State by the carrier; 
 
the number of clean claims for reimbursement processed by the carrier; 
 
the outcome of each grievance filed with the carrier;  
 
the number and outcomes of cases that were considered emergency cases and 
subject to an expedited procedure;  
 
the time within which the carrier made a grievance decision on each case, including 
emergency and nonemergency cases;  
 
the number of grievances filed with the carrier that resulted from an adverse decision 
involving length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to the medical 
procedure involved; and  
 
the number of adverse decisions issued by the carrier for a nonemergency case and 
the type of service at issue in the adverse decisions.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 995/ Page 3 
The report must also describe the number and outcome of all other cases that resulted from 
an adverse decision involving the length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to 
the medical procedure involved. 
 
The Commissioner must compile an annual summary report based on the information 
provided by carriers (and information provided by the Secretary of Health regarding health 
maintenance organizations) and provide copies of the summary report to the Governor and 
the General Assembly. 
 
State Expenditures:  While MIA and HSCRC can generally staff the workgroup with 
existing resources, HSCRC advises that, as the workgroup is charged with gathering, 
reviewing, and analyzing a broad range of data, the commission must engage the services 
of a contractor to support data collection, analysis, and reporting. Thus, HSCRC special 
fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2026 only for contractual services to 
support the workgroup. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 776 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3