START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 967 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 967 
(Delegate Otto, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Somerset County Code of Public Local Laws - 2025 Edition - Legalization 
 
 
This bill legalizes the 2025 Edition of the Somerset County Code of Public Local Laws 
and any supplement to it that contains laws enacted by the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Somerset County publication costs are expected to be minimal in FY 2026 
and this amount is likely absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Somerset County is one of six counties that operate under the commission 
form of government. Commission counties have limited powers and only those powers that 
are expressly delegated by the General Assembly. Legalizing changes to the code of public 
local laws prior to publication of a new compilation must receive approval of the 
General Assembly. 
 
Additional Comments :  If a county makes nonsubstantive revisions to its code of public 
local laws, the revised code must be “legalized” by the General Assembly to the extent that 
local laws enacted by the General Assembly and contained in the county’s code are affected 
by the nonsubstantive revisions. Chapter 253 of 2016 legalized the 2016 edition of the 
Somerset County Code of Public Local Laws. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 967/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  SB 718 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2