START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 991 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 991 
(Delegate Harris, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Minority Business Enterprise Program - Extension and 
Reports 
 
 
This bill (1) extends the termination date for the Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) 
program by one year, to July 1, 2026; (2) extends the due date for the related disparity 
study also by one year, to September 30, 2025; (3) restores the application of the MBE 
program to public-private partnerships (P3s) and sports wagering licensees; and (4) makes 
corresponding adjustments to the termination and due dates for MBE contracting 
requirements and related disparity analyses under current law. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Extending the due dates for the disparity study and related analyses 
does not affect the total cost of those studies. Restoring the application of the MBE program 
to P3s and sports wagering licensees has no practical effect. The bill is otherwise technical 
and procedural in nature and has no effect on State government finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
For a detailed description of the State’s MBE program, please see the 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program. As the appendix notes, the 
MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 991/ Page 2 
Offshore Wind Projects 
 
To the extent practicable and authorized by the United States Constitution, approved 
applicants for a proposed offshore wind project must comply with the State’s 
MBE program. The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) must conduct an 
analysis of the 2017 disparity study, to determine if it applies to the type of work likely to 
be performed by an approved offshore wind project and report its findings to the 
Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) by September 30, 2024. 
 
Within six months of the approval of an offshore wind renewable energy credit (OREC) 
by the Public Service Commission (PSC), the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and 
Women Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Office of the 
Attorney General and an approved applicant, must establish a clear plan for setting 
reasonable and appropriate MBE participation goals and procedures for each phase of the 
qualified offshore wind project. To the extent practicable, the goals and procedures for 
offshore wind projects must be based on the requirements of the State’s MBE program. 
Every six months following the approval of an OREC application, an approved applicant 
must submit a report to PSC on its progress in establishing and implementing MBE 
participation goals and procedures. These requirements terminate July 1, 2025. 
 
The bill extends the termination of the authorization for MBE participation goals and 
procedures for offshore wind projects by one year, to July 1, 2026, to align with the new 
termination date of the MBE program. The bill also extends the deadline for the analysis 
of the disparity study to September 30, 2025, to align with the new deadline for the 
completion of the MBE program’s disparity study and clarifies that the analysis should be 
based on the disparity study currently underway. 
 
Video Lottery Terminals 
 
A video lottery operation applicant or a licensee is subject to the minority business 
participation goal established under current law for any construction related to video lottery 
terminals (VLTs) and for any procurement, including the procurement of equipment and 
ongoing services, related to the operation of VLTs. If a county in which a video lottery 
facility will be located has a higher MBE participation goal than the State, an applicant 
must meet the county’s higher standard to the extent possible. A county in which a 
video lottery facility will be located may impose local business, local minority business 
participation, and local hiring requirements to the extent authorized by local law and 
allowed by the United States Constitution. These requirements terminate July 1, 2025. 
 
The bill extends these requirements for one year, to July 1, 2026, to align with the 
new termination date of the MBE program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 991/ Page 3 
Public-private Partnerships 
 
Chapter 553 of 2020 established that, to the extent practicable and permitted by the 
U.S. Constitution, the provisions of the MBE program applied to P3s. The Board of Public 
Works could not approve a P3 agreement until a reporting agency, if permissible, 
established reasonable and appropriate MBE participation goals and procedures for the 
project, as specified. These provisions abrogated on June 30, 2023. In addition, MDOT 
was required to conduct specified analyses of MBE requirements for P3s by 
September 30, 2020, and again by September 30, 2024. 
 
The bill restores the abrogated provisions that apply the requirements of the MBE program 
to P3s. It also extends the deadline for MDOT’s follow-up analysis to September 30, 2025, 
to align with the new deadline for the completion of the MBE program’s disparity study 
and clarifies that the analysis should be based on the disparity study currently underway. 
 
Sports Wagering Licensees 
 
Chapter 356 of 2021 established that, to the extent practicable and permitted by the 
U.S. Constitution, a sports wagering licensee must comply with the State’s MBE program. 
Chapter 356 requires that within six months after the issuance of a sports wagering license, 
GOSBA, in consultation with the Office of Attorney General and the sports wagering 
licensee, must establish a clear plan for setting reasonable and appropriate MBE 
participation goals and procedures for the procurement of goods and services related to 
sports wagering, including construction, equipment, and ongoing services. These 
provisions terminated on July 1, 2024. 
 
The bill restores the terminated provisions that apply the requirements of the MBE program 
to sports wagering licensees and establishes a new termination date of July 1, 2026, 
consistent with the bill’s termination date for the MBE program.  
 
Capital Projects 
 
Chapter 728 of 2021, as previously amended, requires GOSBA, by July 1, 2025, to 
establish policies and guidelines for the development of MBE contract goals for capital 
projects that receive State capital grants of $3.0 million or more from a miscellaneous grant 
program, a House of Delegates initiative, or a Senate initiative. Following the issuance of 
policies and guidelines, GOSBA must – prior to the release of funds to an eligible grant 
recipient – review each project for subcontracting opportunities under the State’s MBE 
program and, if practicable, establish MBE subgoals for the project. Finally, it requires 
GOSBA to report to the General Assembly by December 31, 2025, on the establishment 
of MBE subgoals in accordance with the Act. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 991/ Page 4 
The bill extends the deadline for GOSBA to establish policies and guidelines by one year 
to July 1, 2026. It also extends the deadline for GOSBA’s report to the General Assembly 
by one year to December 31, 2026. 
 
State Retirement and Pension System Brokerage and Investment Management 
 
Chapter 641 of 2022, as previously amended, requires MDOT and GOSBA, in consultation 
with specified entities, to conduct a study regarding brokerage and investment management 
services used by the State Retirement and Pension System to evaluate whether remedial 
measures to assist minority- and women-owned businesses in those sectors are consistent 
with specified federal or constitutional requirements. MDOT and GOSBA must submit the 
findings of their study to LPC by December 31, 2025. The Act also requires GOSBA to 
develop race- and gender-neutral approaches to address the needs of minority and 
women-owned businesses in the brokerage and investment management services industry 
and market. It must submit its report to LPC by December 31, 2025. 
 
The bill extends both reporting deadlines to December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 829 (Senator Hayes) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Office of the Attorney General; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 991/ Page 5 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2025. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total + 2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 991/ Page 6 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average annual 
wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for comparable 
nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 33% lower than 
for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in the use of MBEs 
by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform work in designated 
categories of work. For instance, African American-owned construction businesses were 
paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they made up 10.3% of the 
construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority women-owned 
construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract dollars but made up 
13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these differences were large 
and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; Chapters 137 and 138 of 2023, 
which reauthorized the program for the tenth time since its inception, also extended the due 
date for the new disparity study to September 2024 to inform the subsequent 
reauthorization process. However, the study was not completed, and MDOT advises that it 
will request another extension. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major 
Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during fiscal 2023 and 2024; 
as the exhibit shows, rates can vary considerably from year to year. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 991/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Aging 
1.2% 
11.2% 
Agriculture 
3.2% 
6.2% 
Budget and Management 
32.9% 
3.0% 
Commerce 
53.8% 
77.5% 
Education 
11.5% 
21.9% 
Environment 
37.9% 
17.5% 
Executive Department 
4.6% 
2.2% 
General Services 
19.5% 
21.4% 
Health 
8.4% 
12.8% 
Higher Education Commission 
3.0% 
20.9% 
Housing and Community Development 
48.5% 
40.4% 
Human Services 
10.5% 
38.9% 
Information Technology 
14.4% 
23.7% 
Juvenile Services 
6.5% 
15.5% 
Labor 
18.6% 
3.7% 
Military 
22.3% 
27.5% 
Natural Resources 
10.2% 
5.9% 
Planning 
0.0% 
3.9% 
State Police 
20.9% 
12.7% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
6.2% 
28.5% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.1% 
20.4% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
20.2% 
25.1% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
48.5% 
21.0% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
13.1% 
16.4% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
21.7% 
27.0% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
12.0% 
n/a 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.4% 
19.8% 
Statewide Total1 
17.9% 
22.0% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
MBE:  Minority Business Enterprise 
n/a:  not available 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 991/ Page 8 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An “economically disadvantaged 
individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2025 is $2,136,382. 
 

END OF PAGE 8