START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 913 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 913 
(Delegate Wells)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City - Speed Monitoring Systems - Interstate 83 
 
 
This bill increases the number of speed monitoring systems (i.e., speed cameras) that may 
be placed on Interstate 83 in Baltimore City from two to four. However, the bill further 
specifies that only one speed monitoring system in each direction may be in operation at 
the same time on the highway. The bill also makes permanent the authorization to place 
speed cameras on Interstate 83 in Baltimore City by repealing the termination date of 
Chapter 628 of 2021, which originally authorized the placement of the speed cameras on 
the highway. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund revenues may increase beginning as 
early as FY 2026 to the extent that additional contested cases are decided in District Court, 
as discussed below. Any additional caseload for the District Court can be handled using 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for Baltimore City may increase beginning in 
FY 2026 to the extent that one or both additional cameras are installed, as discussed below. 
Expenditures may also be incurred as early as FY 2025 if the authorization is used 
immediately. Because the speed camera program terminates beginning FY 2027 absent the 
bill, revenues and expenditures for Baltimore City increase significantly beginning in that 
year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 913/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by the State Highway Administration. Similar requirements apply to speed 
cameras established on Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of 
institutions of higher education in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, 
Maryland Route 175 in Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the 
Maryland Route 175/295 interchange and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, 
and at the intersection of Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in 
Talbot County. 
 
An authorizing ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body of a local 
jurisdiction must establish certain procedures related to the movement or placement of 
speed monitoring systems. Specifically, if a jurisdiction moves (or places) a mobile (or 
stationary) speed monitoring system to (or at) a new location, the jurisdiction may not issue 
a citation for a violation recorded by that speed monitoring system (1) until signage is 
installed, as specified, and (2) for at least the first 15 calendar days after the signage is 
installed.  
 
Chapter 628 authorizes the placement of up to two speed cameras on Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City; however, that authorization terminates June 30, 2026. Chapter 628 also 
requires each sign indicating that a speed monitoring system is in use be proximate to a 
device that displays a real-time posting of the speed at which a driver is traveling. 
Additionally, for any speed camera established on Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, an 
agency must mail a warning notice instead of a citation for a violation recorded by the 
system during the first 90 days of its operation. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 913/ Page 3 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner that includes specified information, including a copy of the recorded 
image, the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty 
imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a 
citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation, directly to 
the political subdivision; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
The civil penalty may not exceed $40, and the District Court must prescribe: 
 
 
a uniform citation form that includes specified information and allows the person 
receiving the citation to pay the citation or contest the citation by standing trial, as 
specified; and 
 
a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons who 
choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the relevant political subdivision, 
in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and consequently the 
general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Generally, from the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction 
may recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. Chapter 628 
requires that any remaining balance after cost recovery be distributed to the Baltimore City 
Department of Transportation to assist in covering the costs of roadway improvements on 
Interstate 83 in Baltimore City. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  While the bill authorizes two additional speed cameras to be placed 
on Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, the bill only allows up to two speed cameras to be in 
operation at once (which is the same number authorized under current law). However, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 913/ Page 4 
bill’s authorization for additional systems allows Baltimore City to modify which cameras 
are in operation. 
 
Thus, under the bill, the number of citations issued in Baltimore City may increase 
beginning as soon as fiscal 2026, assuming at least one additional speed camera is placed 
on Interstate 83. Moreover, the bill repeals the termination date of Chapter 628, making 
permanent the existing speed cameras on the highways and any new cameras that may be 
placed pursuant to the bill’s authority. Absent the bill, beginning in fiscal 2027, any 
cameras on the highway would be required to cease operations. 
 
As a result of these changes, the number of individuals opting for a trial in District Court 
is also likely to increase (particularly beginning in fiscal 2027, when the authority for the 
speed cameras on Interstate 83 would have otherwise terminated). Accordingly, 
general fund revenues increase, as fine revenues paid by individuals convicted in 
District Court are paid into the general fund. As discussed in more detail below, a 
significant portion of Baltimore City’s speed camera citations and the associated revenues 
are from just the two existing speed cameras on Interstate 83. The increase in District Court 
caseloads can likely be handled with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase in fiscal 2026 assuming at 
least one additional camera is installed pursuant to the bill’s authorization to place 
two additional cameras on Interstate 83. (Although the bill takes effect in fiscal 2025, no 
impact on revenues is expected until fiscal 2026 due to the requirement for only warning 
notices be issued for the first 90 days of operation.) However, as noted above, similar to 
current law, only two cameras may be in operation at one time. Accordingly, any such 
impact from this provision may not be significant. 
 
Baltimore City expenditures also increase to procure, install, and maintain the additional 
cameras, and to procure and place signage displaying a driver’s real-time traveling speed, 
to the extent any existing signage is not redeployed for this purpose. If Baltimore City uses 
the authorization to install two additional speed cameras immediately, these costs could be 
borne in fiscal 2025. Additionally, expenditures continue in future fiscal years for costs 
associated with maintaining and operating the systems. 
 
Absent the bill, the authorization to place any speed cameras on Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City terminates beginning in fiscal 2027. Because the bill authorizes the program 
to continue in perpetuity, Baltimore City revenues and expenditures continue to increase 
significantly beginning in fiscal 2027 as the speed camera program continues its operations. 
 
For informational purposes only, according to the Maryland Police Training and Standards 
Commission’s annual report on speed monitoring systems in use in the State, in fiscal 2023 
there were 169 speed cameras in operation in Baltimore City and those cameras issued  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 913/ Page 5 
862,359 citations. According to the report, revenues from these cameras totaled  
$14.9 million in fiscal 2023 (averaging approximately $88,000 per camera) and 
administrative expenditures for the program in that year totaled $7.2 million (averaging 
approximately $42,650 per camera). Additionally, for fiscal 2023, 38.2% of all speed 
camera citations issued in Baltimore City were issued from the two existing speed cameras 
on Interstate 83. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office advises that, for fiscal 2024, the two speed cameras on 
Interstate 83 accounted for 27.9% of all speed camera citations issued for Baltimore City 
and generated $5.6 million. Baltimore City notes that more than 172,000 citations were 
issued during 2024 for speed violations on Interstate 83. 
 
Additional Comments:  House Bill 182, if enacted, would increase the maximum penalty 
for certain speed camera violations that apply under this bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 500 (Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Comptroller’s 
Office; Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 7, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5