START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 962 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 962 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Pediatric Hospital Overstay Patients and Workgroup on 
Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Overstays 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to ensure that a “pediatric 
hospital overstay patient” is transferred to and treated in the least restrictive setting when 
clinically indicated and when possible. The bill requires MDH and the Department of 
Human Services (DHS) to establish a pediatric hospital overstay coordinator in each 
department. The bill establishes a Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and 
Pediatric Hospital Overstays staffed by the State Council on Child Abuse and Neglect 
(SCCAN). The workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor 
and the General Assembly by October 1, 2025. For fiscal 2026, the Governor may include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation necessary to staff five additional beds at the 
John L. Gildner (JLG) Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents (RICA). The bill 
also specifies that the Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Registry and 
Referral System includes private and State inpatient and outpatient mental health and 
substance use services. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2025; workgroup 
provisions take effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $3.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2026 to fund staffing for five additional beds at the JLG RICA. MDH and 
DHS can designate pediatric hospital overstay coordinators and SCCAN can staff the 
workgroup using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
3,000,000 
3,000,000 
3,000,000 
3,000,000 
3,000,000 
Net Effect 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
($3,000,000) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 962/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Pediatric hospital overstay patient” means a patient younger than age 22 
who remains in an inpatient unit or emergency department (ED) of a hospital for more than 
48 hours after being medically cleared for discharge or transfer. 
 
DHS, in coordination with MDH, must ensure that a pediatric hospital overstay patient who 
is a child committed to the care and custody of DHS is transferred to and treated in the least 
restrictive setting when clinically indicated and when possible. 
 
If a pediatric hospital overstay patient remains in the hospital for more than 48 hours and 
the Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Registry and Referral System 
indicates that an appropriate inpatient bed is available, the hospital must seek the transfer 
to maintain the clinical stability of the patient. To ensure that a pediatric hospital overstay 
patient is treated in the least restrictive setting, a hospital may concurrently explore in-state 
and out-of-state placement options. 
 
Pediatric Hospital Overstay Coordinators 
 
The coordinators must act in the best interest of a pediatric hospital overstay patient by 
coordinating between hospitals, relevant State agencies and programs, and providers of 
mental health and substance use disorder (SUD) services. The coordinators must also:   
 
 
advocate on behalf of pediatric hospital overstay patients while maintaining 
appropriate patient confidentiality; 
 
review policies and procedures of relevant State agencies and make 
recommendations for necessary changes to better serve pediatric hospital overstay 
patients; 
 
maintain data on each pediatric hospital overstay patient, as specified; and 
 
report on the data collected to the Secretary of Health and the Secretary of Human 
Services. 
 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays 
 
“Child in an unlicensed setting” means an individual younger than age 21 in an 
out-of-home placement who is residing in a hotel, an office building, a shelter, or any other 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 962/ Page 3 
unlicensed setting. “Child in an unlicensed setting” does not include an individual younger 
than age 21 who is receiving a self-independent living stipend, living with kin awaiting 
approval for a placement, or on aftercare with a parent. 
 
The workgroup must meet before August 1, 2025, and at least once every 30 days 
thereafter. The workgroup must:   
 
 
complete an assessment of the number, type, and cost of the additional beds and 
supportive services needed to place all children in pediatric overstays and other 
unlicensed settings in the least restrictive settings;  
 
develop a comprehensive and sustainable resource development plan designed to 
increase the number of licensed settings and end the use of pediatric overstays and 
unlicensed settings;  
 
develop an implementation plan with comprehensive data to inform the plan; and  
 
determine the anticipated timeline for when the practice of placing children in 
unlicensed settings will cease. 
 
The workgroup must consist of representatives who have experience and knowledge of 
working with children with behavioral health challenges, adverse childhood experiences, 
and developmental disabilities, including:   
 
 
the Secretary of Health (or their designee); 
 
the Secretary of Human Services (or their designee); 
 
the Secretary of Juvenile Services (or their designee); 
 
the State Public Defender (or their designee); 
 
members appointed by the Governor, including one representative of (1) the 
Maryland Association of Resources for Families and Youth; (2) Disability Rights 
Maryland; (3) the Community Behavioral Health Association of Maryland; 
(4) Maryland Legal Aid; (5) the Court Appointed Special Advocates of Maryland; 
(6) the National Association of Social Workers - Maryland who is a hospital-based 
clinical social worker; (7) the Maryland Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics; (8) the Maryland Hospital Association; (9) a specialty psychiatric 
hospital; (10) a residential treatment provider in the State; and (11) a family of a 
child in foster care. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Adolescent Hospital Overstay Program 
 
The Maryland Children’s Cabinet established a three-year plan for 2021-2023 for 
(1) identifying children in crisis and meeting their needs; (2) developing residential 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 962/ Page 4 
treatment center (RTC) capacity for individuals with dual diagnoses; and (3) near real-time 
tracking by DHS of youth with behavioral health needs who are in hospitals. The 
Children’s Cabinet had a special interest in reducing the number of children placed 
out-of-state. To address out-of-state placements, the plan expressed the need for 
reestablishing interagency collaboration and development of quality educational, 
treatment, and residential services in Maryland, and the establishment of a workgroup to 
study and develop recommendations to address adolescent hospital overstays. 
 
In response, MDH established the Adolescent Hospital Overstay Grant Program. In 2021, 
MDH announced a request for proposals for $5.0 million in grant funds to expand 
RTC capacity. The focus of the grants is to provide care to children and adolescents who 
are the hardest to move out of hospitals, resulting in hospital overstays. By expanding bed 
capacity in RTCs for adolescents, the program aims to free up inpatient hospital beds that 
would otherwise be occupied by patients who are ready to be discharged for another setting. 
The increased availability of inpatient and RTC beds helps reduce ED wait time for 
adolescents who need those services. 
 
Residential Treatment Centers 
 
A “residential treatment center” means a psychiatric institution that provides campus-based 
intensive and extensive evaluation and treatment of children and adolescents with severe 
and chronic emotional disturbances who require a self-contained therapeutic, educational, 
and recreational program in a residential setting.  
 
MDH oversees two RICAs in the State. RICA-Baltimore is a mental health residential 
treatment facility located in Baltimore City that provides treatment and educational 
programs for adolescents (aged 11 to 18) who are experiencing emotional, behavioral and 
learning difficulties. Program services include psychiatric evaluation and treatment; 
24-hour nursing/residential services; individual, group, and family therapy; crisis 
intervention; special education; extended-year education program; alternative learning; 
rehabilitation services; and community reintegration. 
 
JLG RICA is a residential and day treatment center in Rockville providing mental health 
treatment, education, and rehabilitative services to children and adolescents and their 
families. 
 
Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder and Registry and Referral System 
 
The Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Registry and Referral System 
provides a statewide system through which health care providers can identify and access 
available inpatient and outpatient mental health and substance use services for patients. 
Subject to the availability of funds, MDH must develop and implement the registry and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 962/ Page 5 
referral system, in collaboration with the State-designated health information exchange. 
The registry and referral system must include (1) a searchable inventory of any provider of 
mental health and SUD services; (2) the capability to allow a provider to update registry 
information including the real-time availability of services; and (3) an electronic referral 
system that is available to any health care provider in the State to facilitate electronic 
referrals to mental health and SUD providers. 
 
Each hospital must ensure the availability of staff to identify appropriate and available 
services for patients in the hospital who are in need of mental health or SUD services and 
to assist the patient in accessing the services. 
 
State Council on Child Abuse and Neglect 
 
Under § 5-7A-06 of the Criminal Law Article, SCCAN is tasked with evaluating the extent 
to which State and local agencies are effectively discharging their child protection 
responsibilities. SCCAN must coordinate its activities with the State Citizens Review 
Board of Children, local citizen review panels, and child fatality review teams in order to 
avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. Under § 5-7A-09 of the Criminal Law Article, 
SCCAN must report and make recommendations annually to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on matters relating to the prevention, detection, prosecution, and 
treatment of child abuse and neglect, including policy and training needs. 
 
SCCAN must also coordinate with the Child Abuse Medical Providers (Maryland 
CHAMP) Initiative and include information on activities of the Maryland CHAMP 
Initiative in its annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly, including any 
data the initiative has collected on child abuse and neglect diagnoses and treatment. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill specifies that, for fiscal 2026, the Governor may include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation necessary to staff five additional beds at the 
JLG RICA. MDH advises that staffing five additional beds at the JLG RICA will cost 
approximately $3.0 million annually, beginning in fiscal 2026, and necessitate filling 31 of 
47 vacant positions.  
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a total of $6.0 million 
in general funds to address pediatric hospital overstays. Funds not expended for this 
purpose may not be transferred by budget amendment or otherwise to any other purpose 
and must revert to the general fund. Although these funds are not contingent on the 
enactment of the bill, this analysis assumes that at least one-half of this funding is allocated 
to staff five additional beds at the JLG RICA. Accordingly, the fiscal 2026 budget includes 
sufficient funding to meet the bill’s requirements. Annually thereafter, this analysis 
assumes general fund expenditures of approximately $3.0 million are incurred to maintain 
continuous staffing of the five additional beds at the JLG RICA. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 962/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  Pediatric hospital overstay patients may remain in an inpatient 
hospital unit or ED for more than 48 hours after being medically cleared for discharge or 
transfer for several reasons, including aggressive behaviors, developmental disabilities or 
autism with psychiatric features, sexually reactive behaviors, or because they are too young  
or too old for available out-of-home placements. As such, in-state placements are not 
always possible, particularly due to medical service needs or geographic location. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 696 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - April 4, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2025 
Enrolled - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 29, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6