START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 996 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 996 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Phenibut Consumer Protection Act (JT Alvey Phenibut 
Consumer Protection Act) 
 
This bill generally requires a “retailer” that prepares, distributes, sells, or exposes for sale 
a “phenibut product” to disclose on the product label the factual basis on which the 
representation is made. A violator is subject to a civil penalty. A retailer is prohibited from 
(1) preparing, distributing, selling, or exposing for sale a phenibut product that does not 
comply with the specified disclosure, has not been recognized by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) as a dietary ingredient or approved drug, or that is adulterated with, 
contaminated with, or contains other substances, as specified, and (2) distributing, selling, 
or exposing for sale a phenibut product to an individual younger than age 21. A violator is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a criminal penalty. A retailer may not advertise or 
market a phenibut product to minors, directly or indirectly, as specified and may not 
advertise a therapeutic benefit of phenibut, directly or indirectly. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances and operations. 
MDH can adopt regulations with existing budgeted resources. The civil and criminal 
penalty provisions of the bill are not anticipated to have a material impact on State finances 
or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances and operations. 
Local health departments can handle enforcement with existing budgeted resources. The 
civil and criminal penalty provisions of the bill are not anticipated to have a material impact 
on local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 996/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Phenibut product” means a product marketed for human consumption 
containing any beta-phenyl-gamma-aminobutyric acid HCL. 
 
“Retailer” means a person that (1) sells, prepares, or maintains phenibut products or 
(2) advertises, represents, or holds itself out as selling, preparing, or maintaining phenibut 
products. This includes a manufacturer, wholesaler, store, restaurant, hotel, catering 
facility, camp, bakery, delicatessen, supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, gas 
station, or food or drink company. 
 
Labeling Requirement 
 
A retailer that prepares, distributes, sells, or exposes for sale a phenibut product must 
disclose on the product label the factual basis on which any representations regarding the 
phenibut product are made. A violator is subject to a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 for 
a first violation and $2,000 for each subsequent offense. 
 
Prohibitions 
 
A retailer may not prepare, distribute, sell, or expose for sale a phenibut product that 
(1) does not comply with the specified disclosure requirement or (2) has not been 
recognized by FDA as a dietary ingredient or an approved drug. A violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to 90 days. 
 
A retailer is also prohibited from preparing, distributing, selling, or exposing for sale:   
 
 
a phenibut product that is adulterated or contaminated with a dangerous substance 
other than phenibut (including a phenibut product that is mixed or packed with 
another substance that affects the quality or strength of the phenibut product to a 
degree as to render the phenibut product injurious to a consumer); 
 
a phenibut product that is contaminated with a dangerous substance – meaning a 
poisonous or otherwise deleterious ingredient, including a controlled dangerous 
substance; or 
 
a product containing phenibut that does not include on its package or label the 
amount of beta-phenyl-gamma-aminobutyric acid HCL. 
 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $5,000 
and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 996/ Page 3 
A retailer may not distribute or sell a phenibut product to an individual younger than 
age 21. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up 
to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. 
 
In addition to any penalty under the bill, a retailer is also liable for any civil damages 
sustained by an individual resulting from the violation. In a prosecution for a violation 
under the bill, it is a defense that the retailer relied in good faith on the representations of 
a manufacturer, processor, packer, or distributor of a phenibut product. 
 
Advertising 
 
A retailer may not advertise (directly or indirectly) a therapeutic benefit of phenibut. 
 
A retailer may not advertise or market (directly or indirectly) phenibut products to minors. 
It is a violation of this prohibition for a retailer to use specified imagery or references in 
the advertising, promotion, packaging, or labeling of a phenibut product, including  
(1) a cartoon; (2) a superhero; (3) a video game reference; (4) an image of a food product 
primarily intended for minors; (5) a trademark that imitates or mimics the trademark of a 
product that has been advertised or marketed primarily to minors; (6) a symbol or celebrity 
that is primarily associated with minors or media primarily directed to minors; and (7) an 
image of an individual who appears to be younger than age 27. 
 
It is also a violation of this prohibition for a retailer to advertise or promote a phenibut 
product on an outdoor billboard or signboard that is within 500 feet of a school or at 
specified locations or in certain media if individuals younger than age 21 constitute 15% 
or more of the total audience as measured by competent and reliable survey evidence, 
including (1) a newspaper, magazine, periodical, or other publication or (2) a concert, 
stadium, sporting event, or other public event. 
 
Current Law:  The State does not currently regulate phenibut. However, Chapters 249 
and 748 of 2024 impose similar requirements and prohibitions on the labeling, advertising, 
and selling of tianeptine and kratom. 
 
Phenibut is a controlled substance in several European countries and Australia but is legal 
to possess and sell in the United States. However, it is not approved by FDA for clinical 
use, and its marketing is regulated by FDA. Phenibut does not meet the definition of a 
dietary ingredient under the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, but some companies 
have marketed phenibut products as dietary supplements or sleep aids. A dietary ingredient 
must fit into one of the following five categories, which phenibut does not fall into – amino 
acid, vitamin, herb, mineral, or dietary supplement that increases dietary intake. Thus, in 
April 2019, FDA issued three warning letters to companies whose phenibut products were 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 996/ Page 4 
improperly marketed as dietary supplements. So long as it is not branded as a dietary 
enhancement or supplement, it is not illegal to buy, possess, or sell phenibut. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business retailers that prepare, distribute, sell, or expose for 
sale a phenibut product must comply with the bill’s requirements. Violators are subject to 
civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
Additional Comments:  Phenibut is an anti-anxiety drug developed in Russia. It is 
considered a psychoactive substance, and often marketed as a supplement for relaxation, 
anxiety, and sleep, as well as to help with depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. In 
November 2021, Alabama made phenibut a Schedule II controlled substance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
American Addiction Centers; U.S. Food and Drug Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4