START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 969 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 969 
(Delegate A. Johnson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Payment in Lieu of Taxes Agreements - Broadband Service 
Providers 
 
 
This bill authorizes county governments to enter into a payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) 
agreement with broadband service providers. The bill specifies that for the term of any 
negotiated agreement, a provider’s real and personal property located in the county is 
exempt from the county property tax. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent that specified property is exempt from tax and PILOT agreements are negotiated 
between county governments and broadband service providers. The amount of any 
decrease depends on the terms of each agreement. Any decrease in county property tax 
revenues will be mitigated by the negotiated PILOT agreements between the county 
government and property owners. Local expenditures are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An agreement for a negotiated PILOT must provide that, for the term 
specified in the agreement (1) the provider must pay to the county a specified amount each 
year in lieu of the payment of county real and personal property tax and (2) all or a specified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 969/ Page 2 
part of the provider’s real and personal property located in the county is exempt from 
county property tax. 
 
Current Law:  A PILOT is an agreement between a jurisdiction and a developer, business, 
or landowner that substitutes a negotiated payment for annual real estate taxes that are 
traditionally due on a property. The Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority provides 
an overview on each county government’s statutory authority to impose local taxes and 
establish tax credits and exemptions, including PILOTs. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 
to the extent that county governments enter into PILOT agreements with broadband service 
providers and property owned by these providers is exempt from county property taxes. 
The amount of any revenue decrease depends on the terms of each negotiated agreement. 
Any decrease in county property tax revenues will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT 
agreements between the county government and property owners. 
 
The property tax is one of the leading revenue sources for county governments, accounting 
for 24.2% of total local revenues in fiscal 2023. In fiscal 2025, county governments are 
projected to collect approximately $10.8 billion in property tax revenues, which represents 
a $1.0 billion increase over a two-year period. Additional information on local property tax 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of the report is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 774 (Senators Hershey and Zucker) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2