START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 984 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 984 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities - Electric Cooperatives - Rate Proceedings 
 
 
This bill incorporates electric cooperatives into specified “make whole” rate proceedings 
held by the Public Service Commission (PSC) to determine whether additional revenues 
are required to earn a fair rate of return for certain relatively small public service 
companies. In addition to other public notification requirements in the make whole rate 
proceeding process, PSC must order an electric cooperative to conduct a public hearing, as 
specified. For an electric cooperative, the rate proceedings consider the company’s debt 
service coverage ratio, instead of a fair rate of return.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC and the Office of People’s Counsel, which participates in PSC 
proceedings, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Service Company Rates – Generally 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 984/ Page 2 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that:   
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article; 
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and 
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
At any time, PSC may investigate and determine the fair value of the property of a public 
service company used and useful in providing service to the public. 
 
Under § 3-104 of the Public Utilities Article, to the extent necessary to receive public 
comment for each application for a rate increase, PSC must hold a hearing at a convenient 
location and time during evening hours, either in person in the affected service area or 
virtually, with appropriate notice.  
 
“Make Whole” Rate Proceedings 
 
The following process applies to a gas company, electric company, telephone company, 
water company, or sewage disposal company whose gross annual revenues, for the most 
recent calendar year for which data is available, are less than 3% of the total gross 
annual revenues of all public service companies in the State during the same calendar year. 
The process does not apply in certain circumstances. 
 
When PSC suspends a proposed new rate for an affected public service company that is 
based on the existing authorized fair rate of return, PSC must promptly institute 
proceedings to determine if additional revenues are required to allow the company to earn 
the existing fair rate of return. PSC must (1) serve each of the parties to the previous base 
rate proceeding of that company with a copy of the suspension order and (2) order the 
company to publish information about the proposal in newspapers of general circulation in 
its service area. The proceedings must:   
 
 
account for revenues, expenses, and rate base in the same manner that PSC 
employed in determining a just and reasonable rate in the previous base rate 
proceeding; and  
 
exclude consideration of any increase in the rate of return, any change in rate 
structure, or any change in an accounting approach to any item pertaining to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 984/ Page 3 
revenues, expenses, or rate base inconsistent with that used by PSC in determining 
a just and reasonable rate in the previous base rate proceeding on the company.  
 
PSC must enter a final order as to the revenue requirement determined under the 
proceedings within 90 days after the proposed new rate is filed. The final order must 
(1) authorize a new rate distributing any change in the revenue requirement proportionally 
among the ratepayers without change in the rate structure and (2) state whether further 
proceedings must be held. 
 
If, in the final order, PSC decides to conduct further proceedings, then after a hearing, it 
may (1) modify the rate structure; (2) lower the authorized fair rate of return; or (3) modify 
the accounting approach to an item that pertains to revenues, expenses, or rate base. PSC 
must take any action on these further proceedings within 120 days after entry of a 
final order issued above, and the process is subject to additional specified requirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  There are four electric cooperatives in the State:  
Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative, Choptank Electric Cooperative, Somerset Rural 
Electric Cooperative, and A&N Electric Cooperative. In practice, PSC has limited 
jurisdiction over Choptank Electric Cooperative, as it is a “member-regulated cooperative” 
for the purposes of Title 5, Subtitle 6 of the Corporations and Associations Article. For 
electric cooperatives, debt service coverage ratio is used as a proxy for authorized rate of 
return. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3