START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 938 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 938 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Continuing Care Providers - Governing Bodies - Membership 
 
 
This bill requires the governing body of a continuing care provider that has only 
one subscriber to authorize the appointment of an alternate subscriber to serve as a regular 
member of the governing body if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the subscriber’s 
duties. The alternate subscriber may (1) attend all meetings of the governing body and 
(2) vote only if the regular subscriber is unable to fulfill the subscriber’s duties as a 
regular member of the governing body. The bill also makes conforming changes relating 
to regular and alternate subscribers. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Aging can modify existing documents and 
amend regulations to reflect the bill’s changes using existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 10-401 of the Human Services Article, “continuing care in a 
retirement community” means providing shelter and providing either medical and nursing 
or other health related services or making the services readily accessible through the 
provider or an affiliate of the provider, whether or not the services are specifically offered 
in written agreement for shelter (1) to an individual who is at least 60 years of age and not 
related by blood or marriage to the provider; (2) for the life of the individual or for a period 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 938/ Page 2 
exceeding one year; and (3) under one or more written agreements that require a transfer 
of assets or an entrance fee notwithstanding periodic changes. 
 
At least quarterly, each provider must hold a meeting open to all of the provider’s 
subscribers. The provider must summarize their operations, significant changes from the 
previous year, and goals and objectives for the next year, as well as answer subscribers’ 
questions. 
 
If a provider has a governing body, at least one of the provider’s subscribers must be a 
full and regular member of the governing body. If a provider owns or operates more than 
three facilities in the State, the governing body must include at least one of the provider’s 
subscribers for every three facilities in the State. 
 
A subscriber member of the governing body must be selected according to the same general 
written standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing body. The 
governing body must confer with the resident association at each of the provider’s facilities 
before the subscriber officially joins the governing body. A subscriber member of a 
governing body may report on nonconfidential deliberations, actions, and policies of the 
governing body to the resident association. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Baltimore City; Kent and 
Montgomery counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2