START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 105

Chapter 105

(House Bill 956)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Workgroup on Artificial Intelligence Implementation

FOR the purpose of establishing the Workgroup on Artificial Intelligence Implementation;
requiring the Workgroup to monitor and make recommendations regarding certain
issues related to artificial intelligence and consumer protection; and generally
relating to the Workgroup on Artificial Intelligence Implementation.

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 3.5–807
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

3.5–807.

(A) THERE IS A WORKGROUP ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
IMPLEMENTATION.

(B) THE WORKGROUP CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) TWO MEMBERS OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) TWO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S
DESIGNEE;

(4) THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE MARYLAND
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, OR THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER’S DESIGNEE; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 105 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) (I) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE
GOVERNOR:

(I) 1. FOUR THREE REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
MARYLAND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL;

(II) 2. THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
E–COMMERCE INDUSTRY;

(III) 3. THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY;

(IV) 4. THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE REAL
ESTATE COMMUNITY;

(V) 5. THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE HEALTH
CARE SECTOR, INCLUDING AT LEAST ONE REPRESENTATIVE WITH CLINICAL
EXPERIENCE; AND

(VI) 6. THREE TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
EDUCATION SECTOR;

7. THREE REPRESENTATIVES FROM ACADEMIA WITH
EXPERTISE IN THE DEVELOPMENT, OPERATION, OR SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF DATA
SCIENCE, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, OR MACHINE LEARNING;

8. TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS THAT FOCUS ON CIVIL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES; AND

9. ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MARYLAND
VETERANS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EXPERTISE;

(II) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT
OF THE SENATE:

1. TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE EXPERTISE THAT FOCUS ON
CONSUMER PROTECTIONS; AND

2. TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE CYBERSECURITY
SECTOR WITH EXPERTISE IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 105

(III) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE SPEAKER
OF THE HOUSE:

1. TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS THAT FOCUS ON ESTABLISHING DATA PRIVACY PROTECTIONS; AND

2. TWO REPRESENTATIVES THAT WORK WITH THE
AFL–CIO TECH INSTITUTE.

(C) THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
JOINTLY SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OF THE WORKGROUP.

(D) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE WORKGROUP
SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE MARYLAND CYBERSECURITY COUNCIL IN A MANNER
AGREED ON BY THE CHAIRS OF THE WORKGROUP AND THE COUNCIL.

(D) (E) THE DEPARTMENT UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND CENTER FOR
HEALTH AND HOMELAND SECURITY SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE WORKGROUP.

(E) (F) A MEMBER OF THE WORKGROUP:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
WORKGROUP; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(F) (G) THE WORKGROUP SHALL MONITOR ISSUES AND MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS RELATED TO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE INCLUDING:

(1) THE REGULATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE USED IN
DECISIONS THAT SIGNIFICANTLY IMPACT THE LIVELIHOOD AND LIFE
OPPORTUNITIES OF INDIVIDUALS IN THE STATE;

(2) DEPLOYER AND DEVELOPER OBLIGATIONS RELATED TO LABOR
AND EMPLOYMENT AND PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY RIGHTS;

(3) PROTECTION OF CONSUMER RIGHTS;

(4) CURRENT PRIVATE SECTOR USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE;

(5) GENERAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DISCLOSURES FOR ALL
CONSUMERS; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 105 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY FOR THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL’S OFFICE OF CONSUMER PROTECTION DIVISION; AND

(7) THE IMPACT OF THE USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN THE
DETERMINATION OF GOVERNMENT BENEFITS.

(G) (H) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
WORKGROUP SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE
SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE ECONOMIC MATTERS COMMITTEE.

(I) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$100,000 TO SUPPORT THE WORKGROUP.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2029, this
Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4