START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 943 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 943 
(Delegate Toles) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Crimes of Malicious or Fraudulent Burning - Prohibitions and 
Penalties 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from committing a “crime of malicious or fraudulent burning” 
that results in the death of or serious physical injury to a firefighter. A violator is guilty of 
a felony and subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years. A sentence imposed for a violation 
of the bill’s prohibition may be separate from and run consecutive to or concurrent with a 
sentence imposed for any crime based on the act establishing the violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in incarceration expenditures due to the bill’s 
penalty provision. The Judiciary and the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) can handle 
the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Crime of malicious or fraudulent burning” means a violation of:   
 
 
§ 6-104 of the Criminal Law Article (malicious burning of personal property in the 
first degree); 
 
§ 6-105 of the Criminal Law Article (malicious burning of personal property in the 
second degree); or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 943/ Page 2 
 
§ 6-106 of the Criminal Law Article (burning with intent to defraud). 
 
The bill incorporates the definition of “serious physical injury” under § 3-201 of the 
Criminal Law Article. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Malicious Burning 
 
A person may not willfully and maliciously set fire to or burn the personal property of 
another. A violator causing property damage of at least $1,000 is guilty of the felony of 
malicious burning in the first degree, which is punishable by imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a maximum fine of $5,000. A violator causing less than $1,000 in 
property damage is guilty of malicious burning in the second degree, which is a 
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 18 months and/or a maximum fine of 
$500. 
 
Burning with Intent to Defraud 
 
A person who sets fire to or burns property of any kind with the intent to defraud another 
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
Serious Physical Injury 
 
Section 3-201 of the Criminal Law Article defines “serious physical injury” as physical 
injury that:   
 
 
creates a substantial risk of death; or 
 
causes permanent or protracted serious (1) disfigurement; (2) loss of the function of 
any bodily member or organ; or (3) impairment of the function of any bodily 
member or organ. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State incarceration 
expenditures or workloads for the Judiciary or OPD. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s incarceration 
penalty due to more people being committed to State correctional facilities for longer 
periods of time. The number of people convicted of this proposed crime is expected to be 
minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 943/ Page 3 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary advises that any impact on its operations from the bill’s implementation 
should be minimal and can be absorbed with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information for fiscal 2024 on the number of violations (charges) filed 
and convictions in the District Court and circuit courts for the offenses defined under the 
bill as a crime of malicious or fraudulent burning and the number of sentences imposed in 
the circuit courts for those offenses. The Judiciary and the Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy (MSCCSP) advise, respectively, that it was not possible to 
identify how many of the violations filed or convictions or sentences imposed in 
fiscal 2024 for a crime of malicious or fraudulent burning involved the death of or serious 
physical injury to a firefighter. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Crimes of Malicious or Fraudulent Burning 
Fiscal 2024 
 
Charge 
District 
Court 
Violations 
Filed/Guilty 
Dispositions1 
Circuit Court 
Violations 
Filed/Guilty 
Dispositions 
MSCCSP 
Circuit Court 
Convictions 
(Individuals/Counts)2 
Criminal Law Article, § 6-104 
(Malicious Burning of Personal 
Property in the First Degree) 
56/0 
50/7 
7/7 
Criminal Law Article, § 6-105 
(Malicious Burning of Personal 
Property in the Second Degree) 
102/6 
49/7 
10/10 
Criminal Law Article, § 6-106 
(Burning w/ Intent to Defraud) 
2/0 
2/0 
0/0 
 
MSCCSP:  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy 
 
1 A violation is a charge filed with the court. It is not a conviction, and one person may be associated with 
multiple violations. 
2 Reflects data from the Maryland State Sentencing Guidelines Database for sentencing information 
received by MSCCSP for individuals sentenced in the State’s circuit courts. 
 
Sources:  Maryland Judiciary; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 943/ Page 4 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
OPD advises that the bill could result in new cases and require it to devote additional 
resources to existing clients charged with the new crime. Accordingly, OPD advises that 
the bill necessitates the hiring of one full-time assistant public defender, at a cost of 
$100,378 in fiscal 2026 and increasing to $137,209 by fiscal 2030. The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) advises that the bill is unlikely to warrant the hiring of an 
additional attorney, as any increase in OPD’s workload is expected to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing resources. 
 
DLS notes that any individual charged under the bill would already be facing a charge for 
an underlying crime under existing statute; thus, the bill would not require OPD to take on 
any new clients. The bill’s impact to OPD, if any, would be attributable to having to defend 
a small number of existing clients against a new charge that arises out of the same alleged 
conduct that led to them being charged with a crime of malicious or fraudulent burning. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 435 and HB 321 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 334 (Senator Waldstreicher, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Talbot counties; Maryland State Commission on 
Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4