START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 744

Chapter 744

(House Bill 936)

AN ACT concerning

Health Insurance – Cancellation and Nonrenewal of Coverage – Required Notice

FOR the purpose of requiring that a carrier provide ~~the~~ notice by certain electronic means,
in addition to written notice, of cancellation or nonrenewal of a small group market
health benefit plan ~~by~~ ~~certified~~ ~~mail,~~ ~~return~~ ~~receipt~~ ~~requested,~~ ~~and~~ ~~by~~ ~~electronic~~
~~means~~ and include information regarding additional health benefit coverage options
in the notice; and generally relating to cancellation and nonrenewal of health benefit
plans in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–1212(h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–1212(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

15–1212.

(h) When a carrier elects not to renew a particular product for all small employers
in the State, the carrier shall:

(1) provide notice of the nonrenewal at least 90 days before the date of the
nonrenewal to:

(i) each affected:

1. small employer; and

2. enrolled employee; and

(ii) the Commissioner;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 744 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) offer to each affected small employer the option to purchase all other
health benefit plans currently offered by the carrier in the small group market; and

(3) act uniformly without regard to the claims experience of any affected
small employer, or any health status–related factor of any affected individual.

(i) (1) Within 7 days after cancellation or nonrenewal of a health benefit plan,
the carrier shall send to each enrolled employee:

(I) written notice of its action BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
RECEIPT REQUESTED; AND

(II) NOTICE DELIVERED BY ELECTRONIC MEANS THAT
COMPLIES WITH § 27–601.2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE INFORMATION ON ADDITIONAL HEALTH BENEFIT
COVERAGE OPTIONS, INCLUDING CONTINUATION OF COVERAGE THROUGH THE
CONSOLIDATED OMNIBUS BUDGET RECONCILIATION ACT (COBRA), IF
AVAILABLE, AND PLANS AVAILABLE THROUGH THE MARYLAND HEALTH BENEFIT
EXCHANGE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
after January 1, 2026.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025~~ January 1, 2026.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2