START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 971 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 971 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park Advisory Committee 
 
 
This bill establishes the Anne Arundel County Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park 
Advisory Committee. The committee must (1) act as an advisory body and provide advice 
on the planning process for Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park; (2) make 
recommendations regarding the development of the memorial park; (3) collect and compile 
public input on the development of the memorial park; and (4) make recommendations to 
ensure the memorial park is a place that focuses on specified goals for the park. By 
February 1 each year, the committee must report its achievements, findings, and 
recommendations to the Anne Arundel County Executive, the Anne Arundel County 
Council, and the Anne Arundel County Delegation. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2030.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County operations or 
finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Crownsville Hospital Center, located in Anne Arundel County, served as 
a State-run psychiatric hospital from 1911 until it was closed in 2004. The hospital was 
first established for African American patients and remained racially segregated until 1963. 
In December 2022, Anne Arundel County acquired the Crownsville Hospital property from 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 971/ Page 2 
the State. Following the acquisition, the county renamed the property the Crownsville 
Hospital Memorial Park and began a master plan process to envision the future of the site. 
In September 2023, the Anne Arundel County Executive signed an executive order to 
create the Crownsville Advisory Committee for the Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park. 
On February 12, 2025, Anne Arundel County government released the final master plan 
report for the Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park. Additional information about the 
Crownsville Hospital Memorial Park is available on the county government’s website.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2