START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 929 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 929 
(Delegate Simpson, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Permanent Protective Orders - Consent 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that govern the issuance of a permanent protective order 
by specifying that an individual may consent to the issuance of such an order. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $30,300 in FY 2026 
only for one-time programming costs. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially 
affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person meeting specified relationship requirements may seek relief from 
abuse by filing a petition for a protective order. For the purpose of protective orders, 
“abuse” means (1) an act that causes serious bodily harm; (2) an act that places a person 
eligible for relief in fear of imminent serious bodily harm; (3) assault in any degree;  
(4) rape or sexual offense, as specified; (5) false imprisonment; (6) stalking; or (7) revenge 
porn. 
 
A judge may grant a final protective order if the judge finds by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred or if the respondent consents to the entry of 
the order. Among other relief, a final protective order may order the respondent to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 929/ Page 2 
(1) refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse any person eligible for relief; (2) refrain 
from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing any person eligible for relief; 
(3) refrain from entering the residence of any person eligible for relief; (4) remain away 
from the place of employment, school, or temporary residence of a person eligible for relief 
or home of other family members; or (5) remain away from a child care provider of a 
person eligible for relief while the child is in the provider’s care. A final protective order 
may also address issues relating to custody and visitation, use and possession of a home or 
vehicle, emergency family maintenance, counseling, payment of costs, and temporary 
possession of a pet. A final protective order must require the respondent to surrender to 
law enforcement authorities any firearm in the respondent’s possession and to refrain from 
possession of any firearm for the duration of the protective order. All relief granted in a 
final protective order is effective for the period stated in the order, generally up to a 
maximum of 12 months. A final protective order may be issued for up to two years in 
specified circumstances set forth in statute. Statutory provisions also set forth 
circumstances under which a final protective order may be modified, rescinded, or 
extended. 
 
A court must grant a permanent protective order against an individual if:   
 
 
an interim, temporary, or final protective order has been issued against the 
individual; 
 
(1) the individual was convicted and sentenced to serve a term of imprisonment of 
at least five years for the act of abuse that led to the issuance of the interim, 
temporary, or final protective order and the individual has served at least 12 months 
of the sentence or (2) during the term of the interim, temporary, or final protective 
order, the individual committed an act of abuse against the person eligible for relief 
and the individual was convicted and sentenced to serve a term of imprisonment of 
at least five years for the act and has served at least 12 months of the sentence; and 
 
the victim of the act of abuse described above, who was the person eligible for 
relief in the interim, temporary, or final protective order, requests the issuance of a 
permanent protective order. 
 
A permanent protective order may (1) only be terminated at the request of the victim and 
(2) contain only the relief that was granted in the original protective order that required the 
respondent to refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse the person eligible for relief or 
to refrain from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing the person eligible for relief. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 929/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 721 (Senator Henson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3