START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 970 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 970 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Insulin - Prohibition on Step Therapy or Fail-First Protocols 
 
 
This bill prohibits certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, or health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) from imposing a step therapy or 
fail-first protocol for insulin or an insulin analog that is approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) and used to treat Type 1, Type 2, or gestational diabetes. The 
bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) from the $125 rate and form filing fee in FY 2026 only. Review of 
filings can likely be handled with existing MIA resources. No impact on the 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program as the program does not 
have step therapy or fail-first protocols on insulin (or other medications) used to treat 
diabetes. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 316 and 317 of 2014 established requirements for step therapy or 
fail-first protocols imposed by carriers, including carriers that provide coverage for 
prescription drugs through a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM). “Step therapy or fail-first 
protocol” means a protocol established by a carrier that requires a prescription drug or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 970/ Page 2 
sequence of prescription drugs to be used by an insured or enrollee before a prescription 
drug ordered by a prescriber is covered. 
 
A step therapy or fail-first protocol may not be imposed if the step therapy drug has not 
been FDA-approved for the medical condition being treated or a prescriber provides 
supporting medical information to the carrier or PBM that a prescription drug covered by 
the carrier or PBM (1) was ordered for the insured or enrollee within the past 180 days and 
(2) based on the professional judgment of the prescriber, was effective in treating the 
insured or enrollee. These requirements for step therapy or fail-first protocols may not be 
construed to require coverage for a prescription drug that is not covered by the policy or 
contract or otherwise required to be covered by law. 
 
A carrier may not impose a step therapy or fail-first protocol on an insured or enrollee for 
an FDA-approved prescription drug that is used to treat the insured’s or enrollee’s stage 
four advanced metastatic cancer if the use of the drug is supported by peer-reviewed 
medical literature and is consistent with the FDA-approved indication or the 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network Drugs & Biologics Compendium indication for 
the treatment of stage four metastatic cancer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 646 (Senator Muse) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2