START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 972 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 972 
(Delegate A. Johnson) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Real Estate Commission - Continuing Education Requirements - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters several continuing education requirements for the renewal of a license for 
real estate brokers, associate real estate brokers, and real estate salespersons. Specifically, 
the bill alters clock hour requirements, course topics, course instructor selection, and course 
application fees. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Real Estate Commission can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, each individual licensed by the State Real Estate 
Commission as a real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or associate real estate broker 
must complete 15-clock hours of continuing education every two years in order to qualify 
for license renewal. 
 
Under current law, for a licensee who provides real estate brokerage services solely in 
connection with nonresidential real estate, of the required clock hours, 1.5 clock hours may 
be satisfied by a course regarding fair housing laws and regulations or the federal 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Under the bill, 2 clock hours (rather than 1.5) must 
be satisfied by a course regarding the ADA. Consequently, licensees engaged in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 972/ Page 2 
nonresidential real estate activities are not subject to the fair housing course requirement 
but are expressly subject to the ADA requirement. 
 
Under current law, the commission must approve the form, substance, and subject matter 
of all continuing education courses. However, every two years, a licensee must complete 
(among several other specified requirements) at least: 
 
 
a 1.5-clock hour (2-clock hour under the bill) course that outlines federal, State, and 
local fair housing laws and regulations, including fair housing advertising; 
 
a 3-clock hour ethics course that includes a discussion of (1) the Maryland Code of 
Ethics; (2) the practice of flipping (repealed under the bill); (3) fraudulent real estate 
practices; and (4) professionalism as it relates to the Maryland Code of Ethics, 
including conflict resolution and a licensee’s duty to respect the public, peers, and 
property; and 
 
for a real estate broker and a licensee designated as a branch office manager or a 
team leader, a 3-clock hour (1.5-clock hour under the bill) course on the 
requirements of broker supervision. 
 
Under current law, continuing education courses may be conducted by (1) the Maryland 
Association of Realtors or its member boards; (2) the Real Estate Brokers of Baltimore, 
Inc.; (3) any similar professional association; or (4) an educational institution approved by 
the commission. Continuing education courses must be taught by a qualified instructor who 
is experienced in the real estate industry. The bill specifies that the instructor must be 
selected by the course provider.  
 
Under current law, the commission must require each course provider to pay a continuing 
education course application fee of $25. Under the bill, the specified fee amount is 
repealed; instead, the commission must set the course application fee (i.e., through 
regulation). The commission advises that it does not plan to change the fee from its current 
level. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 680 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 972/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3