START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 964 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 964 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County - Task Force on the Displacement of Residents of Emory 
Grove  
MC 5-25 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force on the Displacement of Residents of Emory Grove, 
staffed by the Montgomery County Office of Human Rights, to study the urban renewal 
program carried out from 1960 through 1985 that caused the displacement of residents of 
Emory Grove, and if deemed appropriate, recommend remedies for past inequities for 
those displaced by urban renewal. The task force must submit an interim report of its 
findings 
and 
recommendations 
to 
the 
Montgomery 
County 
Council, 
the  
Montgomery County Executive, and the Montgomery County delegation to the  
General Assembly by December 15, 2025, and a final report by December 15, 2026. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill can be implemented by the Montgomery County Office of Human 
Rights with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must review and analyze the displacement of residents of 
Emory Grove under the urban renewal program carried out from 1960 through 1985 in 
order to: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 964/ Page 2 
 
determine the basis for the development of the Emory Grove urban renewal program 
and the guidelines and execution of the program, including how property was 
acquired or purchased from landowners; 
 
analyze the way urban renewal was administered in Emory Grove; 
 
analyze the decisions to use the urban renewal program in Emory Grove and the 
equity impacts of the program; 
 
analyze the guidelines and execution of the urban renewal program in Emory Grove, 
including the purchase of property from landowners and the demolition of homes; 
 
determine the basis for the purchase of property from landowners in Emory Grove 
and identify the details of land purchases, including the purchase prices and 
purchase agreements; and 
 
analyze the plan for providing replacement properties or new homeownership for 
the displaced residents of Emory Grove and the equity impacts of the plan, including 
proposed dates to provide new replacement properties and incentives or benefits for 
previous landowners. 
 
If deemed appropriate, the task force must recommend remedies for past inequities in the 
purchase of land by Montgomery County through the urban renewal program in 
Emory Grove from 1960 to 1985, including methods for determining eligibility and 
providing compensation, such as benefits for former landowners and incentives for 
construction projects. 
 
A member of the task force may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the State budget. 
 
Current Law:  Heritage Emory Grove (HEG) is a redevelopment project through a 
partnership of Montgomery County, the Housing Opportunities Commission (HOC) of 
Montgomery County, and Emory Grove United Methodist Church. The focus of HEG is 
on recreating the interconnectedness of the original Emory Grove, which was founded by 
freed African Americans in 1864. According to HOC, the bulk of the property will be 
redeveloped and revitalized with a strong focus on mixed-income homeownership. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 964/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3