START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 968 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 968 
(Delegate A. Johnson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation – Licensing – Definition of Storage Warehouse 
 
 
This bill excludes a self-service storage facility from the definition of “storage warehouse,” 
thereby exempting a self-service facility from the requirement to obtain a storage 
warehouse license. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2026 
due to the licensing exemption established by the bill. Expenditures are not materially 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Storage warehouse” means a building or structure used for keeping goods 
for a fee. A person must have a storage warehouse license to engage in those activities. 
 
An applicant for a storage warehouse license must pay to the clerk of the court a license 
fee, as shown in Exhibit 1. Storage warehouse license fees collected by the clerk of the 
court must be paid to the Comptroller (the general fund). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 968/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
License Fees for Storage Warehouses 
 
Storage Warehouse Located in 
Municipal Corporation or County with a Population of 
Fee 
10,000 or less 
$30 
10,001 to 20,000 
50 
20,001 to 50,000 
75 
More than 50,000 
150 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Small Business Effect:  As the bill exempts self-service storage facilities from the 
requirement to obtain a storage warehouse license, any such facilities are exempt from 
licensing fees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 734 (Senator McKay) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2