START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 930 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 930 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Public Health Abortion Grant Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Public Health Abortion Grant Program (and the Public Health 
Abortion Grant Program Fund) in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide 
grants to improve access to abortion care clinical services. Excess funds in carriers’ 
segregated accounts for abortion care clinical services under the federal Patient Protection 
and Affordable Care Act (ACA) must be used to support improving access to abortion care 
clinical services. By September 1, 2025 (and by July 1, 2026, and annually thereafter), the 
Insurance Commissioner must order the transfer of specified funds from these accounts to 
the new special fund. By October 1, 2025, the Governor must allocate by budget 
amendment $2.0 million of these funds for the program. Beginning in fiscal 2027, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation for the fund of at least 
90% of the ending balance of the segregated accounts that exceeds disbursements after the 
15-month period following the end of a plan year. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH special fund revenues increase by $19.3 million in FY 2026 and by 
$2.5 million annually thereafter due to transfers from carriers’ segregated accounts. MDH 
special fund expenditures increase by $2.0 million in FY 2026, and by $2.5 million 
annually thereafter from the mandated appropriation. General fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through FY 2028. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$19.3 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
SF Expenditure 
$2.0 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
$2.5 
Net Effect 
$17.3 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 930/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Eligible organization” means an organization that (1) is owned by or employs health care 
practitioners authorized to practice under the Health Occupations Article and provides 
equitable access to abortion care clinical services for individuals without sufficient 
resources or administers a fund to provide equitable access to abortion care clinical services 
for such individuals; (2) is in good standing in the State or jurisdiction in which the 
organization is registered or incorporated; and (3) has policies that do not restrict access to 
abortion care and are consistent with Title 20, Subtitle 2 of the Health-General Article. 
 
“Individuals without sufficient resources” means individuals who are (1) uninsured; 
(2) underinsured, without sufficient abortion coverage; or (3) unable to use their insurance 
due to the risks posed by communication from insurance carriers regarding coverage. 
 
Public Health Abortion Grant Program 
 
The Secretary of Health must provide operating grants to eligible organizations to support 
equitable access to abortion care clinical services. Grant funds must be used to support 
abortion care clinical services for which federal funding is prohibited for individuals 
without sufficient resources, including for the administrative costs of managing services 
provided under the grant. MDH must award at least 90% of funds appropriated for the 
program as grants to eligible organizations. 
 
MDH may not: 
 
 
release, publish, or otherwise disclose any identifying information for (1) the staff 
of an eligible organization that applies for or receives a grant or reimbursement 
under the program or (2) an individual health care practitioner or staff who provides 
abortion care clinical services for an eligible organization that receives a grant or 
reimbursement from the program; 
 
collect identifying information for individuals who request or obtain support for 
abortion care clinical services from an eligible organization awarded a grant under 
the program; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 930/ Page 3 
 
restrict the use of funds granted under the program in a manner that is inconsistent 
with Title 20, Subtitle 2 of the Health-General Article; or 
 
allow an eligible organization awarded a grant to restrict the use of funds in a 
manner that is inconsistent with Title 20, Subtitle 2 of the Health-General Article. 
 
MDH must develop standards for the grants to ensure funds are used in accordance with 
the requirements of the bill. 
 
Public Health Abortion Grant Program Fund 
 
The Secretary of Health must administer the fund. The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund 
that consists of (1) money transferred to the fund from carriers as specified under the bill; 
(2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any 
other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be 
used only for the program. Any interest earnings must be credited to the fund. Expenditures 
from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. 
 
Carrier Premiums 
 
The bill requires that any premium funds collected by a carrier for abortion coverage in 
accordance with the ACA must be used to provide coverage for abortion care clinical 
services for insureds or enrollees, as specified. If after the 12-month period following the 
end of a plan year, the amount of the ending balance of a carrier’s segregated account 
exceeds disbursements, 90% of the ending balance must be used to support coverage of 
abortion care clinical services for which the use of federal funds is prohibited. 
 
By March 1 each year, a carrier must submit to the Commissioner an accounting of receipts, 
disbursements, accrued interest, and the year-end balance for segregated accounts 
established by the carrier under the ACA. Submissions must be on a form approved by the 
Commissioner and include any related documentation required by the Commissioner. 
 
By September 1, 2025, the Commissioner must order the transfer to the Public Health 
Abortion Grant Program Fund of 90% of the amount of the ending balance of carriers’ 
segregated accounts that exceeds disbursements for each of plan years 2014 through 2023, 
including the amount of interest accrued to the accounts as of December 31, 2024. 
 
By July 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, the Commissioner must order the transfer to the 
fund of 90% of the amount of the ending balance of carriers’ segregated accounts that 
exceeds disbursements after the 15-month period following the end of a plan year, 
including the interest accrued to the segregated account as of December 31 of the preceding 
calendar year. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 930/ Page 4 
A party aggrieved by an order of the Commissioner has the right to a hearing and the right 
to appeal from the order of the Commissioner. 
 
Additional Requirements 
 
Uncodified language specifies that, if the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) advises the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) that the bill’s 
provisions violate the ACA, the bill must terminate. Within five days of notification from 
CMS that the bill violates the ACA, MIA must notify the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS). 
 
Current Law: 
 
Insurance Coverage of Abortion Care Clinical Services 
 
A carrier that provides labor and delivery coverage must cover abortion care services 
without (1) a deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or any other cost-sharing requirement 
and (2) restrictions that are inconsistent with the protected rights under Title 20, Subtitle 2 
of the Health-General Article. A carrier must provide information to consumers about 
abortion care coverage using the terminology “abortion care” to describe coverage. 
 
These requirements do not apply to (1) a multistate plan that does not provide coverage for 
abortions in accordance with federal law or (2) a high-deductible plan, unless the 
Commissioner determines that abortion care is not excluded from the safe harbor 
provisions for preventive care under federal law. 
 
A religious organization that is eligible to obtain an exclusion from the requirement to 
cover prescription contraceptive drugs or devices may obtain an exclusion from abortion 
care coverage and notice requirements if the requirements conflict with the organization’s 
bona fide religious beliefs and practices. 
 
If the Commissioner determines that enforcement of these provisions may adversely affect 
the allocation of federal funds to the State, the Commissioner may grant an exemption for 
these requirements to the minimum extent necessary to ensure the continued receipt of 
federal funds. 
 
Federal Abortion Provisions and Related State Reporting Requirements 
 
Section 1303 of the ACA requires insurers that cover certain abortion services to segregate 
funds for those services in a separate account and then use that account to pay for all 
services for these abortions. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 930/ Page 5 
Under Maryland law, MIA must collect data from State-regulated plans on receipts, 
disbursements, and ending balances for the segregated accounts established under the ACA 
and related federal regulations. MIA must report to specified committees of the 
General Assembly annually by January 1, 2023, through January 1, 2026, on aggregate 
data collected for specified periods. 
 
For more information on abortion law on the State and federal level, please see  
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Insurance Administration 
 
MIA advises that the bill requires it to develop a reporting form, gather data, and issue 
orders for the transfer of funds – all of which can be accomplished with existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Revenues to the Public Health Abortion Grant Fund 
 
By September 1, 2025, the Commissioner must order the transfer to the new special fund 
of 90% of the amount of the ending balance of carriers’ segregated accounts that exceeds 
disbursements for each of plan years 2014 through 2023. MIA advises that this transfer 
will total approximately $19.3 million. Thus, special fund revenues to the new fund 
increase by $19.3 million in fiscal 2026. 
 
Based on MIA reports on segregated funds, the average ending balance for plan years 2022 
and 2023 (the most recent years available) is $2.8 million, 90% of which is $2.5 million. 
Assuming the average balance of carriers’ segregated funds remains at this level, beginning 
in fiscal 2027, special fund revenues to the new fund increase by $2.5 million annually. 
 
Expenditures from the Public Health Abortion Grant Fund 
 
By October 1, 2025, the Governor must allocate by budget amendment $2.0 million to the 
program from the funds transferred to the fund under the bill. Thus, MDH special fund 
expenditures increase by $2.0 million in fiscal 2026 to reflect this appropriation. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) grants specialist and one part-time 
(50%) health policy analyst (with start dates of October 1, 2025, concurrent with the 
availability of funding) to manage the grant program. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, as well as the annual grants 
provided under the new program. The bill requires that MDH award at least 90% of funds 
appropriated for the program as grants to eligible organizations; thus, at least $1.8 million 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 930/ Page 6 
must be appropriated for grants in fiscal 2026. This analysis assumes that the balance may 
be used for administrative costs. 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Positions (2 half-time) 
1.0  
- 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$79,328 
$103,097 
Grants 
1,903,347 
2,394,234 
Other Operating Expenses 
17,325 
2,669 
Total State Expenditures 
$2,000,000 
$2,500,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in grants and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, the bill’s mandated appropriation requires the Governor to 
include an appropriation for the fund that is at least equal to the funding required to be 
transferred from carriers’ segregated accounts. This analysis assumes that $2.5 million will 
be transferred annually beginning in fiscal 2027 and that such funds will be appropriated 
from the fund to the program.  
 
In fiscal 2027, personnel costs continue, and the mandated appropriation increases funding 
for the program to $2.5 million, resulting in increased funding available for grants. At least 
$2.25 million must be allocated as grants beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
General Fund Impact 
 
Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the new special fund remain in the fund, 
the bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2024) which requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, that 
interest earnings from special funds (with certain exceptions) accrue to the general fund 
from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues increase minimally from 
interest earnings of the new special fund through fiscal 2028. The fund is exempted from 
a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) of the State Finance and Procurement Article 
that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business abortion care provider benefits to the extent that 
it applies for and receives a grant under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  Based on the most recent Abortion Care Access Data Report 
issued by MIA in December 2024, all four carriers that issue qualified health plans in 
Maryland have segregated accounts under the ACA. The calendar 2023 ending balance for 
all four carriers was well in excess of disbursements for that year, with ending balances 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 930/ Page 7 
ranging from 92% to 99% of disbursements. The ending balance for all four accounts 
totaled $2.8 million. 
 
DLS notes that the estimated transfer from carriers’ segregated accounts in fiscal 2026 is  
$19.3 million, of which only $2.0 million is required to be transferred by budget 
amendment to the program. Beginning in fiscal 2027, an additional $2.5 million is assumed 
to be transferred to the fund annually. Depending on actual appropriations and expenditures 
in future years, as much as $17.3 million may remain in the fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 947 and HB 1412 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 848 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 930/ Page 8 
Appendix – Legal Developments Regarding Abortion 
 
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
Roe and Casey were codified in Maryland law before the Dobbs decision, thereby limiting 
its impact in the State. Section 20-209 of the Health-General Article prohibits the State 
from interfering with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the 
procedure is necessary to protect the health or life of the woman in cases of fetal defect, 
deformity, or abnormality. The Maryland Department of Health may also adopt regulations 
consistent with established clinical practice if they are necessary and the least intrusive 
method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022 expanded beyond physicians the types of health care providers who 
may provide abortions to include nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives, licensed certified 
midwives, physician assistants, and other qualified licensed health care providers. The Act 
also established the Abortion Care Clinical Training Program to (1) ensure there are enough 
health care professionals to provide abortion services in the State and (2) require health 
insurers and Maryland Medicaid to cover abortion services without a deductible, 
coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 
require certain health insurers that provide labor and delivery coverage to also cover 
abortion care services, with limited exceptions. 
 
Chapters 244 and 245 of 2023 proposed a constitutional amendment to (1) establish an 
individual’s fundamental right to reproductive freedom, including but not limited to the 
ability to make and effectuate decisions to prevent, continue, or end one’s own pregnancy 
and (2) prohibit the State from directly or indirectly denying, burdening, or abridging the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 930/ Page 9 
right unless justified by a compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means. 
In November 2024, Maryland voters approved this constitutional amendment through a 
ballot referendum. 
 
Maryland Shield Laws 
 
Chapters 248 and 249 generally prohibit the disclosure of mifepristone data or the 
diagnosis, procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other sensitive 
health services (including reproductive health services other than abortion care) by a health 
information exchange, electronic health network, or health care provider. The Acts also 
define “legally protected health care” to mean all reproductive health services, medications, 
and supplies related to the provision of abortion care and other sensitive health services as 
determined by the Secretary of Health based on the recommendation of the Protected 
Health Care Commission. 
 
Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 generally (1) establish additional protections for information 
related to “legally protected health care” when that information is sought by another state; 
(2) prohibit a health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions related 
to the provision of legally protected health care; (3) prohibit a medical professional liability 
insurer from taking “adverse actions” against a practitioner related to the practice of legally 
protected health care; and (4) prohibit specified State entities, agents, and employees from 
participating in any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or 
sanctions against a person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited 
exception). Data related to legally protected health care is also generally protected from 
other states. 
 
State Actions Following the Dobbs Decision 
 
As of January 2025, 41 states have some type of abortion ban in place with limited 
exceptions. Twelve states (Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and West Virginia) have 
implemented total abortion bans. Twenty-nine states have abortion restrictions based on 
gestational duration, including 7 states that ban abortion at or before 18 weeks gestation 
and 22 states that ban abortion at some point after 18 weeks. All 41 states have an exception 
for a threat to the mother’s life; 22 states have exceptions for a threat to the physical health 
of the mother; and 13 states have exceptions for a threat to the general health of the mother. 
Several states also have limited exceptions for rape (10 states), incest (9 states), or lethal 
fetal anomalies (12 states). 

END OF PAGE 9