START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 936 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 936 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Cancellation and Nonrenewal of Coverage - Required Notice 
 
 
This bill requires a carrier to send notice of cancellation or nonrenewal of coverage of a 
small employer plan delivered by electronic means in addition to the written notice required 
under current law. The notice must include information on additional health benefit 
coverage options, including continuation of coverage through the Consolidated Omnibus 
Budget Reconciliation Act, if available, and plans available through the Maryland Health 
Benefit Exchange. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has no fiscal or operational impact on the Maryland Insurance 
Administration. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill has no fiscal or operational impact on local governments. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  When a carrier elects not to renew a particular product for all 
small employers in the State, the carrier must provide notice of the nonrenewal at least 
90 days before the date of the nonrenewal to each affected small employer and 
enrolled employee, as well as the Insurance Commissioner. 
 
The carrier must offer each affected small employer the option to purchase all other health 
benefit plans currently offered by the carrier in the small group market. The carrier must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 936/ Page 2 
act uniformly with regard to the claims experience of any affected small employer or any 
health status-related factor of any affected individual. Within seven days after cancellation 
or nonrenewal of a health benefit plan, the carrier must send to each enrolled employee 
written notice of its action.  
 
Section 27-602.2 of the Insurance Article specifies how an insurer must deliver notices by 
electronic means. A notice may be delivered by electronic means by an insurer if: 
 
 
the party (applicant, insured, or policyholder) has affirmatively consented to that 
method of delivery and has not withdrawn the consent; 
 
the party, before giving consent, is provided with a clear and conspicuous statement 
informing the party of: 
 
any right to have the notice provided in paper or another nonelectronic form; 
 
the right of the party to withdraw consent to have notice delivered by 
electronic means and any fees, conditions, or consequences; 
 
whether the party’s consent applies only to the particular transaction or to 
identified categories of notices that may be delivered by electronic means; 
 
how the party may obtain a paper copy of a notice delivered by electronic 
means and the fee, if any, for the paper copy; and  
 
the procedures the party must use to withdraw consent and to update 
information needed to contact the party electronically; 
 
the party, before giving consent, is provided with a statement of the hardware and 
software requirements for access to and retention of a notice delivered by electronic 
means and consents electronically, or confirms consent electronically; and 
 
after consent is given, the insurer, in the event of a change in the hardware or 
software requirements provides the party with a statement of the revised hardware 
and software requirements and the right of the party to withdraw consent without 
the imposition of any fee, condition, or consequence that was not disclosed. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Employees of small businesses will receive both written and 
electronic notice of cancellation or nonrenewal and the notice will provide the employees 
with available coverage options. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 936/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3