START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 979 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 979 
(Delegate A. Johnson, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Maryland Self-Service Storage Act - Sale of Personal Property in Satisfaction of 
Lien - Notice Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a self-service storage facility operator to provide an occupant a notice 
that includes certain information prior to conducting a lien sale of personal property. 
Specifically, at least 10 days before conducting a lien sale of personal property authorized 
under the Maryland Self-Service Storage Act, the operator must notify the occupant of the 
time, place, and terms of the sale by hand delivery, verified mail, or electronic mail at the 
occupant’s last known address. If an operator notifies the occupant via email and does not 
receive a response at least 5 days before the sale, the operator must promptly send a  
second notice to the occupant by verified mail (to the occupant’s last known postal 
address). The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Self-Service Storage Act was adopted in 1983 and applies 
to all rental agreements entered into or renewed after July 1, 1983. 
 
Under the Act, a “self-service storage facility” is any real property used for renting or 
leasing individual storage spaces in which the occupants themselves store and remove their 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 979/ Page 2 
own personal property on a “self-service” basis. An “operator” is defined as the owner, 
operator, lessor, sublessor, agent, or any other person authorized to manage the self-service 
storage facility. An “occupant” is defined as a person, sublessee, successor, or assignee 
entitled to use the leased space at a self-service storage facility under a rental agreement. 
“Personal property” is any movable property not affixed to land and includes goods, wares, 
merchandise, motor vehicles, watercraft, and household items and furnishings. “Default” 
is defined as the failure to perform an obligation or duty set forth in the rental agreement 
on time. 
 
An operator of a self-service storage facility has a lien on all personal property stored in 
each leased space for rent, labor, or other charges and for expenses reasonably incurred in 
its sale. 
 
A rental agreement between an operator and occupant of a self-service storage facility must 
contain a statement, in bold type, advising the occupant that, in the event of the occupant’s 
default, the lien sale of personal property stored in the leased space may be advertised (1) in 
a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction where the sale is to be held; (2) by 
email; or (3) on a website. 
 
If an occupant is in default for more than 60 days, the operator may enforce the lien by 
selling the personal property stored in the leased space at a public sale for cash; proceeds 
are applied to satisfy the lien and the operator must hold the balance, if any, for delivery 
on demand to the occupant or any other recorded lien holder. The operator must notify the 
occupant of the occupant’s default status before conducting the sale. The notice must 
include specified information about the operator’s lien on the personal property, including 
the due date by which any outstanding charges must be paid before the personal property 
is sold; the due date must be at least 14 days after the notice’s mailing date. The notice 
must be provided by hand delivery, verified mail, or email; however, email notice is only 
authorized if so specified in the rental agreement or in a written change to the rental 
agreement. 
 
At least 3 days before conducting a sale of the personal property, the operator must 
advertise the time, place, and terms of the sale via the methods noted above. The operator 
may not advertise the sale through email or a website unless the occupant initials the 
required statement in the rental agreement. 
 
At any time before a sale, the occupant may pay the amount necessary to satisfy the lien 
and redeem the occupant’s personal property. A sale must be held at the self-service storage 
facility where the personal property is stored (but may also be sold on an online auction 
website. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 979/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3