START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 956 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 956 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Workgroup on Artificial Intelligence Implementation 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Artificial Intelligence (AI) Implementation to 
monitor issues and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI 
used in decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of 
individuals in the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and 
employment and protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; 
(4) current private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; 
(6) enforcement authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection 
Division; and (7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that the workgroup coordinate with the 
Maryland Cybersecurity Council, as specified. By July 1, 2026, and each year thereafter, 
the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to specified committees of 
the General Assembly. For fiscal 2027 and each year thereafter, the Governor may include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $100,000 to support the workgroup. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures in FY 2026. From 
FY 2027 through 2029, general fund expenditures may increase by as much as 
$100,000 annually, consistent with the amount specified in the bill’s authorized funding 
provision. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 956/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Definition 
 
Under § 3.5‐801 of the State Finance and Procurement Article – the applicable definition 
as used in the bill – “Artificial Intelligence” means a machine‐based system that (1) can, 
for a given set of human‐defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or 
decisions influencing real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human‐based 
inputs to perceive real and virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models 
through analysis in an automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate 
options for information or action. 
 
Artificial Intelligence – State Agencies 
 
Chapter 496 of 2024 expanded the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Department of 
Information Technology (DoIT) as they relate to the procurement and use of AI by State 
agencies and codified the Governor’s AI Subcabinet that was established by 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.02. Broadly, among other things, the Act: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of 
State government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase minimally in fiscal 2026 for 
costs associated with the workgroup. Beginning in fiscal 2027 (and through 2029), this 
analysis assumes that up to $100,000 annually is available to support the workgroup, 
consistent with the bill’s authorized funding provision. Although unspecified, this analysis 
assumes any funding is provided via the University System of Maryland budget. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 956/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  The University of Maryland Center for Health and 
Homeland Security is a nonprofit consulting group and academic center. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3