START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 987 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 987 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B-OB-CRD (Office Building - 
Commercial Revitalization District) Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class B-OB-CRD (office building – commercial revitalization 
district) beer, wine, and liquor license and authorizes the Baltimore County Board of 
License Commissioners to issue up to one license in the county, as specified. The 
Class B-OB-CRD license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for 
on-premises consumption and wine for off-premises consumption if the wine is purchased 
along with prepared food and is not displayed in an area accessible to the public. The bill 
authorizes the license to be issued for an establishment within 300 feet of a place of worship 
if the place of worship consents in writing. The annual license fee is $1,500. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County revenues increase by $1,500 beginning in FY 2026 from 
the issuance of one Class B-OB-CRD license. Baltimore County expenditures are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Class B-OB-CRD license may be issued only for a restaurant that 
(1) is located in the Towson Commercial Revitalization District and in an office building 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 987/ Page 2 
that is at least 100,000 square feet in size; (2) previously had or has a zoning classification 
of BM-D.T. by the county government; and (3) is at least 100 feet from a place of worship.  
 
The number of seats at the bar on the licensed premises may not exceed 25% of the total 
number of seats on the licensed premises. The bill specifies the hours of sale for a 
Class B-OB-CRD license are the same as a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license, which 
are generally Monday through Sunday from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day.  
 
Current Law: Generally, in Baltimore County, the board may not issue an alcoholic 
beverages license for an establishment that is within 300 feet of a place of worship or 
school. The distance from the establishment to the place of worship or school must be 
measured from the nearest point of the establishment to the nearest point of the building of 
the place of worship or school.  
 
The prohibition does not apply to (1) the renewal or transfer of a license if, after the license 
was issued, a place of worship or school was built within 300 feet of the establishment; 
(2) the issuance of a temporary license; (3) a transfer that moves the licensed premises 
within the same building; (4) a transfer of ownership; (5) the renewal of a Class B beer, 
wine, and liquor (on-sale) license or a seven-day Class BDR (deluxe restaurant) (on-sale) 
beer, wine, and liquor license, if the establishment has a seating capacity of more than 
50 and is within a town center; or (6) the transfer, conversion, and issuance of specified 
licenses issued by December 31, 2016.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 999 (Senator M. Washington) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2