START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 933 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 933 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Nursing Homes - Cost Reports 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to review the cost reports 
and other data submitted by each nursing home that participates in Medicaid, including 
data related to revenue allocated to (1) contracted nursing care services and (2) salaries and 
wages of all direct care nonadministrative staff, including certified nurse aides, directors 
of nurses, licensed practical nurses, noncertified or resident care aides, registered nurses, 
housekeepers, dietary workers, and in-house clerical staff who regularly interact with 
residents, Medicaid recipients, and caregivers. By October 1, 2025, and annually thereafter 
through 2029, MDH must report the findings resulting from this review to the Governor, 
the Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can review cost reports and data submitted by specified nursing homes 
and complete the required report using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid utilizes a cost-based reimbursement model for nursing homes 
under which MDH currently oversees annual cost reporting by nursing homes with 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 933/ Page 2 
assistance from contractors. Nursing home rates are rebased every two years after 
contractors complete a desk audit of nursing facilities’ cost reports. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. However, legislation with similar provisions has been introduced. See SB 468 
and HB 725 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 679 (Senator Rosapepe) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2