START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1026 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1026 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Tasting Permits 
 
 
This bill converts Frederick County’s beer and wine consumption permit and its beer, wine, 
and liquor consumption permit into a beer and wine tasting permit, and a beer, wine, and 
liquor tasting permit, respectively. The bill removes specified limitations on the size and 
quantity of sample servings of beer, wine, and liquor and instead requires the 
Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to regulate the quantity of beer, wine, 
and liquor that can be served by a permit holder to an individual and the number of bottles 
or other containers from which the quantity is served. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Frederick County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board may issue a beer and wine consumption permit or a beer, wine, 
and liquor consumption permit to a holder of an appropriate Class A license. 
A consumption permit authorizes a license holder to serve specified alcoholic beverages 
for on-premises consumption. An establishment with a consumption permit may allow an 
individual to consume a single serving of 12 total ounces of beer or 6 total ounces of wine, 
and for liquor permit holders, 1.5 total ounces of liquor. Alternatively, an establishment 
can allow an individual to consume three individual sample servings of beer and wine (and 
liquor, when applicable) in any combination, each consisting of not more than 2 ounces of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1026/ Page 2 
beer, 1 ounce of wine, or 0.5 ounce of liquor. A consumption permit holder cannot serve 
open alcoholic beverages from a drive-through window, and the permit only authorizes 
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.  
 
The board may issue a consumption permit without a public hearing. However, if an initial 
permit application is denied, the board must hold a public hearing on request of the 
applicant. The annual permit fee is $200 for a beer and wine consumption permit and 
$400 for a beer, wine, and liquor consumption permit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 636 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2