START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1034 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1034 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System – Alterations and Clarifications 
 
 
This bill alters (1) due dates for specified annual reports prepared by the State Retirement 
Agency (SRA) and (2) requirements for participation in the State Police Retirement System 
(SPRS) Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) by linking eligibility to years of 
employment rather than to years of service credit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has no material effect on governmental operations or finances, as 
discussed below.     
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Annual Reports 
 
The bill alters the due date, from September 1 to November 1, for an annual report 
submitted to the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs and 
the General Assembly by SRA’s Investment Division on: 
 
 
the identity of minority business enterprise (MBE) brokerage and investment 
services firms used by the Investment Committee in the immediately preceding 
fiscal year; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1034/ Page 2 
 
the percentage and dollar value of the assets controlled by the Investment 
Committee that are under the investment control of MBE brokerage and investment 
services firms for each allocated asset class; and 
 
the measures taken by the Investment Committee in the immediately preceding 
fiscal year to remove barriers that limit the full participation by MBEs in brokerage 
and investment management services opportunities with the committee. 
 
The bill also alters the due date, from December 1 to December 31, for an annual report 
submitted to specified committees of the General Assembly that includes information 
regarding the State Retirement and Pension System’s private equity and venture capital 
investments in entities or vehicles that are located in the State, operate in the State, or that 
are reasonably expected to invest in entities in the State. 
 
Deferred Retirement Option Program 
 
A member of SPRS is eligible for DROP for a period not to exceed the lesser of 7 years or 
the difference between 32 years and the member’s employment, rather than the difference 
between 32 years and the member’s eligibility service.           
 
Current Law:  Maryland State Troopers, Maryland State Police Cadets, and the 
Secretary of State Police are members of SPRS as a condition of their employment. Their 
member contribution is 8% of earnable compensation, except that they stop making 
contributions after 28 years of service. Members hired on or before June 30, 2011, are 
eligible for a normal service retirement after 22 years of service or at age 50. Members 
hired after that date are eligible for a normal service retirement after 25 years or at age 50. 
Their normal service retirement allowance is equal to 2.55% of their average final 
compensation for each year of creditable service, except that members stop accruing 
creditable service after 28 years. SPRS members are not eligible for Social Security 
benefits and, except for the Secretary of State Police, must retire at age 60. 
 
SPRS members are eligible for participation in DROP. Members hired on or before 
June 30, 2011, are eligible if they have at least 22 years but fewer than 32 years of eligibility 
service and are younger than age 60. Members hired after that date are eligible if they have 
at least 25 years but fewer than 32 years of service and are younger than age 60. Regardless 
of their date of hire, SPRS members may participate in DROP for the lesser of (1) 7 years; 
(2) the difference between 32 years and their eligibility service; (3) the difference between 
60 years and their age; or (4) a term chosen by a member. While in DROP, members are 
deemed to be retired, but they continue to work with their normal salary and benefits. While 
in DROP, they do not accumulate any additional service credit, and their retirement 
benefits are deposited into an account that earns 4% interest annually. Upon retirement, 
members receive the lump sum payment from their DROP account and their normal service 
retirement benefit.    

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1034/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  The bill’s provisions that alter eligibility for SPRS DROP correct an 
unintended consequence due to the enactment of Chapters 587 and 588 of 2020, which 
exempted members of SPRS from making member contributions when they reached 
28 years of service credit. Section 24-302 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article 
specifies that members only earn service credit for months in which a member contribution 
is made. Thus, SPRS members never reach 32 years of eligibility credit, which is one of 
the caps for participation in DROP, and could stay in DROP for up to four additional years. 
SRA advises that it is aware of only one individual whose eligibility for DROP is affected 
by the bill. Thus, linking DROP eligibility to years of employment rather than service credit 
restores eligibility to intended levels and has no material effect on State pension liabilities 
or contribution rates.          
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 692 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3