START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

Chapter 773

(House Bill 1028)

AN ACT concerning

Board of Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System – Investment
Division – Compensation and Staffing ~~Committee~~

FOR the purpose of clarifying that the Board of Trustees for the State Retirement and
Pension System shall pay certain incentive compensation to the Chief Investment
Officer for the State Retirement and Pension System if the Chief Investment Officer
retires from the Investment Division of the State Retirement Agency in a certain
manner; clarifying that the Board of Trustees shall pay certain incentive
compensation to certain employees of the Investment Division if the employees retire
from the Investment Division in a certain manner; repealing the Objective Criteria
Committee of the Board of Trustees ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Retirement~~ ~~and~~ ~~Pension~~ ~~System~~
and establishing a Compensation and Staffing Committee of the Board of Trustees;
providing for the membership of the Committee; clarifying the Board of Trustees’
authority to determine the qualifications and compensation of and the type and
number of positions necessary for carrying out the professional investment functions
of the Investment Division of the State Retirement Agency; requiring the Committee
to make certain recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding the objective
criteria to be used in setting compensation and awarding financial incentives to
certain employees in the Investment Division; requiring the Board of Trustees to
consider certain recommendations of the Committee; clarifying the requirements for
the Board of Trustees to enter into an agreement with a consultant to provide certain
services to the Committee; and generally relating to the operations of the Board of
Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–108(b), 21–118.1(a), (b), (c), and (d)(1)(i), and 21–122(f) and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–122(a)(1) through (3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 773 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

21–108.

(b) In addition to the Investment Committee established under § 21–114 of this
subtitle AND THE COMPENSATION AND STAFFING COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED UNDER
§ 21–122 OF THIS SUBTITLE, the Board of Trustees may establish other committees.

21–118.1.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on the recommendation of
the Executive Director and the [Investment] COMPENSATION AND STAFFING
Committee, the Board of Trustees shall determine the qualifications and appointment, as
well as compensation and leave, for the Chief Investment Officer who shall be the head of
the Investment Division.

(2) THE COMPENSATION AND STAFFING COMMITTEE SHALL ASSIST
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE IN RECOMMENDING
QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION, AND LEAVE FOR THE CHIEF INVESTMENT
OFFICER, INCLUDING ANY SALARY CHANGES FOR THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER.

(b) (1) In making RECOMMENDATIONS, determinations, and appointments
under this section, the Executive Director and the [Investment] BOARD OF TRUSTEES,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INVESTMENT COMMITTEE, AND COMPENSATION AND
STAFFING Committee shall consider the comparative qualifications, compensation, and
leave of employees serving in similar positions and discharging similar duties at
comparable public pension funds.

(2) (i) 1. The Board of Trustees shall adopt objective criteria for
setting the qualifications and compensation of the Chief Investment Officer.

2. The Board shall consider the recommendations of the
[Objective Criteria] COMPENSATION AND STAFFING Committee under § 21–122(g) of
this subtitle before adopting objective criteria for setting compensation.

(ii) The criteria adopted under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall include objective benchmarks of investment performance that shall be met or
exceeded for the Chief Investment Officer to be eligible for an increase in compensation.

(iii) The Board may not grant any increases in compensation to the
Chief Investment Officer in a fiscal year in which State employees are subject to a furlough.

(iv) The Chief Investment Officer’s compensation may not be
adjusted in accordance with cost–of–living adjustments and merit increases available to
State employees.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

(c) (1) In addition to the Board of Trustees setting the compensation of the Chief
Investment Officer under subsection (a) of this section, the Board of Trustees may also award
financial incentives to the Chief Investment Officer in accordance with this subsection and
subsection (d) of this section.

(2) (i) Any financial incentives paid shall be paid over multiple fiscal
years in equal installments.

(ii) The dates on which financial incentives awarded under this
section shall be paid shall be set by the Board of Trustees at the time the financial incentives
are determined.

(iii) The dates set under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph may not
be changed after being set.

(3) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, if the
Chief Investment Officer separates from employment, the Board of Trustees may not pay out
any remaining financial incentives due to be paid after the date of separation from
employment.

(ii) The Board of Trustees may pay any remaining [earned]
AWARDED financial incentives after the date of separation from employment if the Chief
Investment Officer retires directly from the Investment Division on or within 30 days after
the date of separation from employment.

(4) (i) The Board of Trustees may not pay financial incentives in a fiscal
year in which State employees are subject to a furlough.

(ii) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE Board of Trustees shall pay out any financial incentives not paid in
accordance with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph only:

1. after the furlough period has ended; and

2. if the Chief Investment Officer is currently employed as the
Chief Investment Officer.

(III) AFTER A FURLOUGH PERIOD HAS ENDED, THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES SHALL PAY OUT ANY REMAINING AWARDED FINANCIAL INCENTIVES NOT
PAID TO THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH
(I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IF:

1. THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER SEPARATES FROM
EMPLOYMENT WITH THE INVESTMENT DIVISION DURING THE FURLOUGH PERIOD;
AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 773 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. AFTER THE DATE OF SEPARATION FROM
EMPLOYMENT, THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER RETIRES DIRECTLY FROM THE
INVESTMENT DIVISION OR WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF SEPARATION FROM
EMPLOYMENT.

(d) (1) (i) 1. On the recommendation of the [Investment]
COMPENSATION AND STAFFING Committee, the Board of Trustees shall establish
objective criteria for awarding financial incentives to the Chief Investment Officer.

2. The Board shall consider the recommendations of the
[Objective Criteria] COMPENSATION AND STAFFING Committee under § 21–122(g) of
this subtitle before adopting objective criteria for awarding financial incentives.

21–122.

(a) (1) There is an Investment Division in the State Retirement Agency.

(2) Subject to subsection (f) of this section, the Board of Trustees shall
determine the qualifications and compensation for positions within the Investment
Division.

(3) The Board of Trustees:

(i) may determine and create the type and number of positions
necessary for carrying out the professional investment functions of the Investment
Division; and

(ii) shall adopt objective criteria to be followed when exercising its
authority under item (i) of this paragraph and paragraph (2) of this subsection.

(f) (1) (i) 1. The Board of Trustees shall adopt objective criteria for
setting the qualifications and compensation of positions under subsection (a) of this section.

2. The Board shall consider the recommendations of the
[Objective Criteria] COMPENSATION AND STAFFING Committee under subsection (g) of
this section before adopting objective criteria for setting compensation.

(ii) The criteria adopted under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall include:

1. consideration of the comparative qualifications and
compensation of employees serving in similar positions and discharging similar duties at
comparable public pension funds;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

2. limitations on the amount by which the compensation for
a position may be increased each fiscal year, not to exceed 10%; and

3. objective benchmarks of investment performance that
shall be met or exceeded by an individual to be eligible for an increase in compensation.

(iii) The Board of Trustees may not grant any increases in
compensation in a fiscal year in which State employees are subject to a furlough.

(iv) For positions that do not involve discretion over
investment–related decisions, the Board of Trustees may not set compensation that exceeds
compensation for providing comparable services in other State employment.

(v) Except for positions under subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph,
the compensation of an employee may not be adjusted in accordance with cost–of–living
adjustments and merit increases available to State employees.

(VI) BASED ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMPENSATION AND STAFFING COMMITTEE UNDER SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS
SECTION, THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES SHALL APPROVE:

1. THE TYPE AND NUMBER OF POSITIONS IN THE
INVESTMENT DIVISION;

2. THE QUALIFICATIONS FOR EACH POSITION IN THE
INVESTMENT DIVISION, AS APPROVED UNDER ITEM 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH; AND

3. ANY COMPENSATION AND FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
FOR THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER AND INVESTMENT DIVISION STAFF,
INCLUDING SALARY INCREASES OR DECREASES RECOMMENDED FOR THE CHIEF
INVESTMENT OFFICER AND EMPLOYEES OF THE INVESTMENT DIVISION; AND

4. IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 21–118.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
ANY COMPENSATION AND FINANCIAL INCENTIVES FOR THE CHIEF INVESTMENT
OFFICER, INCLUDING SALARY INCREASES OR DECREASES RECOMMENDED FOR THE
CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER.

(2) (i) 1. The Board of Trustees shall adopt objective criteria for
awarding financial incentives under subsection (a) of this section.

2. The Board shall consider the recommendations of the
[Objective Criteria] COMPENSATION AND STAFFING Committee under subsection (g) of
this section before adopting objective criteria for awarding financial incentives.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 773 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Financial incentives may only be awarded based on the objective
criteria adopted in accordance with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.

(iii) The criteria adopted under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall include:

1. limitations on the amount of financial incentives for a
position in a fiscal year, not to exceed 33% of a position’s compensation, exclusive of
financial incentives; and

2. objective benchmarks of investment performance that
shall be met or exceeded by an individual to be eligible for financial incentives, including
benchmarks for the asset class in which investments are under the direction of the
individual.

(iv) 1. Any financial incentives paid shall be paid over multiple
fiscal years in equal installments.

2. The dates on which financial incentives awarded under
this section shall be paid shall be set by the Board of Trustees at the time the financial
incentives are determined.

3. The dates set under subsubparagraph 2 of this
subparagraph may not be changed after being set.

(v) Except as provided in subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph, if an
individual who has earned BEEN AWARDED financial incentives separates from
employment in the Investment Division, the Board of Trustees may not pay out any
remaining financial incentives due to be paid after the date of separation from employment.

(vi) The Board of Trustees may pay any remaining earned AWARDED
financial incentives after the date of separation from employment if the individual retires
directly from the Investment Division on or 30 days after the date of separation.

(vii) The Board of Trustees may not award financial incentives for
positions that do not involve discretion over investment–related decisions.

(viii) 1. The Board of Trustees may not pay out financial
incentives in a fiscal year in which State employees are subject to a furlough.

2. The EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 3
OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE Board of Trustees shall pay out any financial incentives
not paid to an individual in accordance with subsubparagraph 1 of this subparagraph only:

A. after the furlough period has ended; and

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

B. if the individual is currently employed in the Investment
Division.

3. AFTER A FURLOUGH PERIOD HAS ENDED, THE BOARD
OF TRUSTEES SHALL PAY OUT ANY REMAINING AWARDED FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
NOT PAID TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH IF:

A. THE INDIVIDUAL SEPARATES FROM EMPLOYMENT
WITH THE INVESTMENT DIVISION DURING THE FURLOUGH PERIOD; AND

B. AFTER THE DATE OF SEPARATION FROM
EMPLOYMENT, THE INDIVIDUAL RETIRES DIRECTLY FROM THE INVESTMENT
DIVISION OR WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF SEPARATION FROM EMPLOYMENT.

(3) (i) On or before October 1 each year, the Board of Trustees shall
submit to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations
Committee, and the Joint Committee on Pensions, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, a copy of the most recent criteria adopted under this subsection,
INCLUDING ANY CHANGES TO COMPENSATION AND INCENTIVES FOR THE CHIEF
INVESTMENT OFFICER AND INVESTMENT DIVISION STAFF.

(ii) In addition to the report required under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, the Board of Trustees shall submit, within 30 days of adoption by the Board of
Trustees, a copy of any changes adopted to the criteria established under this subsection to
the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House Appropriations Committee, and the
Joint Committee on Pensions, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

(4) On or before October 1, January 1, March 1, and July 1 each year, the
Board of Trustees shall submit to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House
Appropriations Committee, and the Joint Committee on Pensions, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, a report on system investment returns for the
preceding fiscal quarter, including:

(i) investment performance by asset class, including performance
relative to asset class benchmarks; and

(ii) investment performance of assets under the direction of each
Investment Division employee.

(g) (1) There is [an Objective Criteria] A COMPENSATION AND STAFFING
Committee of the Board of Trustees.

(2) (I) The [Committee consists of the] following members SHALL BE
INCLUDED ON THE COMMITTEE:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 773 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(i) one member of the Senate of Maryland serving on the Joint
Committee on Pensions, appointed by the President of the Senate;

(ii) one member of the House of Delegates serving on the Joint
Committee on Pensions, appointed by the Speaker of the House;

(iii) the State Treasurer or the State Treasurer’s designee;

(iv)] 1. the Secretary of Budget and Management or the
Secretary’s designee;

[(v)] 2. one [member] OR MORE MEMBERS of the Board of
Trustees under § 21–104(a)(4)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of this subtitle, appointed by the
Chairman of the Board of Trustees; AND

3. ONE OR MORE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
UNDER § 21–104(A)(4)(VI) OR (VII) OF THIS SUBTITLE, APPOINTED BY THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES; AND

[(vi)] 3. 4. one [member] OR MORE MEMBERS of the Board of
Trustees under § 21–104(a)(4)(viii) of this subtitle, appointed by the Chairman of the Board
of Trustees[; and

(vii) a member of the public with financial industry experience,
appointed jointly by the presiding officers of the General Assembly].

(II) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS MAY BE APPOINTED TO THE
COMMITTEE BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:

1. THE STATE TREASURER, OR THE STATE
TREASURER’S DESIGNEE; AND

2. THE COMPTROLLER, OR THE COMPTROLLER’S
DESIGNEE.

(3) (i) The Chairman of the Board of Trustees shall appoint the Chair
of the Committee.

(ii) The Chairman of the Board of Trustees may not serve as the
Chair of the Committee.

(4) [On or before December 31, 2018, and at least once every 5 years
thereafter, the] THE Committee shall make recommendations to the Board of Trustees
regarding:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 773

(i) objective criteria under § 21–118.1(b)(2) and (d) of this subtitle
for the compensation and financial incentives for the Chief Investment Officer; and

(ii) objective criteria under subsections (a) and (f) of this section for
the compensation and financial incentives for the positions in the Investment Division.

(5) (i) The Board of Trustees shall enter into an agreement with a
consultant to assist the Committee AND THE BOARD regarding objective criteria under
this subsection AND THE BOARD’S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR COMPENSATION AND
STAFFING.

(ii) 1. The EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2
OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE Board of Trustees may not enter into an agreement with
a consultant under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph if that consultant is actively
providing consulting services for the Board of Trustees [and] OR the staff of the Investment
Division.

2. THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES MAY ENTER INTO AN
AGREEMENT WITH A CONSULTANT SELECTED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH TO PROVIDE EXECUTIVE SEARCH SERVICES FOR THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(III) THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER MAY NOT SEPARATELY
RETAIN THE CONSULTANT HIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH
FOR ANY SERVICES.

(6) (i) The [Chief Investment Officer] EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR shall
serve in an advisory capacity to the Committee REGARDING COMPENSATION AND
INCENTIVE COMPENSATION FOR THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER AND
INVESTMENT DIVISION STAFF.

(ii) The Chief Investment Officer may not participate in any
deliberations regarding the criteria for compensation and financial incentives for the Chief
Investment Officer OR INVESTMENT DIVISION STAFF.

(III) THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER SHALL SERVE IN AN
ADVISORY CAPACITY REGARDING THE TYPE OF, NUMBER OF, AND QUALIFICATIONS
FOR POSITIONS IN THE INVESTMENT DIVISION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9