START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1072 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1072 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Administrative Fees - Repeal 
 
This bill repeals a requirement that the State and participating local governmental 
employers pay administrative fees to the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) that 
represent their pro rata share of administrative and operational costs for the system. 
Instead, the bill requires that the normal contribution rate paid by employers – as 
recommended by the system’s actuary and certified by the Board of Trustees – include the 
amount necessary to cover SRPS’s administrative and operational expenses. 
Notwithstanding the bill’s effective date, local governments must make their 
administrative fee payments for fiscal 2025 that are due on June 1, 2025. For fiscal 2026, 
the bill requires that SRPS’s administrative and operational expenses be paid from the 
accumulation funds of the several systems (i.e., the pension trust fund). The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Special fund revenues for the State Retirement Agency 
(SRA) decrease by $21.8 million in FY 2026. General fund expenditures decrease by 
$5.7 million only in FY 2026, with a corresponding decrease in reimbursable fund revenues 
for SRA; other fund types are not affected. Beginning in FY 2027, the repeal of the State’s 
payment of administrative fees is fully offset by the inclusion of those costs in the normal 
contribution rate, so there is no material net effect on State expenditures or SRA revenues. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
($21.8) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
ReimB. Rev. 
$0 
($5.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
($5.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($21.8) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local governmental expenditures decrease by an estimated $21.8 million 
in FY 2026. No material effect on local revenues or expenditures beginning in FY 2027. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1072/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 397 of 2011 required participating employers of SRPS, including 
the State, local school boards, community colleges, and participating governmental units, 
to pay their prorated share of the system’s administrative costs based on their share of total 
membership in the system; the State pays the share of public libraries. Prior to fiscal 2013, 
SRA’s budget was funded solely from the system’s assets (the accumulation fund). 
Chapters 727 and 728 of 2018 made expenses of the Investment Division nonbudgeted and, 
therefore, not included in the calculation of administrative fees paid by participating 
employers. 
 
As part of its budget submission every year, the SRPS board must certify the percentage 
of the total membership that is employed by the State, libraries, and each local employer 
as of June 30 of the second prior fiscal year. The amount payable by each employer is 
derived by multiplying the employer’s percentage share of system membership by the 
amount of administrative and operational expenses actually incurred by SRPS in the 
second prior year. By October 1 of each year, the SRPS board must certify to each local 
employer, other than a library, the amount payable by the employer for the following 
fiscal year. 
 
The State must pay the full amount of its administrative fees to the SRPS accumulation 
funds on July 1 of each fiscal year. Each local employer must pay 25% of its fees by 
October 1, January 1, April 16, and June 1 of each fiscal year. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a requirement that the 
State transfer amounts budgeted for administrative fees to SRA on July 1, 2025. That 
provision is not affected by the bill. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and, therefore, repeals the 
statutory requirement that the State payment for fiscal 2026 be made on July 1, 2025, before 
that payment would be made, the fiscal 2026 budget as passed requires the 
budgeted amount to be paid. There is no contingent reduction or elimination of the payment 
in the budget bill. However, the Administration has budgeted for a $5.7 million reversion 
in general funds as a result of the bill; similar reversions of special, federal, and other funds 
are not planned in the budget. Therefore, general fund expenditures decrease by $5,691,206 
in fiscal 2026, with a corresponding decrease in reimbursable revenues for SRA. 
 
Any fees due from special, federal, and other funds in fiscal 2026 are paid to the SRPS 
accumulation funds, which the bill requires to be used to cover the system’s operating costs 
for fiscal 2026. Beginning in fiscal 2027, the addition of administrative and operational 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1072/ Page 3 
expenses to the normal contribution rate offsets any savings resulting from the repeal of 
the administrative fees, resulting in no net effect to State expenditures or revenues for SRA. 
 
Special fund revenues for SRA decrease by $21.8 million in fiscal 2026 due to local 
participating employers paying no fees for fiscal 2026, as described below. 
 
SRA advises that the bill likely results in a negligible increase in SRPS’s unfunded liability. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local participating employers pay administrative fees in four equal 
installments, with the final payment due on June 1. However, the bill cancels their 
administrative fee payments. Given the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date, the final payment 
for fiscal 2025 would not be due under the statutory provisions of the bill, but uncodified 
language establishes that local participating employers must still make their June 1, 2025 
payment as scheduled under current law – for no effect on fiscal 2025 payments. The bill 
does affect payments for fiscal 2026; SRA advises that, absent the bill, it expected to collect 
$21.8 million from local employers that year. Instead, expenditures for local participating 
employers decrease by $21,760,483 in fiscal 2026. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, when the normal contribution rate includes administrative and 
operating expenses for the system, the repeal of administrative fees is fully offset by higher 
normal cost payments, resulting in no net effect in the out-years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 862 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3