START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1098 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1098 
(Delegates Fraser-Hidalgo and Wilson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Automobile Insurance - Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund and 
Affordability Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) to (1) calculate and 
report its risk-based capital (RBC) level in the same manner as other insurers in the State; 
(2) maintain a total adjusted capital level above a certain threshold; and (3) implement its 
rate changes in accordance with prior approval (rather than file and use) ratemaking 
standards during a specified time period and under specified circumstances. The bill also 
requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to establish a workgroup to study, 
among other things, the affordability of private passenger automobile insurance in the 
State. By January 1, 2026, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to 
the Governor and General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025; provisions 
related to the workgroup terminate June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MIA can meet the requirements of the bill using existing budgeted resources 
because MIA already has a workgroup substantially similar to the one required by the bill. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues for MAIF may 
be affected to the extent that the bill requires MAIF to reduce its investment income and to 
the extent that the bill results in an assessment, as discussed below. Expenditures are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1098/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Company action level RBC” means the product of 2.0 and the authorized 
control level RBC. 
 
Risk-based Capital Reporting Requirements 
 
MAIF must calculate and report its RBC level to the Insurance Commissioner using the 
same processes and pursuant to the same requirements that apply to other insurers required 
to report RBC levels. Beginning December 31, 2026, MAIF must maintain total adjusted 
capital in an amount greater than or equal to its company action level RBC. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Rate Making 
 
The provisions of the Insurance Article that apply for prior approval rate making apply to 
the determination of MAIF’s premiums by the Executive Director of MAIF and the filing 
of rates with the Insurance Commissioner: 
 
 
between July 1, 2025, and December 31, 2025, both inclusive; and 
 
beginning January 1, 2026, if MAIF’s total adjusted capital is less than the amount 
required by the bill. 
 
The bill makes a series of technical changes to specify that existing requirements that apply 
to MAIF’s rate making apply for prior approval rate making in addition to competitive rate 
making (i.e., file and use rate making). 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration Workgroup 
 
MIA must establish a workgroup to study: 
 
 
the affordability of private passenger automobile insurance in the State, including 
factors that contribute to premium rate increases and trends in rate increases; 
 
policy options to provide greater transparency regarding automobile insurance 
premiums and to increase the affordability of automobile insurance in the State; 
 
ways in which “affordability” has been defined in the context of the establishment 
of private passenger automobile insurance premium rates; 
 
methodologies by which affordability can be considered in establishing private 
passenger automobile insurance rates consistent with ratemaking principles codified 
in the Insurance Article; and 
 
the current financial status of private passenger automobile insurers in the State and 
potential options to address excess profits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1098/ Page 3 
When conducting this study, the workgroup must consider input from relevant 
stakeholders, including the reinsurance industry. 
 
By January 1, 2026, the workgroup must report its findings to the Governor and  
General Assembly. Provisions related to the workgroup terminate June 30, 2026. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Relevant Definitions 
 
The following terms are defined in statute, often by reference to each other: 
 
 
“Authorized control level RBC” means the number determined under RBC formula 
in accordance with RBC instructions. 
 
“Company action level RBC” means the product of 2.0 and the authorized control 
level RBC. 
 
“Mandatory control level RBC” means the product of 0.70 and the authorized 
control level RBC. 
 
“RBC” means risk-based capital. 
 
“RBC level” means an insurer’s company action level RBC, regulatory action level 
RBC, authorized control level RBC, or mandatory control level RBC, as relevant 
under the definitions specified. 
 
“RBC plan” means a comprehensive financial plan that contains the elements 
specified in the Insurance Article. 
 
“RBC instructions” means RBC instructions developed and adopted by the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). 
 
“Regulatory action level RBC” means the product of 1.5 and the authorized 
control level RBC. 
 
“RBC report” means a report prepared by a domestic insurer and submitted to the 
Commissioner that details the domestic insurer’s RBC levels as of the end of the 
immediately preceding calendar year. 
 
“Total adjusted capital” means the sum of (1) an insurer’s statutory capital and 
surplus as determined in accordance with the statutory accounting principles 
applicable to the annual financial statements required to be filed under State law and 
regulations and (2) any other items provided for in RBC instructions. 
 
Insurance Regulation – Generally 
 
Insurance in the State is regulated by MIA, an independent agency headed by the Insurance 
Commissioner, whom the Governor appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
The administration licenses, examines, and audits insurance companies operating in the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1098/ Page 4 
State; reviews rates and policies; collects premium and retaliatory taxes; licenses 
producers; investigates fraud as well as consumer complaints regarding insurance and 
health plan coverage; and educates the public on insurance matters. 
 
Rate Making 
 
Insurance Law includes guidelines and instructions related to the manner in which insurers 
calculate and apply their premium rates to ensure such rates do not become excessive, 
inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory. With limited exception, rates must generally be 
filed with MIA prior to being used. Among other requirements, Insurance Law includes 
ratemaking specifications that only apply to automobile insurance, processes MIA must 
follow when disapproving of a rate filing, and special ratemaking principles that must be 
followed by an insurer under certain circumstances. 
 
Notably, under certain circumstances, automobile insurers are authorized to use 
“competitive rating,” which allows the insurer to implement a new rate concurrent with the 
rate being filed with MIA for approval. This is generally referred to as file and use rating. 
 
Risk-based Capital Report 
 
Each domestic insurer must prepare and submit to the Commissioner an annual report of 
its RBC levels for the preceding calendar year. Each report must also be filed with NAIC. 
If the Commissioner determines that the filed RBC report is inaccurate, the Commissioner 
adjusts the RBC report to correct the inaccuracy and notifies the insurer of the adjustment, 
including a statement of the reason for the adjustment. 
 
RBC standards for property and casualty insurers are determined by a formula that follows 
RBC instructions developed by NAIC. The formula must take into account and may adjust 
for the covariance between asset risk, credit risk, underwriting risk, and all other business 
risks and other relevant risks as stated in NAIC’s RBC instructions. 
 
Company Action Level Event 
 
A company action level event occurs when an insurer files an RBC report that indicates 
that the insurer has total adjusted capital that is greater than or equal to its regulatory action 
level RBC and less than its company action level RBC. If a company action level event 
takes place, the insurer must prepare and submit to the Commissioner an RBC plan that: 
 
 
identifies the conditions that contribute to the company action level event; 
 
contains proposals of corrective actions that the insurer intends to take and that 
would be expected to result in the elimination of the company action level event; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1098/ Page 5 
 
provides projections of the insurer’s financial results in the current year and at least 
the four succeeding years that (1) project financial results, as specified; (2) include 
projections of statutory operating income, net income, capital, and surplus; and 
(3) for both new and renewal business, include separate projections for each major 
line of business and separately identify each significant income, expense, and 
benefit component; 
 
identifies the key assumptions that impact the insurer’s projections and the 
sensitivity of the projections to the assumptions; and 
 
identifies the quality of and the problems associated with the insurer’s business, 
including its assets, anticipated business growth and associated surplus strain, 
extraordinary exposure to risk, mix of business, and use of reinsurance, as 
appropriate. 
 
Industry Automobile Insurance Association and Assessment Processes 
 
The Industry Automobile Insurance Association (IAIA) is an association that consists of 
all insurers in the State (except for MAIF) that are licensed to issue motor vehicle liability 
insurance or motor vehicle physical damage insurance. Any such insurer must join IAIA 
as a condition of its authority to sell insurance. IAIA is governed by its Board of Directors, 
and it is responsible for, among other things, working with the Insurance Commissioner 
and MAIF to calculate, assess, and collect the MAIF assessment. Chapter 535 of 2023 
modified the assessment process, much of which is statutorily required. The process 
generally takes place in the following manner: 
 
 
When notified that an assessment is necessary by MAIF, the IAIA Board of 
Directors must calculate the assessment in the manner specified by State law. 
 
IAIA first obtains from the Commissioner the net direct written premium for all 
association members. 
 
Using the information from the Commissioner, IAIA calculates the assessment 
allocation percentages and gives notice of the assessment allocation percentages to 
MAIF, the Commissioner, and all IAIA members. 
 
The Commissioner must promptly review the assessment allocation percentages 
and, unless the Commissioner finds them to be inaccurate, authorize each IAIA 
member to impose the assessment on its policyholders, as specified. 
 
The IAIA Board of Directors must promptly assess and collect the assessment from 
its members in the manner specified by State law. 
 
MAIF must also assess its own policyholders in the manner specified by State law. 
 
Funds collected from the assessment must be deposited in the Insufficiency 
Assessment Reserve Fund and then paid to MAIF in one sum, as specified. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1098/ Page 6 
 
Any money in the Insufficiency Assessment Reserve Fund from a previous year 
must be paid to MAIF on December 31 of each year. 
 
Prior to the enactment of Chapter 535, there were additional processes to handle 
overassessment payments from IAIA members; however, Chapter 535 repealed these 
processes and instead requires IAIA members to immediately be reimbursed for any 
overassessment. 
 
MAIF Fiscal Effect:  MAIF currently prepares and submits to MIA the RBC calculation 
required by the bill annually and advises that it generally does not implement a rate increase 
without prior MIA consultation. Nevertheless, the provisions of the bill may affect 
MAIF revenues by reducing investment income (and consequently its ongoing surplus) and 
increasing the risk of an assessment.  
 
The NAIC RBC instructions apply a factor to all investments. Higher-risk factors are 
assigned to equity investments as compared to bonds. This means, under the bill’s proposed 
RBC requirements, holding equities increases MAIF’s required capital, which could lead 
to a reduction in equity exposure in favor of more stable, lower-risk fixed-income 
investments. Additionally, the bill may increase the total adjusted capital MAIF is required 
to maintain to be above the proposed formula referenced in the bill (company action level 
RBC). MAIF advises that meeting this requirement may require it to reduce its investment 
income. 
 
MAIF advises that its investment income has historically been applied to offset, or reduce, 
the amount of a potential MAIF assessment. To the extent that an assessment is required 
to take place, the total amount of the assessment may increase under the bill to account for 
the reduction in investment income. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1098/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2025 
 
rh/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7