START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1018 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 1018 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Institutions - Conventional Home Mortgage Loans - Assumption and 
Required Disclosures 
 
 
This bill requires banking institutions, credit unions, and mortgage lenders to include a 
provision in all “conventional home mortgage loans” that allows any of the existing 
borrowers to purchase the property interest of other borrowers in the event of a divorce, as 
specified. The affected financial institutions must disclose the assumption provision in 
writing to a loan applicant before the completion of the loan application. The bill’s 
provisions apply retroactively to any conventional home mortgage loan entered into prior 
to the bill’s effective date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “conventional home mortgage loan” means any loan primarily for 
personal, family, or household use that is secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other 
equivalent consensual security interest on a dwelling or residential real estate on which a 
dwelling is constructed or intended to be constructed. A “conventional home mortgage 
loan” includes a loan in which funds are advanced through a shared appreciation 
agreement. A “conventional home mortgage loan” does not include a loan that is insured 
or guaranteed by the federal government.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1018/ Page 2 
The provisions of the bill apply only to a conventional home mortgage loan that is not 
already required by law or regulation by the State or federal government to be assumable 
in connection with the granting of an absolute divorce.  
 
Affected lenders must include a provision in all conventional home mortgage loans 
allowing a borrower to purchase the property interest of another borrower on the same loan 
by assuming the seller’s portion of the mortgage if (1) the assumption of the seller’s portion 
of the mortgage is connected to a decree of absolute divorce and (2) the lender determines 
that the assuming borrower qualifies for the loan.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “dwelling” means a residential structure or mobile home that contains one to four family 
housing units or individual units of condominiums or cooperatives. “Dwelling” does not 
include a residential structure or mobile home unless the residential structure or mobile 
home, or at least one unit contained in the residential structure or mobile home is owner 
occupied.  
 
A “mortgage lender” means any person who (1) is a mortgage broker; (2) makes a mortgage 
loan to any person; or (3) is a mortgage servicer. A “mortgage lender” does not include  
(1) a financial institution that accepts deposits and is regulated under Title 3, 4, 5, or 6 of 
the Financial Institutions Article; (2) the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation;  
(3) the Federal Nation Mortgage Association; (4) the Government National Mortgage 
Association; (5) any person engaged exclusively in the acquisition of all or any portion of 
a mortgage loan under any federal, State, or local governmental program of mortgage loan 
purchases; or (6) an affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator, as specified.  
 
A “mortgage lending business” means the activities that define a mortgage lender and 
require the person engaging in those activities to be licensed, as specified. A “mortgage 
lending business” includes the making or procuring of mortgage loans secured by a 
dwelling or residential real estate located outside Maryland.  
 
A “shared appreciation agreement” means a writing evidencing a transaction or any option, 
future, or any other derivative between a person and a consumer where the consumer 
receives money or any other item of value in exchange for an interest or future interest in 
a dwelling or residential real estate, or a future obligation to repay a sum on the occurrence 
of an event, as specified.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1018/ Page 3 
The Office of Financial Regulation 
 
The Office of the Financial Regulation (OFR) is responsible for licensing and regulating 
mortgage lenders, brokers, servicers and loan originators, and other financial institutions. 
The office also supervises and regulates State-chartered financial institutions including 
State-chartered banks, credit unions, and trust companies. Supervision includes periodic 
on-site evaluations as well as off-site monitoring programs. The office responds to 
consumer complaints and oversees retail credit accounts, retail installment contracts, and 
credit grantor contracts.  
 
OFR has the power to vigorously investigate financial transactions to determine whether a 
person has violated a law, regulation, rule, or order over which the commissioner of 
OFR has jurisdiction. For the purposes of an investigation or proceeding, the commissioner 
may administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel the attendance of 
witnesses, and require the production of documents and other evidence. If a person refuses 
to obey a subpoena from the commissioner, the commissioner may apply to the appropriate 
circuit court to issue an order requiring the person to appear before the commissioner and 
produce any requested evidence. If the court issues such an order, failure to obey it subjects 
the person to contempt of court.  
 
When the commissioner determines, after notice and a hearing, as specified, that a person 
has engaged in a violation of a law, regulation, rule, or order, the commissioner may issue 
a cease and desist order, suspend or revoke the license of the violator, and/or issue a penalty 
order against the person for up to $10,000 for a first violation and up to $25,000 for each 
subsequent violation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 689 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 12, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3