START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1027 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1027 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Workgroup to Study Implementation of an Expanded 3-1-1 Nonemergency 
System 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup to Study Implementation of an Expanded 3-1-1 
Nonemergency System, staffed by the Department of Information Technology (DoIT) with 
assistance from the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) as necessary. Workgroup 
members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
By November 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in 
FY 2026 only for DoIT to hire a consultant to support the workgroup, as discussed below. 
DLS can assist with the workgroup as necessary with existing budgeted resources. No 
effect on revenues.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
50,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1027/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must review the study completed by DoIT required by 
Chapter 450 of 2024 in order to establish a plan to implement the recommendations of the 
study.  
 
The workgroup must also review the following areas for study and, if relevant, potential 
modification or implementation:  (1) existing 3-1-1 services provided by the State; 
(2) 3-1-1 services provided in other states and jurisdictions; (3) best practices for providing 
an expanded 3-1-1 nonemergency system; (4) solutions to any limitations or feasibility 
issues with providing an expanded 3-1-1 nonemergency system; (5) the development of a 
plan to provide an expanded 3-1-1 nonemergency system; (6) identification of the 
appropriate State agency to oversee an expanded 3-1-1 nonemergency system; and (7) the 
development of an expanded virtual 3-1-1 portal.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Evaluation and Creation of a Statewide Virtual 3-1-1 Portal 
 
Chapter 450 established the intent of the General Assembly that DoIT evaluate the potential 
of artificial intelligence (AI) in creating a statewide virtual 3-1-1 portal as a source for 
Maryland residents to obtain nonemergency government information and services and, if 
DoIT determines that the use of AI in creating a virtual 3-1-1 portal is feasible, prioritize 
the creation of a virtual 3-1-1 portal. The 2024 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) also 
requested that DoIT assess the possibility of utilizing AI in creating a statewide virtual  
3-1-1 portal as a source for Maryland residents to obtain nonemergency government 
information and services. DoIT submitted one feasibility study to the General Assembly in 
February 2025 to satisfy the intent established under Chapter 450 and the 2024 JCR 
request.  
 
3-1-1 Systems – Generally 
 
According to the Federal Communications Commission, the telephone number 3-1-1 is 
assigned nationwide for nonemergency police and other government services.  
 
State regulations authorize a county or multicounty system in the State to establish a 
3-1-1 system to reduce congestion on the 9-1-1 system. At a minimum, a 3-1-1 system 
must include the following:  (1) switching or programming to direct a 3-1-1 call to a 
nonemergency answering position; (2) a 3-1-1 answering position that must be capable of 
immediately transferring an emergency call to a 9-1-1 answering position or an adjoining 
public safety answering point, transferring a nonemergency call to an adjoining jurisdiction 
or appropriate agency, and providing an individual with a speech or hearing disability 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1027/ Page 3 
access to TTY services or who does not speak or understand the English language access 
to alternative communication services; and (3) a 3-1-1 call taker trained to handle 
nonemergency calls and to transfer emergency calls to a 9-1-1 call taker.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2026 only 
for DoIT to hire a consultant to staff the workgroup, review the DoIT study, conduct related 
research, provide subject matter expertise, and develop the required report. DoIT cannot 
absorb the required staffing duties and comply with the bill’s reporting deadline with 
existing resources. Despite the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date, funds to hire the 
consultant are anticipated to be encumbered in fiscal 2026 only (so there is no effect in 
fiscal 2025).  
 
Expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 775 (Senators Kagan and Jackson) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department 
of Aging; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal 
League; Maryland Department of Disabilities; Federal Communications Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 21, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3