START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1069 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1069 
(Delegate Woorman, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Life and Health Insurance Policies and Annuity and Health Maintenance 
Organization Contracts - Discretionary Clauses - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) from selling, delivering, or issuing a health 
insurance policy, a life insurance policy, an annuity contract, or a health maintenance 
organization contract that contains a clause that purports to reserve sole discretion to the 
carrier to interpret the terms of the policy, or to provide standards of interpretation or 
review that are inconsistent with the laws of the State. The bill applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans sold, delivered, issued, or renewed in the State on 
or after January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2026 from the $125 rate and form filing fee. The bill’s 
requirements can be handled by MIA with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 155 of 2011 prohibits insurers and nonprofit health service plans 
from selling, delivering, or issuing a disability insurance policy that contains a clause that 
purports to reserve sole discretion to the carrier to interpret the terms of the policy, or to 
provide standards of interpretation or review that are inconsistent with the laws of the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1069/ Page 2 
Discretionary clauses in insurance contracts generally give the insurance carrier full 
discretion to determine when insurance benefits are due.  
 
As stated by the U.S. Supreme Court in Firestone Tire v. Bruch (1989), under the federal 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, insureds who believe they have been 
wrongfully denied benefits may sue in federal court. The court determines the standard of 
review by checking for the presence of a discretionary clause. Such a clause might read:  
“Insurer has full discretion and authority to determine the benefits and amounts payable 
and to construe and interpret all terms and provisions of the plan.” If an insurance contract 
has a discretionary clause, the decisions of the insurance company are reviewed under an 
“abuse of discretion” standard. Absent a discretionary clause, review is de novo. 
 
Under the de novo standard, a court may consider all available evidence and issue a 
decision based on its own judgment, which gives claimants a better chance of receiving the 
benefits in their policies. An “abuse of discretion” standard limits the court to only issuing 
a ruling different from the carrier’s decision if the carrier’s decision is found to have been 
unreasonable and an abuse of discretion. 
 
Additional Comments:  The National Association of Insurance Commissioners has 
advocated prohibition of discretionary clauses in life, health, annuity, and disability 
insurance contracts by promulgating a model law intended to help ensure that health 
insurance benefits and disability-income protection coverage are contractually guaranteed 
and avoid the conflict of interest that occurs when the carrier responsible for providing 
benefits has discretionary authority to decide what benefits are due. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1069/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3