START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1028 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1028 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Board of Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System - Investment 
Division - Compensation and Staffing 
 
 
This bill repeals the Objective Criteria Committee (OCC) of the Board of Trustees of the 
State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS), and instead creates a Compensation and 
Staffing Committee (CSC) of the board. OCC’s responsibilities, and some responsibilities 
of the board’s Investment Committee, are transferred to CSC. The bill also modifies the 
conditions under which the Chief Investment Officer (CIO) and Investment Division staff 
are paid incentive compensation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $10,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2026, except for FY 2029, to retain the consultant required by the bill; expenditures 
increase further to the extent the consultant is engaged to provide executive search services. 
The State Retirement Agency (SRA) can otherwise staff CSC with existing resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
10,000 
10,000 
10,000 
0 
10,000 
Net Effect 
($10,000) 
($10,000) 
($10,000) 
$0 
($10,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1028/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Objective Criteria Committee 
 
Chapters 727 and 728 of 2018 gave the SRPS board authority to determine and create 
positions necessary to carry out the professional investment functions of the 
Investment Division and to set their compensation. Under the Acts, the board must adopt 
objective, performance-based criteria for setting the qualifications and compensation of the 
CIO and division staff, including incentive compensation. It must also adopt objective 
criteria to determine appropriate staffing levels for the division. 
 
The Acts created OCC to make recommendations to the SRPS board regarding the 
objective criteria that should be used for setting compensation levels and awarding 
financial incentives. OCC must contract with a consultant to assist it in carrying out its 
responsibilities, but it may not hire a consultant who is actively providing consulting 
services for the SRPS board and Investment Division. The board must consider OCC’s 
recommendations before adopting objective criteria for setting compensation. The 
chairman of the SRPS board may not serve as the chair of OCC, and OCC includes among 
its members one member of the Senate of Maryland, one member of the House of 
Delegates, and a member of the public with financial industry experience, appointed by the 
Presiding Officers. OCC must meet at least once every five years, and the board may enter 
into an agreement with a consultant to assist the committee. 
 
The bill repeals OCC and transfers its responsibilities to the new CSC. The SRPS board 
must enter into an agreement with a consultant to assist CSC and the board. The chair of 
the board may not serve as chair of CSC and must appoint the chair of CSC. Required 
membership of CSC includes only members of the board (including the Secretary of 
Budget and Management); the board chair may appoint the Treasurer or Comptroller or 
their designees to CSC. Membership of CSC does not include members of the 
Maryland General Assembly or any public members. The bill does not include any 
guidelines for the frequency of CSC meetings. The SRPS board may enter into a contract 
with the CSC’s consultant to provide executive search services for the board or 
Executive Director. 
 
Investment Committee 
 
The Investment Committee of the SRPS board is created in statute to invest the system’s 
assets as specified by the board. On the recommendation of the SRA Executive Director 
and the Investment Committee, the SRPS board must determine the qualifications, 
appointment, compensation (including incentive compensation), and leave for the CIO. In 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1028/ Page 3 
making their determinations, the Executive Director and Investment Committee must 
consider the comparative qualifications, compensation, and leave of employees in similar 
positions with comparable public pension funds. 
 
The bill requires CSC to assist the Executive Director and Investment Committee in 
recommending the qualifications, compensation (including incentive compensation), and 
leave for the CIO, and makes conforming changes. 
 
Compensation and Staffing Committee 
 
Under the bill, CSC is responsible for establishing objective criteria for determining 
staffing levels and compensation for the CIO and the Investment Division. Based on those 
criteria, CSC must also make (and the board must consider) recommendations on:   
 
 
the type and number of positions in the Investment Division; 
 
the qualifications for each position in the Investment Division, as specified; and 
 
any compensation and financial incentives for the CIO and Investment Division 
staff, as specified.  
 
The CIO serves in an advisory capacity to CSC regarding (1) compensation and incentive 
compensation for the CIO and Investment Division staff and (2) the type, number of, and 
qualifications for positions in the Investment Division. However, the CIO may not 
participate in any deliberations regarding the criteria for compensation and financial 
incentives for the CIO or Investment Division staff. 
 
Incentive Compensation  
 
Under current law, the SRPS board may award financial incentives to the CIO and 
Investment Division staff. The incentives must be paid over multiple fiscal years in equal 
installments, but they may not be paid after the CIO or staff member separates from 
employment unless the CIO or staff member retires directly from the Investment Division, 
as specified. In addition, financial incentives may not be paid in a fiscal year in which State 
employees are subject to a furlough; any incentives not paid may be paid after the furlough 
period has ended and only if the CIO or staff member is still employed.  
 
The bill specifies that any incentives not paid because of a furlough may be paid to the CIO 
or staff member who has separated from employment if the CIO or staff member retires 
directly from the Investment Division, as specified. 
 
State Expenditures:  OCC is required to meet at least every five years and retain a 
consultant to help it carry out its responsibilities. The first OCC meetings were held in 
fiscal 2019 following the enactment of Chapters 727 and 728, followed by meetings in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1028/ Page 4 
fiscal 2024. Therefore, OCC is not scheduled to meet again until fiscal 2029, when it would 
be required to hire a consultant. 
 
SRA advises that it expects the consultant to cost $10,000 annually (and $50,000 over the 
five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note). However, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that, as SRA would otherwise be required to hire a consultant 
in fiscal 2029 under current law, there is no impact in that year. Instead, special fund 
expenditures increase by $10,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026, except for fiscal 2029.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 810 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’ Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4