START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1082 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1082 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Individual Market Stabilization - Establishment of the State-
Based Health Insurance Subsidies Program 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE), in consultation with the 
Insurance Commissioner and as approved by the MHBE Board, to establish and implement 
a State-Based Health Insurance Subsidies Program to provide subsidies to individuals for 
the purchase of health benefit plans in the individual market. The program must be 
designed to maintain affordability for individuals purchasing health benefit plans through 
MHBE and target individuals who experience an increase in the federal applicable 
percentages for premiums based on household income in calendar 2026 and 2027, as 
compared to calendar 2025. MHBE must adopt regulations to implement the program and 
track specified program expenditures on a monthly basis. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2028, subject to a contingent termination 
provision.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHBE can administer the program using existing budgeted resources. 
Assuming federal advanced premium tax credits (APTCs) are not extended for 
calendar 2026 and 2027, MHBE special fund expenditures increase by a significant but 
indeterminate amount (as much as $75.0 million in FY 2026, $150.0 million in FY 2027, 
and $75.0 million in FY 2028) to provide State-based subsidies for calendar 2026 and 2027, 
as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1082/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
State-Based Health Insurance Subsidies Program  
 
Subject to available funds, for calendar 2026 and 2027, MHBE, in consultation with the 
Commissioner and as approved by the MHBE Board, must establish eligibility and 
payment parameters for the program that (1) mitigate a reduction in APTCs because of 
changes in federal applicable percentages; (2) maximize enrollment in the individual 
market; (3) take into consideration State funds needed to ensure the State Reinsurance 
Program (SRP) continues to provide market stability through calendar 2028; and (4) take 
into consideration uncertainties in enrollment in Medicaid, the individual market, and the 
small group market due to changes in State and federal regulation and funding. On a 
monthly basis, MHBE must track expenditures on subsidies provided, as specified. The 
information must be posted on the MHBE website and included in MHBE’s annual report. 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange Fund 
 
The purposes of the MHBE Fund are expanded to include providing funding for the 
establishment of State-based health insurance subsidies to mitigate the impact of a 
reduction in federal ATPCs. The composition of the fund is also expanded to include any 
funds designated by the State to provide State-based subsidies for this purpose.  
 
In fiscal 2026 through 2028, MHBE may designate funds from the MHBE Fund for the 
program. Except as specified, funds received from the State health insurance provider fee 
assessment may only be used for SRP and the State-Based Health Insurance Subsidies 
Program.  
 
Contingent Termination 
 
If federal APTCs are extended for calendar 2026 and 2027, the bill terminates. Within 
five days of a change in federal law extending APTCs, the MHBE Board and the 
Commissioner must notify the Department of Legislative Services.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Advanced Premium Tax Credits 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) established APTCs to help 
eligible households lower their payments toward premiums for qualified health plans 
offered through exchanges. Under the ACA, APTCs were available to individuals with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1082/ Page 3 
household incomes between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty level (FPL). The APTC 
formula incorporates a premium contribution for the household receiving the subsidy based 
on the household’s income multiplied by an applicable percentage. The American Rescue 
Plan Act (ARPA) expanded eligibility for and the amount of the APTC for calendar 2021 
and 2022 by eliminating the maximum income limit of 400% FPL and reducing the 
applicable percentages, which resulted in larger subsidy amounts. The Inflation Reduction 
Act (IRA) extended ARPA provisions through calendar 2025. Exhibit 1 shows expected 
contribution percentages by household income under the ACA compared with IRA/ARPA. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Expected Contribution Percentages under ACA vs. IRA/ARPA Parameters 
 
 
Individual Contribution to Premium (as a % of Income) 
Household Income 
(% of FPL) 
 
 
ACA1 
 
IRA/ARPA 
Up to 133% 
1.82% 
0% 
133% to 150% 
2.73% to 3.64% 
0% 
150% to 200% 
3.64% to 5.73% 
0% to 2.0% 
200% to 250% 
5.73% to 7.33% 
2.0% to 4.0% 
250% to 300% 
7.33% to 8.65% 
4.0% to 6.0% 
300% to 400% 
8.65% 
6.0% to 8.5% 
Above 400% 
Credit not available 
8.5% 
 
ACA:  federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
ARPA:  federal American Rescue Plan Act 
FPL:  federal poverty level 
IRA:  federal Inflation Reduction Act 
 
1 Contribution percentages that would have applied in calendar 2025 but for the IRA/ARPA expansion. 
 
Note:  Under the ACA’s original premium subsidy structure, contribution requirements are adjusted 
annually to reflect premium growth relative to income. By contrast, ARPA expansion of the APTC 
established fixed-contribution requirements that do not change.  
 
Source:  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1082/ Page 4 
The enhanced APTCs are scheduled to terminate December 31, 2025, unless extended by 
the U.S. Congress; thus, without further federal action, the subsidies will return to original 
ACA rules, with a 400% FPL maximum income limit and higher applicable percentages 
(resulting in lower subsidy amounts). Recent projections from the Congressional Budget 
Office predict that marketplace enrollment across the United States will decrease by 17% 
(4 million enrollees), when enhanced APTCs expire.  
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
 
MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for individuals and 
small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the Maryland Health 
Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, compare rates, and 
determine their eligibility for federal APTCs and Medicaid. The MHBE Fund generally 
provides funding for the operation and administration of MHBE, SRP, and the 
State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program.  
 
State Reinsurance Program 
 
SRP provides reinsurance to carriers that offer individual health benefit plans in the State. 
Carriers that incur total annual claims costs on a per-individual basis between a 
$21,000 attachment point (the dollar amount of insurer costs above which an insurer is 
eligible for reinsurance) and a cap of $250,000 are reimbursed for 80% of those claims 
costs. Payments to insurance carriers are made after the plan year ends and all costs have 
been recorded and reconciled. The federal § 1332 waiver authorizing SRP expires at the 
end of calendar 2028. In calendar 2026, SRP is expected to cost $538.9 million.  
 
State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program  
 
Chapters 777 and 778 of 2021 required MHBE to establish and implement the 
State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program for calendar 2022 and 
2023 to help make health insurance more affordable for uninsured young adults. Subject 
to available funds, in fiscal 2022 through 2024, MHBE was authorized to designate monies 
from the MHBE Fund to be used for the pilot program so that no more than $20.0 million 
in annual subsidies could be provided in calendar 2022 and 2023. Chapters 256 and 257 of 
2023 extended the termination date of the pilot program to June 30, 2026, and authorized 
MHBE, in fiscal 2024 through 2026, to designate funds from the MHBE Fund to provide 
up to $20.0 million in annual subsidies under the pilot program. Under the program, young 
adults ages 18 to 37 with incomes between 138% and 400% FPL are eligible for State 
premium assistance subsidies.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1082/ Page 5 
State Health Insurance Provider Fee Assessment  
 
Under § 6-102.1 of the Insurance Article, a 1% State health insurance provider fee 
assessment provides funding for SRP through calendar 2028 to help stabilize the individual 
health insurance market. Funding for SRP is generated through a combination of federal 
pass-through dollars through the State’s federal § 1332 waiver and from the 1% 
assessment. The provider fee assessment terminates at the end of calendar 2028. According 
to MHBE, the assessment is estimated to generate $159.7 million in calendar 2026. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHBE advises that it does not anticipate any additional operating 
costs or staffing needs to implement the program for calendar 2026 or 2027.  
 
Assuming federal APTCs are not extended for calendar 2026 and 2027, MHBE special 
fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate but significant amount to provide State 
subsidies for calendar 2026 and 2027. The amount of such expenditures cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time and will depend on available funding and the specific eligibility 
parameters for the subsidy program established by MHBE.  
 
Based on MHBE’s Joint Chairmen’s Report on Reinsurance Program Costs and Forecast, 
it is unclear that sufficient funds are available to support SRP and provide State-based 
subsidies should federal APTCs expire. However, the bill specifies that, subject to available 
funds, MHBE must establish eligibility and payment parameters for the program that, 
among other things, take into consideration State funds needed to ensure SRP continues to 
provide market stability through calendar 2028. 
 
MHBE advises that almost 190,000 Marylanders currently receive enhanced APTCs and 
would lose some or all of their financial assistance if the enhanced subsidies expire. For 
illustrative purposes only, a 2023 report projected that the cost for the State to fully replace 
ARPA-enhanced APTCs would be around $150.0 million in calendar 2026. Thus, MHBE 
special fund expenditures increase by a significant but indeterminate amount (as much as 
$75.0 million in fiscal 2026, $150.0 million in fiscal 2027, and $75.0 million in fiscal 2028) 
to provide State-based subsidies for calendar 2026 and 2027. 
 
Should federal APTCs be extended for calendar 2026 and 2027, the bill terminates, and no 
additional expenditures are incurred by MHBE. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1082/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  U.S. Congressional Research Service; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6