START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1004 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1004 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias - Information on 
Prevalence and Treatment 
 
 
This bill expands the information that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in 
partnership with specified entities, must incorporate into relevant public health outreach 
programs to include information (1) for health care providers on treatments approved by 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for Alzheimer’s disease and related 
dementias, including relevant information on treatment use and outcomes and (2) to 
increase public understanding and awareness of early treatment of Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementias and FDA-approved treatments and relevant information on treatment use 
and outcomes. MDH, in collaboration with the State-designated health information 
exchange (HIE), must establish and maintain a publicly accessible website that includes 
specified information regarding Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias in a 
downloadable format, which must be updated annually to include any newly available data. 
The bill also makes conforming changes and corrects an obsolete reference to the 
Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Council. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general expenditures increase by at least $59,000 in FY 2026 for 
contractual staff and technology expenses, as discussed below. Future years reflect 
termination of contractual staff in FY 2027 and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
59,000 
40,800 
21,000 
21,000 
21,000 
Net Effect 
($59,000) 
($40,800) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1004/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The website must include (1) the prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease and 
related dementias in the State; (2) the hospitalization rate related to Alzheimer’s disease 
and related dementias; and (3) to the extent possible, the prevalence and hospitalization 
rate of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias disaggregated based on age (including 
age of diagnosis), sex, race, ethnicity, number of cases by county, co-occurrence of 
Down Syndrome (trisomy-21), and type of dementia. 
 
The website must (1) include data available for the immediately preceding five-year period 
ending September 30, 2025, and (2) be updated to include newly available data by 
January 1 each year, beginning in 2027. 
 
Current Law:  MDH, in partnership with the Maryland Department of Aging, the  
Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Council, and the  
Greater Maryland Chapter of the Alzheimer’s Association, must incorporate information 
into relevant public health outreach programs administered by MDH to: 
 
 
educate health care providers regarding (1) the importance of early detection and 
timely diagnosis of cognitive impairment; (2) validated assessment tools for the 
detection and diagnosis of cognitive impairment; (3) the value of a Medicare annual 
wellness visit or other annual physical for an individual at least 65 years old for 
cognitive health; and (4) the Medicare care planning billing code for individuals 
with cognitive impairment; and 
 
increase understanding and awareness of (1) the early warning signs of Alzheimer’s 
disease and other types of dementia; (2) the value of early detection and diagnosis 
of Alzheimer’s disease and other types of dementia; and (3) how to reduce the risk 
of cognitive decline, particularly among individuals in Black and Latino 
communities who are at greater risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease and other 
types of dementia. 
 
Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Council 
 
Chapters 305 and 306 of 2013 established the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and 
Related Disorders Council for a three-year period. Chapters 410 and 411 of 2019 extended 
the council’s termination date to September 30, 2024. Chapters 397 and 398 of 2022 
renamed the council as the Virginia I. Jones Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias 
Council and required the council to issue and publish an update to the State Plan on 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1004/ Page 3 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias every five years. Chapters 397 and 398 also 
removed the council’s termination date. 
 
The council must (1) update the State Plan on Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders 
and advocate for the State plan; (2) examine the needs for individuals with Alzheimer’s 
disease and related disorders and their caregivers and identify methods through which the 
State can most effectively and efficiently assist in meeting those needs; (3) advise the 
Governor and the General Assembly on policy, funding, regulatory, and other issues related 
to individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders and their caregivers; and 
(4) develop and promote strategies to encourage brain health and reduce cognitive decline. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MDH, in partnership with specified entities, to 
incorporate additional information into relevant public health outreach programs. MDH 
advises that this can be completed with existing budgeted resources. However, the bill also 
requires MDH, in consultation with the State-designated HIE, to establish and maintain a 
publicly accessible website that includes (in a downloadable format) specified data 
available on Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias for the immediately preceding 
five-year period ending September 30, 2025. The website must be updated to include newly 
available data by January 1, 2027, and annually thereafter. 
 
MDH advises that the department is unable to meet the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources. Therefore, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $59,019 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one part-time (50%) contractual epidemiologist to collect specified Alzheimer’s 
disease and related dementias data for the website. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, technology expenses (as discussed below), and ongoing operating 
expenses. This estimate assumes that the contractual position begins October 1, 2025, and 
terminates December 31, 2026, allowing the position to collect initial required data, 
establish the website, and update the website prior to the January 1, 2027 deadline. After 
the contractual position terminates, this analysis assumes that the website can be updated 
on an annual basis using existing resources. 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Position 
0.5 
-0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$31,064 
$19,543 
Technology Expenses 
21,000 
21,000 
Operating Expenses 
    6,955 
       279 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$59,019 
$40,822 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1004/ Page 4 
MDH estimates that technology expenses associated with developing and maintaining the 
website are at least $21,000 annually for MDH data office support and licensing fees. To 
the extent additional personnel are required to build out the website, expenditures increase 
by an additional amount. 
 
Additional Comments: According to the Alzheimer’s Association, more than 
127,000 Marylanders are living with Alzheimer’s disease. The Alzheimer’s Association 
releases an annual report outlining specified Alzheimer’s disease data. 
 
In July 2024, FDA approved an injectable drug to be used in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment or mild dementia stage of Alzheimer’s disease. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 748 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4