START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1045 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1045 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance, Family Planning Services, and Confidentiality of Medical 
Records - Consumer Protections - Updates 
 
This bill updates references to federal law related to family planning services under the 
Family Planning Program in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The bill alters 
the definitions of “legally protected health care” and “sensitive health services” to include 
gender-affirming care with respect to disclosure of information regarding sensitive health 
services. The bill specifies that the Insurance Commissioner and the Maryland Commission 
on Civil Rights (MCCR) have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce consumer protection 
provisions related to discrimination in health insurance. The Commissioner may adopt 
regulations necessary to carry out enforcement of such provisions, consistent with federal 
statute, rules, and guidance in effect on December 31, 2024. The bill also updates 
references to federal rules and guidance relating to health insurance consumer protection 
provisions. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Family Planning Program 
 
Chapters 28 and 810 of 2017 established a Family Planning Program in MDH to ensure 
the continuity of family planning services in the State. Program funding must be in addition 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1045/ Page 2 
to any funding applied by MDH, before December 31, 2016, to the Maintenance of Effort 
(MOE) requirement for federal funding under the Title X Family Planning Program. MDH 
may not accept any federal funding under Title X if that program (1) excludes family 
planning providers and (2) does not require such providers to provide a broad range of 
acceptable and effective medically approved family planning methods and services. 
 
Statute defines “family planning providers” under the program to mean providers of 
services (1) funded under Title X of the federal Public Health Service Act as of 
December 31, 2016, and (2) that lost eligibility for Title X funding as a result of the 
termination of federal funding for providers because of the scope of services offered by the 
providers or the scope of services for which the providers offer referrals. 
 
Under the bill, the definition of “family planning providers” is updated to (1) reflect 
providers of services funded under Title X of the federal Public Health Service Act as of 
December 31, 2024. 
 
The bill also updates the definition of “family planning services” to reflect services 
provided under Title X of the federal Public Health Service Act as of December 31, 2024, 
and specifies that program funding must be in addition to any funding applied by MDH, 
before December 31, 2024, to the MOE requirement for federal funding under the  
Title X Family Planning Program. 
 
Legally Protected Health Care and Sensitive Health Services 
 
Under § 4-301 of the Health-General Article, “legally protected health care” means all 
reproductive health services, medications, and supplies related to (1) the provision of 
abortion care and (2) other sensitive health services as determined by the Secretary of 
Health based on the recommendations of the Protected Health Care Commission. 
“Sensitive health services” includes reproductive health services other than abortion care. 
 
Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 (the Reproductive Health Protection Act) establish 
additional protections for information related to “legally protected health care” when that 
information is sought by another state. The Acts also prohibit (1) a health occupations 
board from taking specified disciplinary actions related to the provision of legally protected 
health care; (2) a medical professional liability insurer from taking specified adverse 
actions against a practitioner related to the practice of legally protected health care; and 
(3) specified State entities, agents, and employees from participating in any interstate 
investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or sanctions against a person for 
activity related to legally protected health care (with limited exception).  
 
Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 prohibit the disclosure of mifepristone data or the diagnosis, 
procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other sensitive health services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1045/ Page 3 
by a health information exchange, electronic health network, or health care provider. A 
person who knowingly violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
a fine of up to $10,000 per day.  
 
The bill alters the definition of “legally protected health care” to mean all sensitive health 
services, medications, and supplies related to (1) the provision of abortion care and 
(2) reproductive health and other sensitive health services as determined by the Secretary 
based on the recommendations of the Protected Health Care Commission. The bill also 
alters the definition of “sensitive health services” to include (1) reproductive health 
services other than abortion care and (2) gender-affirming care. 
 
Carrier Prohibition Against Discrimination 
 
Section 15-1A-22 of the Insurance Article prohibits a carrier from refusing, withholding, 
or denying coverage under a health benefit plan to, or otherwise discriminating against, 
any individual on the grounds of race, sex, color, creed, national origin, marital status, 
sexual orientation, age, gender identity, or disability. MCCR must enforce these provisions. 
These prohibitions do not apply to limitations or restrictions related to age or marital status 
that are specifically authorized or required under the Insurance Article to limit or restrict 
eligibility for insurance coverage or benefits. 
 
Under the bill, the commission has concurrent jurisdiction with MCCR for the enforcement 
of these provisions. 
 
Grandfathered Plans 
 
Section 15-1A-01 of the Insurance Article defines a “grandfathered plan” as a health 
benefit plan that meets the criteria established under 45 C.F.R. § 147.140 and any 
corresponding federal rules or guidance as those provisions were in effect as of 
December 1, 2023, or meets the criteria of specified regulations adopted by the 
Commissioner. 
 
Under the bill, the date of any corresponding federal rules or guidance as those provisions 
were in effect is changed to December 31, 2024. 
 
Regulations Regarding Consumer Protection Provisions 
 
Throughout Title 15, Subtitle 1A of the Insurance Article, various provisions require the 
Commissioner to adopt regulations regarding consumer protections that must be consistent 
with specified federal law and any corresponding federal rules and guidance as those 
provisions were in effect either as of December 1, 2019, or as of December 1, 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1045/ Page 4 
Under the bill, the date for corresponding federal rules and guidance references are updated 
to December 31, 2024.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 940 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4