START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1021 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1021 
(Delegates Taylor and Holmes) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Real Estate Appraisers - Licensure and Certification - Qualifications 
 
 
This bill prohibits the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management 
Companies, and Home Inspectors from requiring an applicant to hold a bachelor’s degree 
or higher to qualify for licensure as a real estate appraiser or certification as a residential 
real estate appraiser. The bill’s prohibition does not apply to an applicant seeking 
certification as a general real estate appraiser. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The commission can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed or certified by the 
State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and 
Home Inspectors in the Maryland Department of Labor before the individual may provide 
real estate appraisal services or certified real estate appraisal services, respectively, in the 
State. 
 
Statute requires that, in addition to other requirements, an applicant for initial licensure or 
certification must have completed at least 1,000 or 1,500 hours (respectively) of real estate 
appraiser services as a trainee under the supervision of a certified appraiser. Regulations 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1021/ Page 2 
specify these requirements must be completed over a period of at least 6 months for 
licensure and 12 months for certification. 
 
A bachelor’s degree is not required to become a licensed real estate appraiser. Additionally, 
while not a requirement, a certified residential real estate appraiser may meet examination 
eligibility requirements by holding a bachelor’s degree or higher (in addition to meeting 
required classroom hours). However, regulations require a bachelor’s degree or higher for 
certified general real estate appraisers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2