START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1078 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1078 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Prince George's County - Federal Bureau of Investigation Headquarters - 
Mandated Appropriation 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include in the annual operating or capital budget bill an 
appropriation of at least $200 million for site redevelopment and to improve transportation 
infrastructure for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) headquarters relocation project 
if the U.S. General Services Administration applies to Prince George’s County or the State 
for a permit associated with the relocation of the FBI headquarters to Prince George’s 
County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has no effect assuming general obligation (GO) bond funding of 
$200 million already authorized for the FBI headquarters project satisfies the bill’s 
mandate, as discussed below. In conjunction with that assumption, should the already 
authorized GO bond funding for the FBI headquarters project be repurposed, the bill could 
be interpreted as merely requiring the same amount of funding to be appropriated if and 
when the project moves forward. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  On November 9, 2023, the U.S. General Services Administration selected 
Greenbelt, Maryland as the new site for the FBI headquarters. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1078/ Page 2 
GO bond funding of $100 million was authorized for the FBI headquarters project in each 
of fiscal 2024 and 2025. This funding will support construction of an interchange along  
I-95/I-495 at the Greenbelt Metro Station as well as other improvements necessary for 
relocation of FBI headquarters, with an estimated total project cost of $266 million. The 
project is included in the Consolidated Transportation Program (CTP), which assumes 
using the $200 million in GO bond funding over three years, beginning in fiscal 2026, 
based on anticipated cash flow requirements. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although $200 million in GO bond funding has already been 
authorized, those monies have not yet been expended. The CTP assumes GO bond 
expenditures of $23.5 million in fiscal 2026, $96.5 million in fiscal 2027, and $80 million 
in fiscal 2028. Thus, this analysis assumes these GO bond expenditures fulfill the bill’s 
mandate, and the bill has no fiscal effect. Even so, given recent uncertainty about the 
project, should the GO bond funding that has already been authorized be repurposed rather 
than expended for the FBI headquarters project, the bill ensures the same amount of 
funding if, and when, the project moves forward – again for no fiscal impact, just a possible 
shift in timing. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill could also be interpreted as requiring an additional 
$200 million for the FBI headquarters project. Under this interpretation, pay-as-you-go 
(PAYGO) Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and/or GO bond expenditures increase by a 
combined $200 million in FY 2027 to meet the bill’s mandate. 
 
The General Assembly cannot mandate appropriations in the capital budget, but the 
Governor may satisfy the mandated appropriation by including GO bond funding in the 
capital budget on a discretionary basis. Accordingly, PAYGO TTF expenditures increase 
by as much as $200 million in fiscal 2027 if the funding mandate is fulfilled, at least in 
part, through the operating budget. If the mandated appropriation is met by including some, 
or all, of the $200 million as GO bond funding in the capital budget, there is no further 
effect on total capital expenditures, which are fixed annually by the Governor and 
General Assembly through the capital budget process, subject to debt affordability limits. 
To the extent that GO bonds are used for the FBI headquarters project, funding for other 
capital projects is either reduced or delayed.  
 
Under this interpretation, however, it is unclear how the additional funds would be 
expended as they would exceed the amount necessary for the project. More specifically, 
the CTP projects that the FBI headquarters project costs $266 million, and total funding 
programmed for it already adds up to that amount ($200 million in GO bonds, $53 million 
in federal funds, and $13 million in TTF PAYGO funding). 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1078/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 997 (Senator A. Washington) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; U.S. General Services 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3