START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1095 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1095 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County - Alcoholic Beverages - Beauty Salon and Barbershop 
License  
MC 3-25 
 
 
This bill expands and renames the beauty salon beer and wine license as the beauty salon 
and barbershop beer, wine, and liquor license in Montgomery County. The license 
authorizes the license holder to provide up to 1.7 ounces of liquor for on-premises 
consumption by a beauty salon or barbershop customer, as specified. The bill also 
increases, from 5 to 12 ounces, the maximum amount of beer a license holder may provide 
to a customer for on-premises consumption and  makes conforming changes. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County can handle any additional enforcement activity with 
existing resources. Montgomery County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners is authorized 
to issue a beauty salon beer and wine license to a holder of a beauty salon permit. The 
license authorizes the licensee to provide up to five ounces of beer or wine by the glass for 
on-premises consumption by a beauty salon customer during specified cosmetology 
services and permitted fundraising events. The license may not be transferred to another 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1095/ Page 2 
location. Beer and wine may be provided during normal business hours but no later than 
9:00 p.m. each night. Licensees are subject to specified existing alcohol awareness training 
requirements. The annual license fee is $100. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2