START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1083 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1083 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council and the Commission on Behavioral Health 
Care Treatment and Access - Plan to Implement Early and Periodic Screening, 
Diagnostic, and Treatment Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Behavioral Health Advisory Council and the Commission on 
Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access (through its workgroup on youth behavioral 
health, individuals with developmental disabilities, and individuals with complex 
behavioral health needs) to provide recommendations to implement the federal Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) State Health Official (SHO) letter #24-005:  Best 
Practices for Adhering to Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment 
(EPSDT) Requirements. By January 1, 2026, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
must submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The advisory council and commission can provide recommendations and 
MDH can submit the associated report with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The recommendations must address (1) screening and assessment of 
behavioral health conditions; (2) the feasibility of implementing a specified diagnostic tool 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1083/ Page 2 
for patients younger than age five; (3) community-based services to correct and ameliorate 
behavioral health conditions; and (4) services to ensure children’s behavioral health, early 
symptoms of concern (with or without a diagnosis), and urgent and crisis needs. 
 
In making the recommendations, the advisory council and commission must consult with 
specified stakeholders. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment Program 
 
The EPSDT Program is a federal requirement that mandates that states cover certain 
benefits for Medicaid recipients from birth through age 20 – benefits that are not 
necessarily covered for recipients who are aged 21 and older. Maryland’s EPSDT Program 
promotes access to, and ensures availability of, quality health care for Medicaid-eligible 
children, teens, and adults younger than 21. The program provides appropriate, 
practice-based performance improvement assessments and targeted interventions to 
enhance the quality of health services delivered by Medicaid providers. 
 
The preventive care component of EPSDT is known as the Healthy Kids Program. 
Preventive health care services allow for early identification and treatment of health 
problems before they become medically complex and costly to treat. Standards for the 
Healthy Kids Program are developed through collaboration with key stakeholders. 
 
The federal Bipartisan Safer Communities Act requires the U.S. Secretary of Health and 
Human Services to issue guidance to states on EPSDT Medicaid coverage requirements 
that includes best practices for ensuring children have access to comprehensive health care 
services, including children without a mental health or substance use disorder diagnosis. In 
September 2024, CMS issued guidance via SHO # 24-005 that is intended to provide an 
overview of EPSDT requirements and how states can meet the goal of EPSDT – the right 
care, to the right child, at the right time, in the right setting. The guidance discusses policies, 
strategies, and best practices to maximize health care access and utilization for 
EPSDT-eligible children. 
 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council 
 
Chapter 328 of 2015 established the council to promote and advocate for the enhancement 
of behavioral health services across the State for individuals who have behavioral health 
disorders and their family members. The council must meet at least six times a year and 
submit an annual report by December 31 each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1083/ Page 3 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access 
 
Chapters 290 and 291 of 2023 established the commission to make recommendations to 
provide appropriate, accessible, and comprehensive behavioral health services that are 
available on demand to individuals in the State across the behavioral health continuum. 
The commission is statutorily mandated to establish particular workgroups that must meet 
at least twice a year and include members of the commission. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 790 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3