START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1046 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1046 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Mechanical Repair Contracts - Technical Service Bulletins 
 
 
This bill prohibits (1) a mechanical repair contract from containing a provision precluding 
coverage solely for an issue with a motor vehicle identified in a technical service bulletin 
and (2) a guarantor or provider from denying a mechanical repair contract claim solely 
because the claim was made for a diagnosed issue with the motor vehicle that was identified 
in a technical service bulletin. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Mechanical Repair Contracts 
 
“Mechanical repair contract” means any agreement or contract sold by a licensed vehicle 
dealer, an obligor, or an agent under which the dealer or obligor agrees to perform specified 
services pertaining to the repair, replacement, or maintenance of a motor vehicle for a 
specific identifiable price. “Obligor” means the person specified in a mechanical repair 
contract that is contractually obligated to perform the services set forth in the contract. An 
obligor must register with the Insurance Commissioner each year, provide specified 
information, and pay an annual registration fee. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1046/ Page 2 
Only a licensed vehicle dealer, an agent, or a registered obligor or their employees may 
offer, sell, or negotiate a mechanical repair contract. Violators are subject to imprisonment 
for up to one year and/or a fine of up to $5,000 and may be required to pay restitution. 
 
Also, licensed dealers and obligors who sell mechanical repair contracts have the same 
obligations as a seller of goods under § 2-314 of the Commercial Law Article. In addition, 
the provisions of the Maryland Service Contracts and Consumer Products Guaranty Act 
(Title 14, Subtitle 4 of the Commercial Law Article) apply to a mechanical repair contract 
sold in the State. 
 
A mechanical repair contract, among other things: 
 
 
includes extended warranties and extended service contracts; 
 
does not include warranties under the federal Magnuson-Moss Warranty Act 
(consumer products warranties); contracts or agreements for regular maintenance 
only; or an agreement between a motor club, as defined in § 26-101 of the Insurance 
Article, and a member or subscriber of the motor club; 
 
must be offered in addition to any express warranty originally included as part of 
the contract for sale of a new motor vehicle; and 
 
must clearly and conspicuously set forth the date when the warranty begins, the date 
or the odometer reading at which the warranty expires, and the name and address of 
the insurer issuing the policy of insurance required of an obligor for the protection 
of the purchasing consumer, as specified. 
 
The repair of a malfunction or defect covered under a mechanical repair contract must 
include the cost of the teardown and diagnosing the malfunction and defect. 
 
Maryland Service Contracts and Consumer Products Guaranty Act 
 
Under the Maryland Service Contracts and Consumer Products Guaranty Act, a service 
contract is, among other things, a contract or an agreement for a separately stated 
consideration to perform the repair, replacement, or maintenance of a product, and includes 
a mechanical repair contract. The Act requires a service contract to include specified 
information in writing, including the duration of the contract, the purchase price, the 
services to be provided, requirements for cancellation, and procedures for contract dispute 
resolution. Additionally, under the Act, a service contract is automatically extended when 
the provider fails to perform the services under the contract; the contract does not terminate 
until the services are provided. “Provider” means a person or persons acting in concert who 
are contractually obligated under the service contract to provide services to the owner of a 
product covered by the service contract. If a provider is unable to fulfill the terms of the 
contract within 10 days after the date specified in the contract, the provider must, on request 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1046/ Page 3 
of the person guaranteed under the service contract, provide a written explanation for the 
delay. 
 
“Guarantor” means a person who is engaged in the business of making consumer products 
available to consumers and who makes a guaranty. A guaranty is made at the time of the 
sale of a consumer product by a guarantor to a person guaranteed and is part of the basis 
of the bargain between these two individuals. A guaranty includes a warranty and a written 
undertaking to refund, repair, replace, or take other remedial action with respect to a 
consumer product if it proves defective in material or workmanship or fails to meet a 
specified level of performance. A guaranty does not include a service contract. A guarantor 
must deliver to the first person guaranteed specified written information, including any 
reasonable and necessary maintenance required as a condition for the performance of the 
guaranty and a recital of the guarantor’s obligations to the person guaranteed during the 
guaranty period. 
 
If a guarantor or provider violates the Act, the Office of the Attorney General may obtain 
a court order to prohibit the guarantor or provider from further violations. A court may also 
issue an order to restore money or property to a person damaged by a violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3