START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 683

Chapter 683

(House Bill 1086)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance – Coverage for
Anesthesia – Prohibiting Time Limitations

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Medical Assistance Program, managed care
organizations, and certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health
maintenance organizations, if providing coverage for the delivery of anesthesia for a
procedure for which a licensed medical professional issues an order, to provide the
coverage in a certain manner; and generally relating to health insurance coverage
for the delivery of anesthesia.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–102.3(m), 15–103(a)(2)(xxv), and 15–157
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxiii) and (xxiv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 15–861
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–102.3.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 683 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(M) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2026, THE PROVISIONS OF § 15–861 OF THE
INSURANCE ARTICLE APPLY TO MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS IN THE SAME
MANNER THAT THEY APPLY TO CARRIERS.

15–103.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall administer the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

(2) The Program:

(xxiii) Beginning on July 1, 2025, shall provide, subject to the
limitations of the State budget, and as permitted by federal law, coverage for biomarker
testing in accordance with § 15–859 of the Insurance Article; [and]

(xxiv) Beginning on January 1, 2025, shall provide coverage for
prostheses in accordance with § 15–844 of the Insurance Article; AND

(XXV) BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2026, IF PROVIDING COVERAGE
FOR THE DELIVERY OF ANESTHESIA, SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR THE DELIVERY
OF ANESTHESIA IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–861 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE.

15–157.

IF THE PROGRAM COVERS THE DELIVERY OF ANESTHESIA FOR A PROCEDURE
FOR WHICH A LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL ISSUES AN ORDER, THE
PROGRAM:

(1) SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR THE:

(I) THE DELIVERY OF ANESTHESIA FOR THE ENTIRE DURATION
OF THE PROCEDURE; AND

(II) MEDICAL CARE RELATED TO THE DELIVERY OF
ANESTHESIA FOR THE PROCEDURE THAT IS PROVIDED IMMEDIATELY BEFORE AND
AFTER THE PROCEDURE; AND

(2) MAY NOT PLACE ESTABLISH, IMPLEMENT, OR ENFORCE A POLICY,
PRACTICE, OR PROCEDURE THAT PLACES TIME LIMITATIONS ON THE DELIVERY OF
ANESTHESIA.

Article – Insurance

15–861.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 683

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

(1) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
PROVIDE HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS
ON AN EXPENSE–INCURRED BASIS UNDER HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES OR
CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE; AND

(2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS UNDER
CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

(B) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION THAT COVERS THE DELIVERY OF
ANESTHESIA FOR A PROCEDURE FOR WHICH A LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL
ISSUES AN ORDER:

(1) SHALL PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR:

(I) THE DELIVERY OF ANESTHESIA FOR THE ENTIRE DURATION
OF THE PROCEDURE; AND

(II) MEDICAL CARE RELATED TO THE DELIVERY OF ANESTHESIA
FOR THE PROCEDURE THAT IS PROVIDED IMMEDIATELY BEFORE AND AFTER THE
PROCEDURE; AND

(2) MAY NOT PLACE ESTABLISH, IMPLEMENT, OR ENFORCE A POLICY,
PRACTICE, OR PROCEDURE THAT PLACES TIME LIMITATIONS ON THE DELIVERY OF
ANESTHESIA.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
after January 1, 2026.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
January 1, 2026.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3