START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1010 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1010 
(Delegate A. Jones) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
African American Heritage Preservation Program and Grant Fund - Noncapital 
Grants and Donations 
 
 
This bill allows for grants and donations to be made to the African American Heritage 
Preservation (AAHP) Grant Fund of the Maryland Historical Trust (MHT) and allows for 
the grant/donation funding to be used to award AAHP Noncapital Grants for preserving or 
sharing African American history or culture in the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the AAHP Grant Fund 
increase correspondingly, beginning in FY 2026, as grants and donations are made to the 
fund and AAHP Noncapital Grants are awarded from the fund.  
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures may increase, as discussed 
below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under provisions governing the AAHP Grant Fund, the bill:   
 
 
establishes that the AAHP Grant Fund consists of – in addition to existing 
funding – grants and donations to the fund; and 
 
authorizes the Secretary of Planning to award an AAHP Noncapital Grant – defined 
as a grant awarded for the purpose of preserving or sharing African American 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1010/ Page 2 
history or culture in the State – funded by money received by the AAHP Grant Fund 
as grants and donations.  
 
The bill specifies that if, after the award of all eligible AAHP Noncapital Grants, there is 
additional money in the AAHP Grant Fund received as grants and donations, the Secretary 
may award a grant, funded by that money, for a capital AAHP Project.  
 
Current Law:  There is an AAHP Program and an AAHP Grant Fund in MHT. The 
program has the purpose of identifying and preserving buildings, communities, and sites 
of historical and cultural importance to the African American experience in the State. The 
program is administered by MHT in partnership with the Maryland Commission on 
African American History and Culture (MCAAHC).  
 
The AAHP Grant fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
program; (2) investment earnings of the fund; (3) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund; and (4) money received from the sale of State general 
obligation bonds. Each fiscal year, the Governor is required to include in the annual 
operating or capital budget an appropriation of $5.0 million to the AAHP Grant Fund. 
Individuals, business entities, nonprofit organizations, and political subdivisions may 
submit an application for a grant under the program.  
 
MHT and MCAAHC review grant applications and make grant recommendations to the 
Secretary of Planning for a final decision. The Secretary may award a grant under the 
program only for an AAHP Project. “AAHP Project” means a capital project that 
(1) preserves buildings, communities, and sites of historical and cultural importance to the 
African American experience in the State and (2) is for the acquisition of land or buildings 
or the construction or improvement of land or buildings.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the AAHP Grant 
Fund increase correspondingly, beginning in fiscal 2026, reflecting grants and donations 
made to the fund each year and corresponding awards of AAHP Noncapital Grants and, to 
the extent there is remaining grant/donation funding, grants for AAHP Projects. The 
amount of grants and donations made to the AAHP Grant Fund annually cannot be reliably 
estimated.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures may increase as a result 
of receipt and spending of AAHP Noncapital Grants.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may meaningfully benefit from the bill, as direct 
recipients of AAHP Noncapital Grants or through providing goods or services to recipients.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1010/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3