START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1085 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1085 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Housing Authorities - Tax-Exempt Status - Modifications 
 
 
This bill standardizes the tax treatment of real property owned by certain nonprofit entities 
created by public housing authorities in Maryland by extending a specified property tax 
exemption to all nonprofit entities created by public housing authorities in the State. Under 
current law, the property tax exemption only applies to the nonprofit entities created by 
public housing authorities in three jurisdictions (Baltimore City and Howard and 
Montgomery counties). The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in State property tax revenues beginning in 
FY 2026 to the extent that public housing authorities establish nonprofit entities. 
State expenditures should not be significantly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in local property tax revenues beginning in 
FY 2026 to the extent that public housing authorities establish nonprofit entities. 
Local expenditures should not be significantly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Real property owned by public housing authorities are exempt from State 
and local property taxes as provided in both the Tax-Property Article (Section 7-215) and 
the Housing and Community Development Article (Section 12-104). In addition, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1085/ Page 2 
real property owned by nonprofit entities established by the public housing authorities in 
Baltimore City and Howard and Montgomery counties is also exempt from State and local 
property taxes. 
 
Housing Authorities and Nonprofit Entities 
 
Any housing authority in the State may establish and control nonprofit entities, including 
corporations and limited liability companies, which may own, operate, and take steps 
necessary or convenient to develop or undertake housing projects in the authority’s area of 
operation. 
 
Federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit 
 
Many of the affordable housing projects financed in the State are financed through the use 
of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC). LIHTC was established by the 
Tax Reform Act of 1986. The tax credit subsidizes the construction and rehabilitation of 
low-income rental housing and is intended to encourage the production of low-income 
residential rental housing. Instead of offering direct subsidies, LIHTC provides incentives 
by granting investors a dollar-for-dollar reduction in their federal tax liability in exchange 
for providing funds for the development of qualified, affordable rental housing. This allows 
rents for some of a project’s units to be set below market level, while the investors receive 
annual tax credit allotments over 10 years. For at least 15 years after completion, a project 
must continue to meet LIHTC eligibility requirements, such as maintaining the units as 
affordable to the target population. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  Public housing authorities often create nonprofit 
subsidiary entities as a way to develop projects with private investment or to accept equity 
investment through LIHTC. In these cases, the public housing authority retains majority 
ownership and control of the nonprofit entity. Due to the limited nature of the property tax 
exemption, any potential effect on State and local revenues is projected to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, Howard, and 
Prince George’s counties; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1085/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3