START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 764

Chapter 764

(House Bill 1072)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement and Pension System – Administrative Fees – Repeal

FOR the purpose of requiring the Board of Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension
System to certify certain employer contribution rates each fiscal year; requiring the
employer contribution rates to include recognition of certain administrative and
operational expenses; repealing a requirement that certain administrative and
operational expenses of the State Retirement and Pension System and the State
Retirement Agency be funded by charging each participating employer an
administrative fee for each system participant; clarifying that certain payments
certified by the Board of Trustees to be paid by local employers in a certain fiscal
year shall be paid; requiring the Board of Trustees to fund certain operating
expenses of the State Retirement Agency through the accumulation fund; and
generally relating to the funding of the administrative and operating expenses of the
State Retirement and Pension System and the State Retirement Agency.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–125, 21–302, 21–303, and 21–315
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–301
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–316
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

21–125.

(a) The Board of Trustees shall designate an actuary who shall:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 764 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) give technical advice to the Board of Trustees on the operation of the
funds of the several systems; and

(2) perform other related duties that the Board of Trustees requires.

(b) (1) On the basis of actuarial assumptions that the Board of Trustees
adopts, each year the actuary shall make a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the
funds of the several systems AND SHALL RECOMMEND THE RATES OF EMPLOYER
CONTRIBUTIONS TO BE CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.

(2) (I) 1. Each year, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE
ACTUARY, the Board of Trustees shall certify to the Secretary of Budget and Management
and to the Governor the rates of employer contributions.

2. EACH YEAR, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE
ACTUARY, THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES SHALL CERTIFY TO ALL OTHER PARTICIPATING
EMPLOYERS THE RATES OF EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS.

(II) THE NORMAL CONTRIBUTION RATE RECOMMENDED BY THE
ACTUARY AND CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR ALL EMPLOYERS
UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR SHALL
INCLUDE AN AMOUNT NECESSARY FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL
EXPENSES OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND THE STATE RETIREMENT AGENCY,
EXCLUDING THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL EXPENSES OF THE
INVESTMENT DIVISION.

(3) For purposes of actuarial valuation, the Board of Trustees may adopt a
generally accepted ACTUARIAL method for determining the value of the assets held by the
several systems.

(4) For general ledger accounting and financial reporting, the Board of
Trustees shall use generally accepted accounting principles.

(c) (1) At least once in each 5–year period, the actuary shall make:

(i) actuarial investigations into the compensation, mortality, and
service experience of the participants of each of the several systems; and

(ii) a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the funds of each of the
several systems.

(2) The Board of Trustees shall:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 764

(i) review the results of the investigations and valuations of the
actuary; and

(ii) adopt the actuarial assumptions for each of the several systems
as the Board of Trustees considers necessary.

21–301.

(a) In each State system, there is:

(1) an accumulation fund;

(2) an annuity savings fund; and

(3) an expense fund.

(b) The Board of Trustees shall credit the assets of each State system to the
appropriate fund of the State system according to the purpose for which the assets are held.

21–302.

(a) The following are obligations of the State:

(1) the payment of all allowances and other benefits payable under this
Division II;

(2) the creation and maintenance of reserves in the accumulation funds of
the several systems; AND

(3) the crediting of regular interest to the annuity savings funds of the
several systems[; and

(4) except as provided in § 21–316 of this subtitle, the payment of the
expenses for administration and operation of the several systems].

(b) The assets of the several systems shall be used to pay the obligations of the
State specified in this section.

(c) Each fiscal year the State shall pay to the accumulation fund of each State
system at least an amount that when combined with the amount in the accumulation fund
of the system is sufficient to provide the allowances and other benefits payable out of the
fund during that fiscal year.

21–303.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 764 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) The Board of Trustees shall credit to the accumulation fund of each State
system:

(1) all employer contributions to the State system;

(2) all interest, dividends, and other income derived from the assets of the
State system; and

(3) amounts transferred under § 21–311(c) or (d) of this subtitle.

(b) The Board of Trustees shall pay from the accumulation fund of a State system
all benefits payable under that State system except for benefits payable from the annuity
savings fund of that State system.

(c) (1) Each year the Board of Trustees shall transfer from the accumulation
fund of each State system to each member’s account in the annuity savings fund of that
State system regular interest on the account as provided in this Division II.

(2) If a retiree who has retired because of disability is restored to
membership, the Board of Trustees shall transfer from the accumulation fund of the
appropriate State system to the annuity savings fund of that State system an amount equal
to the remaining portion of the retiree’s annuity reserve.

(d) [(1)] Each year, the Board of Trustees shall transfer from the accumulation
fund of each State system to the expense fund of that system the amounts required by §
21–315 of this subtitle.

[(2) On or before June 30 each year, the administrative fees that are paid
by participating employers as provided in § 21–316 of this subtitle for that year shall be
reimbursed to the accumulation fund of each State system for the amount transferred to
the expense fund of that system under paragraph (1) of this subsection.]

21–315.

(a) The Board of Trustees shall credit to the expense fund of each State system
its pro rata share of:

(1) the amount [provided in the annual State budget to pay the
administrative and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees and the State Retirement
Agency] ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL EXPENSES OF
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND THE STATE RETIREMENT AGENCY AS CERTIFIED BY
THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES UNDER § 21–125 OF THIS TITLE;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 764

(2) the amounts authorized by the Board of Trustees under this section for
investment management services, including personnel and operational expenses of the
Investment Division; and

(3) the amount authorized by the Board of Trustees to implement a closing
agreement with the Internal Revenue Service regarding former members of the Employees’
Retirement System or the Teachers’ Retirement System who elected to become members of
or participate in those State systems under former Article 73B, §§ 2–206 and 3–206 of the
Code.

(b) (1) The Board of Trustees shall pay from the expense fund of each State
system its pro rata share of:

(i) the administrative and operational expenses of the Board of
Trustees and the State Retirement Agency, in accordance with the annual State budget;

(ii) the amounts as authorized by the Board of Trustees necessary
for investment management services, including personnel and operational expenses of the
Investment Division; and

(iii) the amounts as authorized by the Board of Trustees necessary to
implement a closing agreement with the Internal Revenue Service regarding former
members of the Employees’ Retirement System or the Teachers’ Retirement System who
elected to become members of or participate in those State systems under former Article
73B, §§ 2–206 and 3–206 of the Code.

(2) The amounts for the personnel and operational expenses of the
Investment Division shall be paid out of the accumulation fund of each State system on a
pro rata basis [and may not be paid by participating employers as provided in § 21–316 of
this subtitle].

(c) Each year the Board of Trustees shall estimate the amount, not exceeding
0.22% of active member payroll, retiree benefits, and former member compensation,
necessary for the administrative and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees and the
State Retirement Agency.

(d) (1) Each quarter of the fiscal year the Board of Trustees shall estimate
one–fourth of an amount, not exceeding 0.5% of the market value as of the last day of the
preceding quarter of invested assets that are externally managed exclusive of assets
invested in real estate or alternative investments, necessary to procure and retain
investment management services other than external real estate or alternative investment
management services.

(2) The Board of Trustees is not limited in the amount of investment
manager fees that the Board of Trustees may pay as necessary for external real estate or
alternative investment management services.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 764 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) (1) The amounts estimated under subsection (c) of this section shall be paid
into the expense funds of the several systems during the ensuing year on a pro rata basis
according to the total membership of each system.

(2) The amounts estimated under subsection (d) of this section shall be paid
into the expense funds of the several systems during the ensuing year on a pro rata basis
according to the total assets held by each system.

(f) The Board of Trustees may combine the expense funds of the several systems
for budgetary and administrative efficiency.

(g) (1) (i) On or before December 31 of each year, the Board of Trustees
shall report to the General Assembly the actual amount spent for investment management
services during the preceding fiscal year.

(ii) The report required under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall include the amount of carried interest on any assets of the system.

(2) On or before December 31 each year, the Board of Trustees shall report
to the General Assembly the actual amount spent for Investment Division operations
during the preceding fiscal year.

[21–316.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Administrative fees” means the actual administrative and operational
expenses incurred by the Board of Trustees and the State Retirement Agency as of June 30
of the second prior fiscal year.

(3) “Library” means a library that is established or operates under the
Education Article.

(4) “Local employer” means a participating employer other than the State.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, for each fiscal year, the
State and each local employer shall pay to the Board of Trustees their pro rata shares of
the administrative fees.

(2) The pro rata share of the administrative fees of the State and of each
local employer for each fiscal year shall be based on the number of members of the several
systems employed by the State or local employer as of June 30 of the second prior fiscal
year compared to the total membership of the several systems as of that date.

(3) The State shall pay the pro rata share under this section of each library.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 764

(4) The administrative fees used to determine the pro rata shares under
this subsection may not include costs for the personnel and operational expenses of the
Investment Division.

(c) As part of its annual budget submission for a fiscal year, the Board of Trustees
shall certify to the Secretary of Budget and Management the percentage of the total
membership of the several systems that is employed by the State, the libraries, and each
local employer as of June 30 of the second prior fiscal year.

(d) (1) The Governor shall include in the budget bill an appropriation to the
accumulation funds of the State Retirement and Pension System that equals the authorized
administrative fees for the fiscal year.

(2) The amounts payable by the State under this section with respect to
members employed by each State unit shall be charged against the budget of that unit.

(3) The State shall pay its pro rata share of the amount of administrative
fees authorized in the State budget to the Board of Trustees on July 1 of the applicable
fiscal year.

(e) (1) On or before October 1 each year, the Board of Trustees shall:

(i) certify to each local employer other than a library the amount
payable by the local employer for the next fiscal year that is equal to the percentage
certified under subsection (c) of this section multiplied by the amount of administrative
fees; and

(ii) notify the Secretary of Budget and Management and the
Department of Legislative Services of the certifications sent under item (i) of this
paragraph.

(2) On or before October 1, January 1, April 16, and June 1 of the fiscal
year immediately following the certification required in paragraph (1) of this subsection,
each local employer shall pay to the Board of Trustees 25% of the amount certified to the
local employer by the Board of Trustees under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(3) If a local employer does not pay the amounts required under this section
within the time required, the local employer is liable for interest on delinquent amounts at
a rate of 4% a year until payment.

(4) The Secretary of the Board of Trustees may allow a grace period not to
exceed 10 calendar days for payment of the amounts certified under this section.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 764 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) On notification by the Secretary of the Board of Trustees that a
delinquency exists, the State Comptroller immediately shall exercise the right of setoff
against any money due or coming due to that local employer from the State.

(f) On receipt of payments under this section, the Board of Trustees shall credit
these amounts to the accumulation fund of the appropriate State system.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding Section 1 of
this Act, on or before June 1, 2025, each local employer shall pay to the Board of Trustees
for the State Retirement and Pension System the amounts certified to be paid by each local
employer for fiscal year 2025 to the Board of Trustees in accordance with § 21–316 of the
State Personnel and Pensions Article in effect at the time of certification.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, for fiscal year 2026, the
amounts for the administrative and operational expenses of the Board of Trustees for the
State Retirement and Pension System and the State Retirement Agency shall be paid out
of the accumulation fund of each State system on a pro rata basis.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, for fiscal year 2027 and
each fiscal year thereafter, the administrative and operational expenses of the Board of
Trustees for the State Retirement and Pension System and the State Retirement Agency
shall be included in the employer contribution rates certified by the Board of Trustees for
the State Retirement and Pension System as provided in Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
June 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8