START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1087 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1087 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Step Therapy or Fail-First Protocols - Drugs to Treat 
Associated Conditions of Advanced Metastatic Cancer 
 
 
This bill prohibits certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) from imposing a step therapy or fail-first 
protocol for a prescription drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
that is prescribed by a treating physician to treat a symptom or side effect of 
stage four advanced metastatic cancer, as specified. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, 
and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or 
renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) from the $125 rate and form filing fee in FY 2026 only. Review of 
filings can likely be handled with existing MIA resources. No likely impact on the State 
Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
 
Local Effect:  Any impact on local governments with fully insured health benefit plans is 
assumed to be minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 316 and 317 of 2014 established requirements for 
step therapy or fail-first protocols imposed by carriers, including carriers that provide 
coverage for prescription drugs through a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM). 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1087/ Page 2 
“Step therapy or fail-first protocol” means a protocol established by a carrier that requires 
a prescription drug or sequence of prescription drugs to be used by an insured or enrollee 
before a prescription drug ordered by a prescriber is covered. 
 
Under current law, a step therapy or fail-first protocol may not be imposed if the 
step therapy drug has not been FDA-approved for the medical condition being treated or a 
prescriber provides supporting medical information to the carrier or PBM that a 
prescription drug covered by the carrier or PBM (1) was ordered for the insured or enrollee 
within the past 180 days and (2) based on the professional judgment of the prescriber, was 
effective in treating the insured or enrollee. These requirements for step therapy or  
fail-first protocols may not be construed to require coverage for a prescription drug that is 
not covered by the policy or contract or otherwise required to be covered by law. 
 
Under current law, a carrier may not impose a step therapy or fail-first protocol on an 
insured or enrollee for an FDA-approved prescription drug that is used to treat the insured’s 
or enrollee’s stage four advanced metastatic cancer if the use of the drug is supported by 
peer-reviewed medical literature and is consistent with the FDA-approved indication or the 
National Comprehensive Cancer Network Drugs & Biologics Compendium indication for 
the treatment of stage four advanced metastatic cancer. 
 
The bill expands the prohibition on step therapy or fail-first protocols for a prescription 
drug used to treat stage four advanced metastatic cancer to include drugs prescribed by a 
treating physician to treat a symptom or side effect of stage four advanced metastatic 
cancer. Use of the prescription drug must be consistent with best practices for the treatment 
of stage four advanced metastatic cancer, or a condition or side effect associated with 
stage four advanced metastatic cancer and supported by peer-reviewed medical literature. 
The prescription drug must be covered under the terms of the policy or contract of the 
insured or enrollee.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 921 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1087/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3