START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1066 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1066 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access - Workgroups 
 
 
This bill requires the Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access to 
establish an additional workgroup on improvement of health, social, and economic 
outcomes related to substance use. The workgroup must evaluate and review specified 
issues, including Maryland Department of Health (MDH) regulations on standards for the 
discharge of patients from substance use treatment programs. The workgroup must make 
recommendations on changes to State laws, policies, and practices (1) needed to mitigate 
the harms related to the criminalization of substance use with the goal of improving the 
public health and safety of residents of the State and (2) related to the discharge of patients 
from substance use treatment programs to consider the patient’s mental health or substance 
use disorder (SUD) diagnosis in making an appropriate placement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $38,000 in FY 2026 and 
$39,600 in FY 2027 for contractual staff to support the workgroup, as discussed below. 
Future years reflect termination of the positions consistent with the termination of the 
commission at the end of FY 2027. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
38,000 
39,600 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($38,000) 
($39,600) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1066/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must evaluate and review: 
 
 
the availability, affordability, and accessibility of treatment for SUD and recovery 
support services, including housing and employment services, in the State; 
 
the number and percentage of individuals directed to SUD and recovery support 
services by the Maryland criminal justice system; 
 
the health outcomes after receiving SUD and recovery support services, 
disaggregated by whether the services were sought voluntarily or mandated; 
 
the impact of current criminal justice involvement related to substance use in the 
State on health and well-being; 
 
the cost to State and local governments resulting from current criminal justice 
involvement related to substance use in the State; 
 
the equitable application of current criminal justice involvement related to substance 
use in the State; 
 
current research on the efficacy of voluntary treatment for SUDs compared to 
treatment mandated by criminal justice systems, including systems outside the State; 
 
the availability and accessibility of data on the aforementioned issues; and 
 
MDH’s regulations on the standards for the discharge of patients from substance 
use treatment programs to assess whether current standards adequately consider the 
patient’s mental health or SUD diagnosis and the impact of discharge standards on 
the patient. 
 
As with current commission workgroups under current law, the workgroup must include 
members of the commission, meet at least twice annually, and by July 1 each year, report 
and make recommendations to the commission and the Behavioral Health Advisory 
Council. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 290 and 291 of 2023 established the commission to make 
recommendations to provide appropriate, accessible, and comprehensive behavioral health 
services that are available on demand to individuals in the State across the behavioral health 
continuum. 
 
The commission must establish workgroups that must meet at least twice per year and 
include members of the commission. The established workgroups may also include 
individuals invited by the commission and the Behavioral Health Advisory Council. The 
workgroups include (1) the geriatric behavioral health workgroup; (2) the youth behavioral 
health, individuals with developmental disabilities, and individuals with complex 
behavioral health needs workgroup; (3) the criminal justice-involved behavioral health 
workgroup; and (4) the behavioral health workforce development, infrastructure, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1066/ Page 3 
coordination, and financing workgroup. By July 1 each year, the workgroups must report 
and make recommendations to the commission and the Behavioral Health Advisory 
Council. 
 
The commission must meet at least three times annually and report its findings and 
recommendations by January 1 each year. The annual report must include funding and 
legislative recommendations that are consistent with providing appropriate, accessible, and 
comprehensive behavioral health services that are available on demand to individuals in 
the State across the behavioral health spectrum. Any legislative recommendations that 
require funding must also include an estimate of the funding required and information that 
supports the estimate. 
 
The commission must also meet jointly with the Behavioral Health Advisory Council at 
least three times per year as mutually determined. The commission must coordinate with 
the council in submitting its annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
January 1 each year. 
 
Per Chapters 290 and 291, the commission is scheduled to terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
State Expenditures:  Given the specific duties of the workgroup established under the bill 
and the requirement that the workgroup make specified recommendations (neither of which 
are required of existing workgroups), MDH advises that additional contractual resources 
are required to staff the workgroup. 
 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $38,019 in fiscal 2026, which reflects 
the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one part-time (50%) contractual health policy analyst to staff the new workgroup. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$31,064 
Operating Expenses 
6,955 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$38,019 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and assume termination of the 
contractual position on June 30, 2027, consistent with the termination of the commission. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1066/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4