START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 121

Chapter 121

(House Bill 1020)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Credit Reporting – Medical Debt
(Fair Medical Debt Reporting Act)

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a consumer reporting agency from including certain
medical debt information in a consumer report; prohibiting a person from using
medical debt information included in a consumer report when making a
creditworthiness determination; prohibiting certain entities from disclosing medical
debt to a consumer reporting agency; requiring certain entities to include a certain
provision in contracts entered into with a collection entity regarding medical debt
and establishing a contract that does not contain the provision is void and
unenforceable; and generally relating to credit reporting and medical debt.

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 14–1213
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–214.2(a)(1) and (e)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section ~~19–214.2(f)~~ 19–214.2(b), (e)(4), and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 24–2501 and 24–2502 be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 25. Medical Debt
Reporting”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 121 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

14–1213.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “MEDICAL DEBT” MEANS AN OBLIGATION OF A
~~CONSUMER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PAY~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECEIPT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~
SERVICES, PRODUCTS, DEVICES, DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT, OR
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS PROVIDED TO A PERSON BY:

(I) A HEALTH CARE FACILITY AS DEFINED IN § 19–114 OF THE
~~HEALTH~~ ~~–~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ARTICLE;~~

(II) A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER AS DEFINED IN § 19–114 OF
THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE; OR

(III) AN AMBULANCE SERVICE AS DEFINED IN § 13–515 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE DEBT OWED BY A CONSUMER TO:

(I) A PERSON WHOSE PRIMARY BUSINESS IS PROVIDING
MEDICAL SERVICES, PRODUCTS, OR DEVICES; OR

(II) THE PERSON’S AGENT OR ASSIGNEE FOR THE PROVISION OF
MEDICAL SERVICES, PRODUCTS, OR DEVICES.

(2) “MEDICAL DEBT” INCLUDES MEDICAL BILLS THAT:

(I) ARE NOT PAST DUE; OR

(II) HAVE ALREADY BEEN PAID.

(3) “MEDICAL DEBT” DOES NOT INCLUDE DEBT CHARGED TO A
CREDIT CARD UNLESS THE CREDIT CARD IS ISSUED UNDER AN OPEN–ENDED OR A
CLOSE–ENDED OPEN–END OR CLOSE–END CLOSED–END CREDIT PLAN OFFERED
SPECIFICALLY SOLELY FOR THE PAYMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES, PRODUCTS,
OR DEVICES, DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT, OR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

(B) (1) A CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY MAY NOT:

(I) MAKE, CREATE, OR FURNISH ANY CONSUMER REPORT
CONTAINING, INCORPORATING, OR REFLECTING:

1. ANY ADVERSE INFORMATION THAT THE CONSUMER
REPORTING AGENCY KNOWS OR SHOULD KNOW RELATES TO MEDICAL DEBT
INCURRED BY THE CONSUMER; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 121

2. ANY COLLECTION ACTION AGAINST A CONSUMER TO
COLLECT MEDICAL DEBT; OR

(II) MAINTAIN IN A FILE ON A CONSUMER ANY INFORMATION
RELATING TO:

1. MEDICAL DEBT INCURRED BY THE CONSUMER; OR

2. ANY COLLECTION ACTION AGAINST THE CONSUMER
TO COLLECT MEDICAL DEBT.

(2) THE PROHIBITIONS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION APPLY REGARDLESS OF WHEN MEDICAL DEBT WAS INCURRED BY
A CONSUMER.

(C) A PERSON MAY NOT USE MEDICAL DEBT INFORMATION INCLUDED IN A
CONSUMER REPORT TO MAKE A DETERMINATION REGARDING THE
CREDITWORTHINESS OF THE CONSUMER.

Article – Health – General

19–214.2.

(a) (1) Each hospital annually shall submit to the Commission:

(i) At times prescribed by the Commission, the hospital’s policy on
the collection of debts owed by patients; and

(ii) A report including:

1. The total number of patients by race or ethnicity, gender,
and zip code of residence against whom the hospital, or a debt collector used by the hospital,
filed an action to collect a debt owed on a hospital bill;

2. The total number of patients by race or ethnicity, gender,
and zip code of residence with respect to whom the hospital has and has not reported or
classified a bad debt; and

3. The total dollar amount of the charges for hospital services
provided to patients but not collected by the hospital for patients covered by insurance,
including the out–of–pocket costs for patients covered by insurance, and patients without
insurance.

(b) The policy submitted under subsection (a)(1) of this section shall:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 121 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Provide for active oversight by the hospital of any contract for collection
of debts on behalf of the hospital;

(2) Prohibit the hospital from selling any debt;

(3) Prohibit the charging of interest on bills incurred by self–pay patients
before a court judgment is obtained;

(4) Describe in detail the consideration by the hospital of patient income,
assets, and other criteria;

(5) Prohibit the hospital from [reporting]:

(I) REPORTING ADVERSE INFORMATION to a consumer reporting
agency; or [filing]

(II) FILING a civil action to collect a debt within 180 days after the
initial bill is provided;

(6) Describe the hospital’s procedures for collecting a debt;

(7) Describe the circumstances in which the hospital will seek a judgment
against a patient;

(8) In accordance with subsection (c) of this section, provide for a refund of
amounts collected from a patient or the guarantor of a patient who was later found to be
eligible for free care within 240 days after the initial bill was provided;

(9) If the hospital has obtained a judgment against or reported adverse
information to a consumer reporting agency about a patient who later was found to be
eligible for free care within 240 days after the initial bill was provided for which the
judgment was awarded or the adverse information was reported, require the hospital to
seek to vacate the judgment or strike the adverse information;

(10) Provide a mechanism for a patient to:

(i) Request the hospital to reconsider the denial of free or
reduced–cost care;

(ii) File with the hospital a complaint against the hospital or a debt
collector used by the hospital regarding the handling of the patient’s bill; and

(iii) Allow the patient and the hospital to mutually agree to modify
the terms of a payment plan offered under subsection (e) of this section or entered into with
the patient; [and]

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 121

(11) Prohibit the hospital from collecting additional fees in an amount that
exceeds the approved charge for the hospital service as established by the Commission for
which the medical debt is owed on a bill for a patient who is eligible for free or
reduced–cost care under the hospital’s financial assistance policy; AND

(12) COMPLY WITH § 24–2505 § 24–2502 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, a hospital shall provide in
writing to each patient who incurs medical debt information about the availability of an
installment payment plan for the debt.

(4) (i) A patient shall be deemed to be compliant with a payment plan
if the patient makes at least 11 scheduled monthly payments within a 12–month period.

(ii) If a patient misses a scheduled monthly payment, the patient
shall contact the health care facility and identify a plan to make up the missed payment
within 1 year after the date of the missed payment.

(iii) The health care facility may, but may not be required to, waive
any additional missed payments that occur within a 12–month period and allow the patient
to continue to participate in the income–based payment plan and not refer the outstanding
balance owed [to a collection agency or] for legal action.

(f) (1) A HOSPITAL SHALL COMPLY WITH § 24–2502 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) For at least 180 days after issuing an initial patient bill, a hospital may
NOT not report adverse information about a patient to a consumer reporting agency or
commence civil action against a patient for nonpayment.

[(2)] (3) A hospital shall report the fulfillment of a patient’s payment
obligation within 60 days after the obligation is fulfilled to any consumer reporting agency
to which the hospital had reported adverse information about the patient.

[(3)] (4) A hospital may not report adverse information to a consumer
~~reporting~~ ~~agency~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~a~~ ~~patient~~ ~~who~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~time~~ ~~of~~ ~~service~~ ~~was~~ ~~uninsured~~ ~~or~~ ~~eligible~~
~~for~~ ~~free~~ ~~or~~ ~~reduced–cost~~ ~~care~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~19–214.1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle.~~

[(4)] (5) A hospital may not report adverse information about a patient to
~~a~~ ~~consumer~~ ~~reporting~~ ~~agency,~~ commence a civil action against a patient for nonpayment, or
delegate collection activity to a debt collector:

(i) If the hospital was notified in accordance with federal law by the
patient or the insurance carrier that an appeal or a review of a health insurance decision
is pending within the immediately preceding 60 days; or

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 121 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) If the hospital has completed a requested reconsideration of the
denial of free or reduced–cost care that was appropriately completed by the patient within
the immediately preceding 60 days.

[(5)] (6) If a hospital has BY NOVEMBER 1, 2025, A HOSPITAL THAT
HAD reported adverse information about a patient to a consumer reporting agency, the
~~hospital~~ shall instruct the consumer reporting agency to delete the adverse information
about the patient:

~~(i)~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~was~~ ~~informed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~patient~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~insurance~~
~~carrier~~ ~~that~~ ~~an~~ ~~appeal~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~health~~ ~~insurance~~ ~~decision~~ ~~is~~ ~~pending,~~ ~~and~~ ~~until~~ ~~60~~
~~days~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~appeal~~ ~~is~~ ~~complete;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~Until~~ ~~60~~ ~~days~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~has~~ ~~completed~~ ~~a~~ ~~requested~~
~~reconsideration~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~denial~~ ~~of~~ ~~free~~ ~~or~~ ~~reduced–cost~~ ~~care.~~

SUBTITLE 25. MEDICAL DEBT REPORTING.

24–2501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “AMBULANCE SERVICE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–515 OF THE
~~EDUCATION~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

(C) (B) “COLLECTION ENTITY” MEANS ANY INDIVIDUAL, PARTNERSHIP,
CORPORATION, TRUST, ESTATE, COOPERATIVE, ASSOCIATION, GOVERNMENT OR
GOVERNMENT SUBDIVISION, AGENCY, OR OTHER ENTITY THAT PURCHASES
MEDICAL DEBT OR COLLECTS MEDICAL DEBT ON BEHALF OF ANOTHER.

(D) “HEALTH CARE FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–114 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(E) “HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–114
OF THIS ARTICLE.

(F) (C) “MEDICAL DEBT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–1213 OF THE
COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE.

24–2502.

(A) A HEALTH CARE FACILITY, A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER, OR AN
AMBULANCE SERVICE A PERSON WHOSE PRIMARY BUSINESS IS PROVIDING

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 121

MEDICAL SERVICES, PRODUCTS, OR DEVICES, OR THE PERSON’S AGENT OR
ASSIGNEE:

(1) MAY NOT DISCLOSE ANY PORTION OF A MEDICAL DEBT TO A
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY; AND

(2) SHALL INCLUDE IN ANY CONTRACT ENTERED INTO WITH A
COLLECTION ENTITY FOR THE PURCHASE OR COLLECTION OF MEDICAL DEBT A
PROVISION PROHIBITING THE DISCLOSURE OF ANY PORTION OF THE MEDICAL DEBT
TO A CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY.

(B) A CONTRACT ENTERED INTO ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2025, THAT
DOES NOT INCLUDE THE PROVISION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS
SECTION IS VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7