START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1060 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1060 
(Delegates Crutchfield and Kaufman) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Judicial and Public Safety for Service Members Act 
 
This bill generally establishes uniform definitions related to the military in the Correctional 
Services, Courts and Judicial Proceedings, Criminal Law, Family Law, General Provisions, 
Public Safety, Real Property, and State Government Articles of the Maryland Code, 
primarily by reference to definitions in the U.S. Code. While numerous alterations within 
the bill represent only stylistic or technical changes, there are substantive changes. These 
changes generally make certain provisions – including those related to court record 
fees – more broadly applicable to additional service members.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, 
updates are necessary to the licensing portal for the Department of State Police (DSP); thus, 
general fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2026 only. State finances are not 
otherwise materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill adds the definition of several military terms to the 
State Government Article (specifically, § 9-901). This includes the definition of “military 
family” as well as all terms found in Exhibit 1 below. “Military family” includes the spouse 
and dependent children of a service member or veteran related by blood, marriage, or 
adoption. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1060/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Repeated Military Definitions Added to State Government § 9-901 
 
Term 
U.S. Code Reference 
Definition 
Active duty 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Full-time duty in the active service of a 
uniformed service, including full-time training 
duty, annual training duty, full-time National 
Guard duty, and attendance, while in the active 
service, at a school designated as a service 
school by law or the relevant Secretary 
Active service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is (1) an active-duty member 
of the uniformed services or (2) serving in a 
reserve component of the uniformed services on  
active-duty orders 
Armed forces 
10 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, and Coast Guard 
Reserve 
component 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
The Army National Guard of the United States, 
the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the 
Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard 
of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the 
Coast Guard Reserve, or the Reserve Corps of 
the Public Health Service 
Service 
member 
n/a 
An individual who is a member of (1) the 
uniformed services or (2) a reserve component 
of the uniformed services 
Uniformed 
services 
37 U.S.C. § 101 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Space 
Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, and Public Health 
Service 
Veteran 
38 U.S.C. § 101 
A person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released under nondishonorable 
conditions 
 
n/a:  not applicable 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1060/ Page 3 
In General 
 
Numerous statutory provisions in the Articles referenced above explicitly extend 
applicability to individuals who meet certain requirements, generally related to military 
service. The bill generally expands certain provisions to apply more broadly, some of 
which are further described below.  
 
Correctional Services 
 
Under current law, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services must adopt 
regulations requiring that a correctional officer hired by the Division of Correction within 
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services on or after October 1, 2007, be 
at least age 21. In addition, the Secretary must adopt regulations requiring that a 
correctional officer hired by the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services or the 
Patuxent Institution on or after October 1, 2008, be at least age 21. In both cases, the 
regulations must exempt any honorably discharged veteran or reserve member of the  
United States armed forces from the minimum age requirement. The bill expands the 
exemption to apply more broadly to an honorably discharged reserve component member 
of the uniformed services, defined as specified above. 
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
 
Fees for Court Records:  Under current law and subject to additional limitations, a clerk 
of court must provide without charge (1) a copy of any paper or record in the clerk’s office 
that is requested by a former or active member of the armed forces, in person, or by the  
U.S. government; (2) a copy of a marriage record of a former or active member of the 
armed forces that is requested by the member; and (3) a copy of a marriage record of a 
former or active member of the armed forces or of a surviving spouse or child of the 
member. The bill substitutes the term “service member,” thereby extending this benefit to  
(1) former and active members of the Public Health Service (PHS) or the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and (2) former and active members of the 
reserve components of the uniformed services, defined as specified above, which also 
includes members of the reserve corps of PHS. 
 
Jury Service:  Under current law, active-duty members of the armed forces and members 
of the State’s organized militia who meet certain qualifications under federal and State law 
are exempt from jury duty. The bill definitively incorporates active-duty members of the 
commissioned corps of NOAA. 
 
Criminal Law 
 
Certain provisions within the Criminal Law Article that prohibit wearing, carrying, or 
transporting a firearm in specified areas are not applicable to a member of the armed forces 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1060/ Page 4 
of the United States, the National Guard, or the uniformed services on duty or traveling to 
or from duty. The bill alters this reference to apply the exemption broadly to a 
service member, thereby definitively incorporating members of all reserve components, as 
defined above. 
 
In regard to provisions relating to prohibitions against identity fraud, the bill updates the 
term “military identification” to be a “uniformed services identification.” 
 
Family Law 
 
Among other alterations within the Family Law Article, the bill replaces a reference to the 
United States armed forces with service member in provisions that authorize the early 
effectiveness of a marriage license (prior to the expiration of a waiting period) in certain 
situations. 
 
Public Safety 
 
Firearms:  The bill alters several provisions that provide exemptions from the requirements 
and restrictions relating to the sale, rental, transfer, and possession of regulation firearms, 
rifles, and shotguns. The defined term “armed forces” is generally substituted for the 
previously undefined “armed forces of the United States.” Specifically, the bill makes this 
substitution within the sections relating to:   
 
 
regulated firearms (handgun qualification license (HQL); handgun safety devices; 
relief from a firearms disqualification; restrictions on the sale, rental or transfer of 
a regulated firearm; and out-of-state purchases); 
 
rifles and shotguns (possession of a short-barreled rifle and restrictions on the sale, 
rental, or transfer of a rifle or shotgun); 
 
permit to wear, carry, and transport a handgun; 
 
explosives license; and 
 
organized militia enlistment. 
 
In addition to the above change in provisions regarding HQL, current law (§ 5‐117.1 of the 
Public Safety Article) references individuals who possess a valid military identification 
card; the bill substitutes the term “uniformed services.” 
 
Militia:  The bill updates various terms within provisions relating to the establishment of a 
militia in the State. For example, the bill substitutes the term “uniformed services” for 
former references to the “armed forces,” thereby including PHS and NOAA within 
provisions relating to (1) the composition of the Maryland Defense Force; (2) exemptions 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1060/ Page 5 
from the unlawful wearing of a uniform; and (3) prohibitions against exclusion from places 
of amusement and recreation. 
 
Also, under current law, each individual commissioned or appointed as an officer or 
warrant officer must meet certain requirements. Under the bill, the requirements are 
expanded to include the option of being (1) an individual with prior service in the 
uniformed services; (2) a graduate of the Uniformed Services University; and (3) a graduate 
of a school, college, university, or officers’ training school who received instruction 
(instead of only military instruction) under the supervision of an officer of the 
uniformed services who certified the graduate’s fitness for appointment as a commissioned 
officer. 
 
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act:  The Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (SCRA) 
(50 U.S.C. §§ 501 to 596), is a federal law that provides military members certain 
protections as they enter active duty and other protections while they are on active duty. It 
has been adopted into State law and becomes effective when members of the 
National Guard or Maryland Defense Force are ordered to military duty under certain 
circumstances. SCRA generally covers issues such as rental agreements, security deposits, 
prepaid rent, eviction, installment contracts, credit card interest rates, mortgage interest 
rates, mortgage foreclosure, civil judicial proceedings, automobile leases, life insurance, 
health insurance, and income tax payments. Among other changes, the bill establishes that 
active service authorized by the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services (or the 
Assistant Secretary for Health or the Surgeon General), under specified circumstances, 
qualifies an eligible service member and eligible spouse for protections under SCRA. 
 
Maryland Code of Military Justice:  The bill updates various terms within provisions 
relating to the Maryland Code of Military Justice, most notably substituting armed forces 
of the United States with the term “uniformed services,” defined as specified above, as 
relates to prohibitions against desertion to encompass members of PHS and NOAA. 
 
Other Changes:  The defined term “uniformed services” replaces the previously undefined 
term “military,” thus definitively including PHS and NOAA for purposes of 
reappointments to DSP. In other provisions regarding the attendance of a uniformed honor 
guard from the active armed forces at the burial service of a deceased veteran, the term 
“uniformed services” is substituted. Also, the bill modifies the scope of the 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management with regard to “emergency 
management,” which under the bill does not include the preparation for and carrying out 
of functions in an emergency for which the uniformed services (rather than the 
military forces) are primarily responsible. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1060/ Page 6 
Real Property 
 
The bill updates terms used within provisions relating to residential leases and the rent 
liability of military personnel who have received a change of assignment. For example, the 
bill substitutes a reference to a person on active duty with the United States military with 
the term “active service member,” thereby definitively including PHS and NOAA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although the definition changes in the bill expand access to various 
State benefits and privileges (generally to certain members of PHS and NOAA), these 
changes represent a small number of people. 
 
In January 2020, the latest date for which information is readily available, there were an 
estimated 2,200 PHS officers living in Maryland, with about 1,500 on active duty and 
700 retired. As of September 2024, there are 53 NOAA officers in the State, and as of 
January 2025, about 6,000 National Guard members in Maryland. Compared to the 
321,000 veterans living in Maryland who are already covered by these provisions, this 
change is very small and can be absorbed by any affected agency’s existing funds. 
 
DSP currently operates a licensing portal for many transactions relating to firearms, 
including applications for an HQL or a handgun permit. As explained above, altering the 
accepted identification to be “uniformed services” necessitates an update to the 
DSP licensing portal to accommodate the change at a cost of $50,000 in fiscal 2026 only. 
 
The Judiciary can absorb minimal programming and similar costs within existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under additional definitions under 38 U.S.C. § 101, “active 
military, naval, air, or space service” includes full-time duty in a reserve component of the 
armed forces, full-time duty as a commissioned officer of the Regular or Reserve Corps of 
PHS or commissioned officer corps of NOAA, and service as a cadet or midshipman at a 
service academy (Military, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Naval academies). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 280 (Senator Simonaire, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings and 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1060/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Secretary of State; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
State Police; Department of Veterans and Military Families; Military Department; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7