START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1016 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1016 
(Delegate Wells)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Baltimore Convention and Tourism Redevelopment and Operating Authority 
Task Force - Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires the Baltimore Convention and Tourism Redevelopment and Operating 
Authority Task Force to identify funding sources and mechanisms, and make related 
recommendations, to (1) redevelop the Baltimore Convention site and the immediate 
surrounding area, as specified and (2) establish and sustain the operations of a 
Baltimore Convention and Tourism Redevelopment and Operating Authority (BCTROA). 
By December 1, 2025, the task force must report its findings and recommendations on the 
funding sources and mechanisms to the Mayor of Baltimore City, the Governor, and the 
General Assembly. The bill also extends the duration of the task force by one year to 
June 30, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures for the Department of 
Commerce increase by approximately $350,000 in FY 2026. Expense reimbursements for 
task force members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
350,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($350,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1016/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task must identify funding sources and mechanisms to:   
 
 
renovate, revitalize, and develop projects relating to the Baltimore Convention site 
and the immediate surrounding area, excluding areas 13, 14, and 15a as designated 
by the Baltimore City Inner Harbor Project I Urban Renewal Plan; and  
 
establish and sustain the operations of BCTROA. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 635 of 2024 established the Baltimore Convention and Tourism 
Redevelopment and Operating Authority Task Force to study the establishment of an entity 
or strategy to govern and redevelop, revitalize, construct, design, manage, finance, and 
operate certain State and local real property assets while promoting the 
Baltimore Convention site and the immediate surrounding area. Commerce must provide 
staff for the task force. The task force was required to make related recommendations on 
the membership, purpose, and function of any recommended entity, as specified, and to 
report its findings and recommendations to the Mayor of Baltimore City, the Governor, 
and the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. 
 
As described in Appendix III of the report, the task force considered, at a high level, the 
potential viability of a range of revenue streams that fund comparable convention centers 
in other states – generally, various local taxes, parking fees, and convention center naming 
rights.  
 
Baltimore Convention Center Funding 
 
The Baltimore Convention Center (BCC) was opened in 1979 and an expansion was 
completed in 1997. The State contributed to the initial project by issuing $35.0 million in 
general obligation (GO) bonds and to the expansion by issuing $101.0 million in GO bonds 
and Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) bonds. Baltimore City agreed to provide 
$15.0 million for the opening and $50.0 million for the renovation. Under its existing 
statutory authority as part of that agreement, MSA is authorized to have up to $55.0 million 
in outstanding bonds related to BCC. The original bonds were retired in fiscal 2015. The 
current arrangement between MSA and BCC, under which the State contributes 
two-thirds of the annual operating deficit and one-half ($200,000) of the annual capital 
reserve fund, has been in place since 1996. Legislation in 2008, 2013, and 2018 extended 
the arrangement through its current expiration date of December 31, 2029. 
 
Chapter 695 of 2019 required MSA and Baltimore City to promptly enter into a written 
agreement to begin the planning and design of the expansion or renovation of BCC in 
fiscal 2020. The fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly included 
$25.7 million for the design, construction, and capital equipment infrastructure 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1016/ Page 3 
improvements to BCC. The funds are administered by MSA, which has entered into a 
memorandum of understanding with Baltimore City for the use of the funds. 
 
State Expenditures:  Commerce advises that the task force requires assistance from 
one (or more) consultants with specific expertise in convention center funding and 
authority governance to complete the study at an estimated cost of approximately $300,000 
to $400,000. This analysis assumes the midpoint of the range and that all costs are incurred 
in fiscal 2026. Expense reimbursements for task force members are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Accordingly, general fund 
expenditures for Commerce increase by approximately $350,000 in fiscal 2026 only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 672 (Senator M. Washington)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Stadium Authority; 
Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3