START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1036 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1036 
(Delegates Wilson and Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities - Generating Stations - Generation and Siting (Renewable Energy 
Certainty Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes or modifies various provisions of law related to solar energy and 
energy storage, requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to take specified 
actions to assist the State in meeting its solar energy commitments, and requires the Public 
Service Commission (PSC) to conduct two related studies and to report on the results of 
those studies by specified dates. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $0.4 million in FY 2026 and 
by at least $0.2 million annually thereafter; special fund revenues increase correspondingly 
in FY 2026 and by at least $0.7 million annually thereafter from assessments and fees, as 
discussed below. General/special fund expenditures for DNR increase by $1.8 million in 
FY 2026 and by at least $1.2 million annually thereafter. General fund expenditures for the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) increase by $0.2 million annually beginning 
in FY 2026. General fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2027 from licensing fees. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$0.4 
$0.7 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.8 
GF Expenditure 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
SF Expenditure 
$0.4 
$0.2 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
GF/SF Exp. 
$1.8 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.3 
Net Effect 
($2.0) 
($0.9) 
($0.9) 
($0.9) 
($1.0) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances and operations may be significantly affected, as 
discussed below. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1036/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Broadly, the bill: 
 
 
alters the factors that PSC must consider before taking final action on a Certificate 
of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN);  
 
establishes requirements for the construction of certain energy storage devices and 
solar energy generating stations and imposes specified requirements and limitations 
on local jurisdictions with respect to their construction and development;  
 
creates a Distributed Generation Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
(DGCPCN);  
 
modifies community solar requirements;  
 
establishes requirements related to residential rooftop solar energy generating 
systems and mandates the creation of a new license for their installation and 
maintenance;  
 
modifies the definition of agrivoltaics; 
 
requires DNR to take specified actions to assist the State in meeting its solar energy 
commitments;  
 
requires PSC to conduct two studies and report on the results of those studies by 
specified dates;  
 
specifies the application of the bill to specified solar energy generating systems; and 
 
specifies that a presently existing obligation or contract right may not be impaired 
in any way by the bill. 
 
Solar Energy Generating Stations – § 7-218 of the Public Utilities Article 
 
Application and Approval Process:  In general, a person may not begin construction of a 
solar energy generating station larger than 1 megawatt unless: 
 
 
PSC or, as applicable, a local jurisdiction, verifies that the proposed construction 
meets specified siting requirements; 
 
the construction has received approval for all local permits required under 
§ 7-207(h) of the Public Utilities Article; and 
 
for a generating station larger than 2 megawatts:  (1) a CPCN is issued under 
§ 7-207 of the Public Utilities Article; (2) PSC approves the construction pursuant 
to § 7-207.1 of the Public Utilities Article (i.e., the CPCN exemption process); or 
(3) for a distributed solar energy generating system only, a DGCPCN is issued 
under § 7-207.4 of the Public Utilities Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1036/ Page 3 
The above referenced siting requirements only apply to a solar energy generating station 
that (1) has the capacity to produce more than 1 megawatt of electricity as measured by the 
alternating current rating of the station’s inverter; (2) is designed to produce electricity for 
sale on the wholesale market, is a community solar energy generating system under  
§ 7-306.2 of the Public Utilities Article, or is part of aggregate net metering under  
§ 7-306.3 of the Public Utilities Article; and (3) is not located on a rooftop, carport, or 
brownfields site, or behind the meter of a retail electric customer. 
 
When a person submits an application for approval of the construction of a solar energy 
generating station that has the capacity to produce more than 2 megawatts of electricity, 
the person must include written documentation or other evidence showing that the 
proposed construction meets specified siting requirements. Similarly, when a person 
submits a site development plan to a local jurisdiction to construct a solar energy generating 
station with an electricity generating capacity of 2 megawatts or less, the person must 
include written documentation or other evidence showing that the proposed construction 
meets those same siting requirements. 
 
When verifying whether the documentation provided by a person meets the specified siting 
requirements, PSC or a local jurisdiction must require the person constructing the solar 
energy generating station, if the proposed location of the generating station is in an area 
considered to be overburdened and underserved (as defined in § 1-701 of the 
Environment Article), to hold at least two public meetings in the community where it is to 
be located to collect community feedback and provide opportunities to address that 
feedback. The meetings must be held in the county in which the proposed generating station 
is to be located and within 10 miles of the proposed location of the generating station, 
except as otherwise specified. 
 
Applicable Requirements for Owners:  An owner of a proposed solar energy generating 
station must comply with various land use requirements, which include, among other 
things: 
 
 
providing a boundary of 150 feet between the generating station and the nearest wall 
of a residential dwelling; 
 
providing a boundary of 100 feet between the generating station and all property 
lines (not including property lines that bisect the interior of a project area); 
 
providing nonbarbed wire fencing, as specified, only on the interior of a landscape 
buffer or immediately adjacent to a generating station; 
 
providing for landscaping buffers or vegetative screening, as specified; 
 
mitigating the visual impact of the generating station in specified areas; 
 
minimizing grading at the site to the maximum extent possible;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1036/ Page 4 
 
not removing topsoil from the parcel and planting vegetation, as specified, to 
maintain the site’s soil integrity; 
 
limiting mowing and other unnecessary landscaping; 
 
not using herbicides except to control invasive species (in compliance with the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture’s (MDA) weed control program); 
 
posting, for the first five years of the life of the generating station, a landscaping 
bond equal to 100% of the total landscaping cost with the county in which the 
generating station is located, subject to specified requirements; 
 
ensuring that the generating station does not emit visible light during dawn to dusk 
operations, except as required by law, or for safety or emergency; and 
 
ensuring that the generating station and any accessory structures associated with it 
have an average height that does not exceed 15 feet, except as specified. 
 
However, the owner of a proposed solar energy generating station and the applicable 
county may enter into a written siting agreement that provides less stringent restrictions 
than those specified above. Written documentation provided to PSC or the applicable local 
jurisdiction must be considered as meeting the requirements.  
 
For applicable solar energy generating stations, PSC may not issue a CPCN without due 
consideration of whether the applicant complies with these requirements. 
 
An owner of a solar energy generating station must also (1) enter into a decommissioning 
agreement with PSC; (2) post a surety bond with PSC for up to 125% of the estimated 
future cost of decommissioning the generating station and its related infrastructure, less 
any salvage value; and (3) execute a securitization bond true-up every five years. 
 
The land use requirements specified above do not apply to agrivoltaics (agrivoltaics are 
discussed below). 
 
Local Jurisdictions:  Generally, a local jurisdiction may not adopt zoning laws (or other 
laws or regulations) that (1) prohibit the construction or operation of solar energy 
generating stations or (2) deny site development plans for these projects if they meet all 
applicable requirements. Furthermore, a local jurisdiction must expedite the review and 
approval of site development plans for solar energy generating stations if the plans have 
met all applicable requirements. 
 
For solar energy generating stations of up to 5 megawatts, a local jurisdiction must process 
the site development plan application as a permitted use, subject to existing review 
standards. The bill also specifies additional limitations on the siting of generating stations 
with capacities of more than 5 megawatts – prohibiting their placement in specified 
growth/higher density areas and significantly limiting their placement in priority 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1036/ Page 5 
preservation areas (PPAs). Specifically, within a PPA established before January 1, 2025, 
the total combined number of generating stations that may be approved for construction 
must be limited in area to 5% of the total acreage of the PPA. Once this 5% threshold has 
been reached for a PPA, the prohibition on local zoning actions specified above do not 
apply to the remaining 95% of the PPA. 
 
In general, a local jurisdiction must hold any landscaping bond received as part of the land 
use requirements described above for five years. A local jurisdiction must release 50% of 
the bond if, on inspection, the vegetative protections meet a 90% survival threshold. The 
remaining 50% must be held for two additional years and, if that same survival threshold 
is still met, must be released. 
 
Distributed Generation Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
A “DGCPCN” is a certificate issued by PSC that authorizes the construction and operation 
of a distributed solar energy generating system. It has the same force and effect as a CPCN. 
A “distributed solar energy generating system” means a community solar energy 
generating system, as defined, that (1) would be required to obtain a CPCN, if the system 
does not obtain a DGCPCN; (2) has a capacity to produce more than 2 megawatts but not 
more than 5 megawatts of alternating current (as measured by the alternating current rating 
of the system’s inverter) and (3) is not located within a municipality. 
 
A person may not begin construction of a distributed solar energy generating system in the 
State unless the person first obtains a DGCPCN or CPCN from PSC. At least 30 days 
before submitting a DGCPCN application to PSC, the person must submit a copy of the 
application to the governing body of the county where the distributed solar energy 
generating system is proposed to be located. Furthermore, when a person submits a 
DGCPCN application to PSC, the person must also submit a copy of the application to the 
Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) within DNR. 
 
Duties of the Power Plant Research Program:  By July 1, 2026, after giving notice and 
opportunity for public comment, PPRP must develop and submit to PSC proposed 
“standard siting requirements and design requirements” and “standard licensing 
conditions” for the issuance of a DGCPCN. In developing these requirements and 
conditions, PPRP must consider: 
 
 
achievement of the State’s climate and renewable energy commitments; 
 
reasonable setbacks and landscape screening requirements; 
 
environmental preservation, including specified prohibitions on forest clearance; 
 
stormwater management, erosion and sediment control, and site stabilization, 
accounting for specified impacts of solar panels; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1036/ Page 6 
 
minimization and mitigation of the effects of a distributed solar energy generating 
system on historic sites; 
 
public safety and industry best practices; 
 
ensuring the stability and reliability of the electric system by requiring the applicant 
to submit a signed interconnection agreement with the electric company before the 
start of construction; 
 
licensing conditions previously adopted by PSC for solar energy generating 
systems, including requirements related to decommissioning; and 
 
any other requirements it determines to be necessary. 
 
PPRP must also ensure that the standard siting and design requirements it develops are 
consistent with the land use and siting requirements specified under § 7-218 of the Public 
Utilities Article (discussed above). 
 
“Standard siting and design requirements” are the predetermined objective requirements 
adopted by PSC for the siting and design of a distributed solar energy generating system 
that has been issued a DGCPCN. “Standard licensing conditions” are the predetermined 
licensing conditions adopted by PSC for the construction and operation of a distributed 
solar energy generating system that has been issued a DGCPCN. 
 
Within a specified timeframe (as established by PSC in regulation) after a DGCPCN 
application is filed with PSC, PPRP must (1) determine whether the distributed solar 
energy generating system satisfies the standard siting and design requirements for the 
DGCPCN and (2) notify PSC in writing as to the determination it has made, including how 
an application that is determined not to satisfy those requirements can cure the deficiency. 
In making its determination, PPRP must consider public comments received by PSC. 
 
Duties of the Public Service Commission:  By July 1, 2027, PSC must adopt regulations to 
(1) implement standard siting and design requirements and standard licensing conditions 
for a DGCPCN; (2) specify the application form and any application fee; (3) specify its 
procedure for processing a DGCPCN application; and (4) establish the time period within 
which PPRP must make its determination on a DGCPCN application. In adopting these 
regulations, PSC must consider the proposed standard siting requirements, design 
requirements, and licensing conditions developed by PPRP and ensure the regulations are 
consistent with § 7-218 of the Public Utilities Article. 
 
PSC, in consultation with PPRP, may periodically solicit public comments regarding 
improvements to the standard siting and design requirements and standard licensing 
conditions for a DGCPCN. The process for soliciting public comments regarding these 
requirements and conditions must be the same as the process for soliciting public comment 
regarding the adoption of a regulation. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1036/ Page 7 
Before PPRP makes its determination on a DGCPCN application, PSC must provide an 
opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on the application in each county 
where any portion of the construction of the distributed solar energy generating system is 
proposed to be located. PSC may hold the public hearing virtually, rather than in person, if 
the commission provides a comparable opportunity for public comment and participation 
in the hearing. 
 
Within 60 days after PPRP makes its determination on a DGCPCN application, PSC must 
schedule a hearing to consider the application. At the hearing, PSC must determine whether 
the proposed distributed solar energy generating system satisfies the standard siting and 
design requirements. In making this determination, PSC must consider any public 
comments it has received. If PSC determines that the proposed system satisfies the 
requirements, PSC must issue a DGCPCN to the applicant, subject to the standard licensing 
conditions. If, however, PSC determines that the proposed system does not satisfy each of 
the requirements, a DGCPCN may not be issued. 
 
Application Fee:  PSC and DNR may jointly set an application fee for a DGCPCN 
application at an amount that they determine may offset the administrative costs of the 
DGCPCN approval process that they each incur. The calculation of administrative costs 
must be based on an estimate of the number of DGCPCN applications that will be filed 
each year. 
 
Requirements Applicable to DGCPCN Holders:  A DGCPCN issued by PSC must require 
the person constructing the distributed solar energy generating system to obtain the 
following permits and approvals from the county, municipality, or soil conservation district 
in which the system is to be constructed (subject to existing provisions related to local 
approval applicable to the CPCN process):  (1) site plan approval; (2) stormwater 
management plan approval; (3) erosion and sediment control plan approval; (4) all  
applicable building and electrical permits; and (5) any additional local permit required by 
the standard licensing conditions. 
 
Energy Storage Devices 
 
Application and Approval Process:  A person may not begin construction of a 
front-of-the-meter “energy storage device” (as defined in current law) unless the 
construction has been approved by PSC in accordance with specified requirements. 
 
Upon receiving an application to construct a front-of-the-meter energy storage device, PSC 
must provide immediate notice or require the applicant to provide immediate notice of the 
application to (1) the governing body of each county or municipality in which any portion 
of the energy storage device is proposed to be constructed or that is within one mile of the 
proposed location of the energy storage device; (2) each member of the General Assembly 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1036/ Page 8 
that represents any part of a county in which any portion of the energy storage device is 
proposed to be constructed or that is within one mile of the proposed location of the energy 
storage device; and (3) affected communities that are within one mile of the proposed 
location of the energy storage device. This requirement may be waived by PSC for good 
cause. 
 
When reviewing an application to construct a front-of-the-meter energy storage device, if 
the proposed location of the energy storage device is in an area considered to be 
overburdened and underserved (as defined in § 1-701 of the Environment Article), PSC 
must require the applicant to hold at least two public meetings in the community where the 
energy storage device is to be located. PSC must, however, exempt a front-of-the-meter 
energy storage device that is located within the boundaries of an existing electricity 
generating station from that requirement. This requirement may be waived by PSC for good 
cause.  
 
Applicable Requirements for Owners:  An owner of a proposed front-of-the meter energy 
storage device that will not be constructed at a commercial or industrial location must 
comply with several land use requirements, which include: 
 
 
providing nonbarbed wire fencing, as specified; 
 
providing for a landscaping buffer or vegetative screening if required by the local 
jurisdiction, as specified; 
 
minimizing grading at the site to the maximum extent possible; 
 
not removing topsoil from the parcel, as specified; and 
 
not using herbicides except to control invasive species (in compliance with MDA’s 
weed control program). 
 
These requirements may be waived by PSC for good cause. 
 
Local Jurisdictions:  Generally, local jurisdictions may not adopt zoning laws (or other 
laws or regulations) that (1) prohibit the construction or operation of front-of-the-meter 
energy storage devices or (2) deny site development plans for these projects if they meet 
all applicable requirements. Local jurisdictions must expedite the review and approval of 
site development plans for front-of-the-meter energy storage devices if the plans have met 
all applicable requirements. Additionally, local jurisdictions must adopt standard processes 
for the review and approval of site development plans for the construction of 
front-of-the-meter energy storage devices. 
 
Community Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
The existing process related to payments for unsubscribed energy generated by a 
community solar generating system not owned by an electric company is modified to create 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1036/ Page 9 
a banked bill credit process prior to direct purchase by the electric company. More 
specifically, any unsubscribed energy generated by a community solar energy generating 
system that is not owned by an electric company must create banked bill credits tracked by 
the electric company that, within one year after the date that a banked bill was created, may 
be allocated to one or more subscribers. The generation associated with a banked bill credit 
not allocated to a subscriber within one year after the date that the credit was created must 
be purchased under the electric company’s process for purchasing the output from 
qualifying facilities at the amount it would have cost the electric company to procure the 
energy. 
 
The bill also specifies that a community solar energy generating system is not a generating 
station if it is located on the rooftop of a building. 
 
Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
A seller or lessor of residential rooftop solar energy generating systems must (1) provide 
to the buyer or lessee a five-year full warranty on the installation and component parts of 
the system; (2) include any manufacturer’s warranties for any of the products or 
components of the system; (3) inform the buyer or lessee of the minimum level of 
weather-adjusted energy production the buyer or lessee may expect from the system; and 
(4) certify, in writing, that installation of the system is compliant with all federal, State, 
and local laws regarding workmanship and that the solar panels, inverters, racking systems, 
and all other components meet the minimum standards for product design. If a seller or 
lessor violates any of these requirements, the seller or lessor is subject to a fine of up to 
$1,000 for each violation. 
 
MD Labor must develop a special solar contractor license for the installation and 
maintenance of residential rooftop solar energy generating systems and establish minimum 
qualifications for individuals installing and maintaining these systems. 
 
Modifications to the Definition of “Agrivoltaics” 
 
Existing law defines “agrivoltaics” as the simultaneous use of areas of land for both solar 
power generation and specified agricultural activities. The bill alters the definition by 
specifying that agrivoltaics (1) must be maintained in agricultural use in accordance with  
COMAR 18.02.03 or the Maryland Procedures Manual and (2) do not include the 
simultaneous use of areas of land for both solar power generation and apiaries or pollinator 
habitat. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1036/ Page 10 
Assistance with Meeting the State’s Solar Energy Commitments 
 
To assist the State in meeting its solar energy commitments under Title 7, Subtitle 7 of the 
Public Utilities Article, DNR, in consultation with the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA), the Maryland Department of Transportation, and the Maryland Department of 
Planning (MDP), must (1) update the publicly available SmartDG+ tool to include 
State-owned land suitable for solar energy development and (2) complete an analysis of 
land owned by the State to identify land suitable for solar energy development. The 
SmartDG+ tool must be updated by December 1, 2025, and the analysis must be completed 
by December 1, 2026. 
 
Required Studies by the Public Service Commission 
 
Study on Establishing Procurement Models for Electricity Generation Projects:  PSC must 
conduct a study to establish a process by which the commission may establish power 
purchase agreements, partnerships between electric companies and electricity suppliers, or 
other procurement models for electricity generation projects. The process must conform to 
specified requirements that generally expedite the review, approval, and interconnection of 
the generation projects and prioritize procurement models that have little or no impact on 
customer rates. By December 1, 2026, PSC must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the results of the study. 
 
Study on Establishing a Community Solar Automatic Enrollment Program:  PSC must 
conduct a study on the feasibility of and technical barriers to establishing a community 
solar automatic enrollment program for local jurisdictions. In conducting the study, PSC 
must consider (1) how low- to moderate-income subscribers would be subscribed under 
the program; (2) whether automatically enrolled subscribers should receive a bill credit; 
(3) how to ensure that local jurisdictions comply with all program parameters; and (4) any 
necessary notification requirements and consumer protections that the program should 
have. By July 1, 2026, PSC must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
results of the study. 
 
No Effect on Specified Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
The bill may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on an application for the 
construction or modification of any solar energy generating system that is submitted for a 
CPCN or a required permit from a local government before July 1, 2025. A similar 
provision is established for specified notification and public hearing actions taken by a 
person responsible for a proposed solar energy generating system on or before 
June 30, 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1036/ Page 11 
Additionally, the bill’s provisions relating to DGPCNs may not be applied or interpreted 
to have any effect on the construction or modification of any solar energy generating 
system for which a CPCN or other required approval was obtained before the effective date 
of the DGCPCN regulations adopted by PSC. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity Process 
 
Generally, a person may not begin construction in the State of a generating station, 
overhead transmission line, or a qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is 
first obtained from PSC. The application process involves notifying specified stakeholders, 
public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by State and local government 
entities, and the project’s effect on various aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, 
and environment. 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of the 
recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; the effect of the project on various aspects 
of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment; the effect of climate change on the 
project; and, for a generating station only, other specified information. 
 
Chapter 515 of 2023 specified that a county or municipality has the authority to approve 
or deny any local permit required under a CPCN issued by the PSC. A county or 
municipality must approve or deny such a permit within a reasonable time and in 
accordance with local laws, to the extent that local laws are not preempted by State law. A 
county or municipality is prohibited from conditioning the approval of a local permit 
required under a CPCN on receipt of a conditional use approval, a special exception 
approval, or a floating zone approval for any aspect of a generating station, an overhead 
transmission line, or a qualified lead line proposed to be constructed under the CPCN. 
 
For additional information on the CPCN process, please see the Appendix – Certificate 
of Public Convenience and Necessity. 
 
Community Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
A community solar energy generating system is a system that, in addition to other 
requirements: 
 
 
has a generating capacity that does not exceed 5 megawatts as measured by the 
alternating current rating of the system’s inverter; 
 
has at least two subscribers, but no limit to the maximum number of subscribers; 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1036/ Page 12 
 
serves at least 40% of its energy output to “LMI subscribers” unless the system is 
wholly owned by the subscribers to the system; and 
 
credits its generated electricity, or the value of its generated electricity, to the bills 
of the subscribers to that system through virtual net energy metering. 
 
Subscribers must be in the same electric service territory as the system. Investor-owned 
electric companies must participate in the program; large electric cooperatives and 
municipal utilities may choose to participate. Community solar is a form of net metering, 
which is subject to an overall statewide cap of 3,000 megawatts. 
 
For a general overview of net metering and other notable State incentives for solar, see the 
Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems. 
 
Maryland Energy Storage Program 
 
Chapter 570 of 2023 required PSC to establish the Maryland Energy Storage Program and 
establish targets for the cost-effective deployment of new energy storage devices in the 
State with a goal of achieving at least a cumulative total of 750 megawatts by the end of 
the 2027 PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM) delivery year, 1,500 megawatts by the end of 
the 2030 PJM delivery year, and 3,000 megawatts by the end of the 2033 PJM delivery 
year. If a target cannot be met cost effectively, the target must be reduced to the maximum 
cost-effective amount for the relevant delivery year. The program must be implemented by  
July 1, 2025, as specified. 
 
Priority Preservation Areas 
 
The Agricultural Stewardship Act of 2006 authorized counties to include a PPA element 
in their local comprehensive plans and, since fiscal 2009, has required inclusion of a  
PPA element in a county’s comprehensive plan as a condition of certification of an 
effective county agricultural land preservation program under § 5-408 of the State Finance 
and Procurement Article. PPAs must contain productive agricultural or forest soils or be 
capable of supporting profitable agricultural and forestry enterprises where productive soils 
are lacking. PPAs must be governed by local policies, ordinances, regulations, and 
procedures that stabilize the agricultural and forest land base so that development does not 
convert or compromise agricultural or forest resources and support the ability of working 
farms in PPAs to engage in normal agricultural activities. In addition, PPAs must be large 
enough to support normal agricultural and forestry activities in conjunction with the 
amount of development permitted by a county therein. 
 
MDP and the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) must jointly 
certify a PPA. Additionally, MDP and MALPF must review any update to a county’s 
comprehensive plan or any other change that may affect a PPA. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1036/ Page 13 
Stormwater Management Plans 
 
Stormwater management is implemented at the local level, and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment (MDE) is responsible for providing oversight and assistance to local 
programs. A person may generally not develop any land for residential, commercial, 
industrial, or institutional use without submitting a stormwater management plan to the 
county or municipality that has jurisdiction and obtaining plan approval. Further, a grading 
or building permit may not be issued for a property unless a stormwater management plan 
has been approved that is consistent with the Stormwater Management Act. Developers 
must certify that all land clearing, construction, development, and drainage is conducted 
according to the plan. 
 
Sediment Control Plans 
 
In general, a county or municipality is authorized to issue grading and building permits, 
but these permits may only be issued to a developer who has submitted a grading and 
sediment control plan approved by the appropriate approval authority and has certified that 
all land clearing, construction, and development will be done in accordance with the plan. 
Typically, the appropriate approval authority is (1) the appropriate soil conservation 
district; (2) a municipality in Montgomery County that is designated by a soil conservation 
district, as specified; (3) any municipality not within a soil conservation district; or  
(4) MDE, for construction projects undertaken by the State or a federal unit, specified 
abandoned mine reclamation projects conducted by MDE, and for large redevelopment 
sites. 
 
Agrivoltaics 
 
“Agrivoltaics” means the simultaneous use of areas of land for both solar power generation 
and the following agricultural uses: 
 
 
raising grains, fruits, herbs, melons, mushrooms, seeds, tobacco, or vegetables; 
 
raising poultry, including chickens and turkeys, for meat or egg production; 
 
dairy production and raising livestock; 
 
horse boarding, breeding, or training; 
 
turf farming and raising ornamental shrubs, plants, or flowers; 
 
aquaculture or silviculture; or  
 
any other activity recognized by MDA as an agricultural activity. 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 1036/ Page 14 
Maryland Home Improvement Commission 
 
The Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) in MD Labor licenses and 
regulates home improvement contractors and salespersons, subject to specified 
requirements for licensure and ongoing licensee behavior. MHIC also administers a 
guaranty fund for the purpose of reimbursing homeowners for actual losses due to the 
errors and omissions of licensed contractors and their subcontractors, salespersons, and 
employees. 
 
“Home improvement” includes (1) construction, improvement, or replacement, on land 
adjacent to the building, of a driveway, fall-out shelter, fence, garage, landscaping, deck, 
pier, porch, or swimming pool; (2) a shore erosion control project for a residential property; 
(3) connection, installation, or replacement, in the building or structure, of a dishwasher, 
disposal, or refrigerator with an icemaker to existing exposed household plumbing lines; 
(4) installation, in the building or structure, of an awning, fire alarm, or storm window; and 
(5) work done on individual condominium units. 
 
Under current practice, MHIC requires a contractor license for the installation of residential 
solar power system equipment. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Public Service Commission 
 
Under the bill, PSC must develop new regulations pertaining to DGCPCNs and adopt them 
by July 1, 2027. PSC advises that existing commission staff can handle the development 
and implementation of these new regulations. However, because PSC anticipates that the 
bill will result in an increase in the number of applications for solar projects – and given 
the bill’s requirements for an expanded analysis and review of proposed solar energy 
generating stations and energy storage devices – PSC cannot absorb the anticipated 
increase in workload with existing budgeted resources. Additional funds are also required, 
in fiscal 2026 only, for consulting expenses associated with the completion of the 
electricity generation procurement study. The study on a community solar automatic 
enrollment program can be completed with existing resources. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $403,385 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of (1) hiring one Public 
Utility Law Judge and one assistant general counsel to handle PSC’s increased workload 
and (2) engaging consultants to assist with the electricity generation procurement study. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and 
a one-time $200,000 consulting expense. 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 1036/ Page 15 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$188,647 
Consultant Costs 
200,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    14,738 
Total FY 2026 PSC Expenditures 
$403,385 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the elimination of one-time 
consulting costs. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. However, the bill authorizes PSC and DNR to jointly set a DGCPCN application 
fee that offsets the administrative costs of the DGCPCN approval process that they each 
incur. For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that a DGCPCN application fee is 
established, PSC collects the application fees from DGCPCN applicants, and PSC 
distributes the fee revenue between itself and DNR in accordance with the administrative 
costs that each entity incurs related to the DGCPCN approval process. Based on the bill’s 
implementation timelines for the establishment of DGCPCNs, this analysis further assumes 
that PSC does not begin collecting such fee revenues until fiscal 2027. 
 
Accordingly, in fiscal 2026, special fund revenues for PSC increase in a corresponding 
amount to its special fund expenditures (from assessments imposed on public service 
companies). In fiscal 2027 and future years, special fund revenues for PSC increase from 
(1) assessments imposed on public service companies and (2) application fees collected 
from DGCPCN applicants. Thus, in fiscal 2027 and future years, PSC special fund 
revenues increase in a corresponding amount to PSC special fund expenditures, plus the 
DGCPCN application fee revenue it collects on behalf of DNR. Based on an estimate of 
administrative expenses for DNR, the additional amount collected is estimated to be 
approximately $0.5 million annually. 
 
Department of Natural Resources 
 
According to DNR, the bill has significant fiscal and operational impacts on PPRP. Among 
other things, PPRP must (1) develop proposed standard siting requirements, design 
requirements, and licensing conditions for DGCPCNs by July 1, 2026; (2) develop energy 
storage guidelines and recommended license conditions for energy storage devices and 
establish a decommissioning template for PSC to use; (3) update the Smart DG+ tool; and 
(4) complete an assessment of land owned by the State to identify land suitable for solar 
energy development. Moreover, DNR expects the bill to significantly increase the number 
of solar and energy storage projects that PPRP must review, while also increasing the 
complexity of the review process for solar projects. As a result, PPRP requires additional 
staff and the assistance of consultants to manage its increased workload under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 1036/ Page 16 
DNR anticipates annual consultant expenses of approximately $600,000 to provide 
ongoing technical expertise related to solar project applications (including DGCPCN 
applications) and energy storage device applications. In addition to those ongoing costs, 
DNR anticipates incurring the following one-time consultant costs:  (1) $500,000, in 
fiscal 2026 to develop proposed standard siting requirements, design requirements, and 
licensing conditions for DGCPCNs; (2) $30,000, in fiscal 2026 to update the 
Smart DG+ tool; and (3) $100,000, assumed to be split evenly between fiscal 2026 and 
2027, to complete an assessment of State-owned land to identify land suitable for solar 
energy development. 
 
In general, special funds from the Environmental Trust Fund are used to fund PPRP’s 
operations. However, as mentioned previously, the bill authorizes PSC and DNR to jointly 
set a DGCPCN application fee that offsets the administrative costs of the DGCPCN 
approval process. For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that PSC establishes a 
DGCPCN application fee, PSC collects the application fee revenues, and PSC distributes 
a pro rata share of those revenues to DNR in accordance with the administrative costs that 
DNR incurs from the DGCPCN approval process. This analysis further assumes that the 
DGCPCN application fee revenues (about $0.5 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027, 
based on initial estimates) for DNR are treated as special fund revenues. 
 
Notwithstanding this funding mechanism for administrative expenditures related to the 
DGCPCN approval process, general funds may still be required to cover part or all of the 
other expenses that PPRP incurs under the bill because DNR anticipates a special fund 
revenue shortfall in fiscal 2026 and beyond. 
 
Therefore, general/special fund expenditures for DNR increase by $1,816,564 in 
fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of (1) hiring four full-time site assessors, one half-time site assessor, and 
one half-time attorney; (2) using consultants on an ongoing basis, at a cost of $600,000 
annually, to assist with reviewing additional project applications; and (3) one-time 
consultant costs of $580,000. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
ongoing operating expenses, and a total of $1,180,000 in consultant costs. 
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$591,799 
Consultant Costs 
1,180,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
44,765 
Total FY 2026 DNR Expenditures 
$1,816,564 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) salaries with annual increases and employee turnover;  
(2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; (3) ongoing consultant costs of 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 1036/ Page 17 
$600,000 annually; and (4) additional one-time consultant costs of $50,000 in fiscal 2027 
only. 
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
MD Labor advises that it requires additional staff to develop and implement the new special 
solar contractor license as required by the bill. Among other things, these personnel are 
expected to assist with (1) establishing minimum qualification standards for licensure; 
(2) implementing the licensing and registration program; (3) processing and reviewing 
applications; and (4) developing investigatory procedures and conducting investigations. 
The bill does not specify a dedicated funding source; this analysis assumes general funds 
are used. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures for MD Labor increase by $187,270 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one administrator, one investigator, and one part-time assistant Attorney General to handle 
MD Labor’s development and administration of the special solar contractor license. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$165,578 
Other Operating Expenses 
21,692 
Total FY 2026 MD Labor Expenditures 
$187,270 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The bill does not specify when MD Labor must begin issuing special solar contractor 
licenses; however, MD Labor advises that it intends to move expeditiously to develop a 
licensing regime and begin issuing these licenses. For purposes of this analysis, it is 
assumed that MD Labor does not begin issuing any special solar contractor licenses until 
fiscal 2027. 
 
According to MD Labor, its Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing intends 
to establish a fee structure for these licenses to cover its administrative costs. MD Labor 
advises that the collection of any fees associated with the issuance of special solar 
contractor licenses is unlikely to begin until at least fiscal 2027. 
 
Therefore, general fund revenues from license fees increase by an unknown amount 
beginning in fiscal 2027; amounts are likely to approximate the department’s 
administrative costs – about $215,000 to $250,000 annually. 
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 1036/ Page 18 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
According to MDE, the bill may increase the volume of permit applications it must review 
and the number of site inspections it must conduct. To the extent that the bill results in a 
significant increase in applications to develop solar projects, MDE advises that it may need 
to hire additional staff to adequately handle these responsibilities. MDE further advises 
that, under the bill, it may generate additional revenue through permitting fees, compliance 
inspections, and environmental impact assessments. Any such impact cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time and has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  PSC advises that the bill overrides local authority on the siting of 
certain solar energy generating systems and on energy storage devices, thus limiting the 
ability of local governments to deny or restrict the development of certain projects. The 
bill also establishes various review and approval requirements for local governments 
related to those devices and systems, including expedited review and approval in certain 
circumstances, plus ongoing requirements related to decommissioning bonds. To the extent 
that additional solar energy generating systems or energy storage devices are planned 
and/or built in the State due to the bill, local government operations and finances are further 
affected, both from additional administrative requirements, such as project reviews, 
permitting, etc., and from various associated revenues, such as permit fees and property 
taxes. 
 
The overall effect on the finances and operations of any particular local government is 
unknown at this time but could be significant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that the bill results in increased development of solar 
energy generating systems and energy storage devices, small businesses that provide 
construction or consulting services for such projects likely benefit. With respect to 
distributed solar energy generating systems specifically, small businesses engaged in their 
development benefit from the bill’s expedited review process for DGCPCN applications 
relative to the current CPCN process. Additionally, the bill’s requirements pertaining to 
the sale, leasing, and installation of residential rooftop solar energy generating systems, 
including contractor licensure, may have a meaningful effect on small businesses that 
operate in the residential solar market. 
 
Additional Comments:  SmartDG+ is a free, online, interactive map-based screening tool 
sponsored by PPRP, with support from MEA and the Department of Commerce. It is 
intended to help developers and officials identify promising areas for the location of new 
wind and solar projects in the State. SmartDG+ focuses on screening factors of relevance 
to projects with an electricity generating capacity of 2 megawatts or greater. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 1036/ Page 19 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 931 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery 
counties; City of Frederick; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Planning; Maryland Energy Administration; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service 
Commission; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
caw/smr 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 1036/ Page 20 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or 
qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. 
 
State law provides that a “generating station” excludes:  
 
 
a facility used for electricity production with a capacity of up to 2 megawatts that is 
installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to the electric grid 
during time periods when the grid is out of service; 
 
a combination of two or more co-located or adjacent facilities used for electricity 
production 
from 
solar 
photovoltaic 
systems 
or 
specified 
eligible 
customer-generators that have a maximum cumulative capacity of 14 megawatts, 
including maximum individual capacities of 2 megawatts (subject to satisfying other 
requirements); and  
 
a facility, or a combination of two or more facilities, used for electricity production 
for the purpose of onsite emergency backup for critical infrastructure when service 
from the electric company is interrupted and conducting necessary test and 
maintenance operations (subject to satisfying other requirements). 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 1036/ Page 21 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions and must consider alternative 
routes and related costs for the construction of a new overhead transmission line. 
 
Generating Station Exemptions 
 
There are three general conditions under which a person constructing a generating station 
may apply to PSC for an exemption from the CPCN requirement: 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
HB 1036/ Page 22 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company; 
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or 
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
    
HB 1036/ Page 23 
Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
 
State law establishes multiple incentives for solar energy generating systems of different 
types, sizes, and locations. The following is an overview of notable State incentives, which 
may be combined, depending on the specifics of a particular solar energy generating 
system.  
 
Production Incentives 
 
 
Net Metering 
 
Under § 7-306 of the Public Utilities Article, the Public Service Commission (PSC) must 
require electric companies to develop and make net metering tariffs available to eligible 
customer-generators. Net metering is the measurement of the difference between the 
electricity that is supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by 
the customer and fed back to the grid over the customer’s billing period. Under net 
metering, the customer pays only for energy used, netted against energy generated, plus 
the fixed monthly customer charge. In the event that more energy is generated than used, 
the electric company must pay the customer the value of the difference, subject to specified 
requirements. Generally, net excess generation payments are made annually, although 
certain customers may instead choose to accrue net excess generation indefinitely.  
 
Generally, the generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may 
be up to 2 megawatts, although there are exceptions allowing for larger capacities, 
including for community solar. Community solar systems are those that meet specified 
requirements, have multiple subscribers, and engage in virtual net metering.  
 
There are multiple eligible energy sources for net metering, although most of the installed 
capacity is solar. The statewide capacity limit is 3,000 megawatts.  
 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Under Title 7, Subtitle 7 of the Public Utilities Article, which establishes the State 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS), utilities and other competitive energy 
suppliers must submit renewable energy credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail 
electricity sales specified in statute each year or else pay an alternative compliance payment 
(ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. Generally, an REC is a tradable commodity equal to 
1 megawatt-hour of electricity generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation 
source. In program compliance year 2025, RPS percentage requirements include 7.0% 
from solar, which must be connected to the electric distribution grid serving Maryland. 

END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
    
HB 1036/ Page 24 
Under § 7-709.1 of the Public Utilities Article, PSC must establish a Small Solar Energy 
Generating System Incentive Program and begin determining eligibility by 
January 1, 2025. Under the program, a solar energy generating system that meets specified 
requirements and is certified by PSC generates certified solar RECs, which have an RPS 
compliance value of 150%, for 15 years. In addition to other requirements, an eligible 
system must be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and January 1, 2028, inclusive.  
 
Grant and Loan Incentives 
 
Under § 9-20B-05 of the State Government Article, the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) must administer SEIF. Among other revenue sources, SEIF receives funds from 
the sale of carbon dioxide emissions allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas 
Initiative (RGGI) and ACP revenues through the State RPS. RGGI-sourced funding is 
allocated through a statutory formula that provides significant annual funding for clean 
energy programs and initiatives, in addition to other purposes. In practice, MEA offers a 
variety of residential and commercial grants and rebates for different types of solar 
installations. Solar ACP revenues must be used make grants and loans to support the 
creation of new solar energy sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit low- 
to-moderate income communities, overburdened or underserved communities, or 
households with low- to-moderate income.  
 
Tax Incentives 
 
 
Solar Energy Property Generally Not Subject to State or Local Real Property Tax 
 
Under § 7-242 of the Tax-Property Article, solar energy property is generally not subject 
to State or local real property tax. “Solar energy property” means equipment that is installed 
to use solar energy or solar thermal electric energy to generate electricity to be used in a 
structure or supplied to the electric grid or provide hot water for use in a structure.  
 
Specified Nonresidential Solar Systems Exempt from Valuation or State or Local 
Property Taxes 
 
Under § 7-249 of the Tax-Property Article, specified nonresidential solar energy generating 
systems that are constructed on the rooftops of buildings or on parking facility canopies 
are not subject to valuation or to State or local property taxes. The exemption applies only 
to a system approved by PSC for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
(CPCN) or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
    
HB 1036/ Page 25 
 
Community Solar Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
Under § 7-237 of the Tax-Property Article, a community solar energy generating system 
with up to 5 megawatts of capacity that meets specified requirements is exempt from the 
county and municipal personal property tax through the life cycle of the system. To be 
eligible, a system must (1) be placed in service after June 30, 2022, and be approved by 
PSC by December 31, 2030; (2) provide at least 50% of the energy produced to low- to 
moderate-income customers at reduced prices, as specified; and (3) be used for agrivoltaics 
or be installed on a rooftop, brownfield, parking facility canopy, landfill, or clean fill.  
 
 
Community Solar Real Property Tax Credit 
 
Under § 9-111 of the Tax-Property Article, the State and local governments must grant a 
50% property tax credit for a brownfield, landfill, or clean fill on which a specified 
community solar energy generating system is installed. 
 
 
Optional Local Property Tax Credit for Solar Energy Devices 
 
Under § 9-203 of the Tax-Property Article, counties and municipalities are authorized to 
grant tax credits against county or municipal property taxes for the use of a solar energy, 
geothermal energy, or qualifying energy conservation device in a structure for the purposes 
of heating and cooling, electricity generation, or the provision of hot water. Local 
governments may establish related definitions in determining eligibility for the credit. 
 
 
Optional Local Real Property Assessment Reduction for Certain Parking Canopies 
 
Under § 7-250 of the Tax-Property Article, the governing body of a county or municipality 
may reduce or eliminate, by law, the percentage of the assessment of any real property that 
is subject to the county or municipal property tax if the real property includes a parking 
facility on which a solar energy generating system has been constructed on its canopy. 
These provisions apply only to real property that includes a parking facility on which a 
system has been approved by PSC for a CPCN or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemptions 
 
Under § 11-230 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of solar energy equipment, which is defined as equipment that uses solar energy to heat or 
cool a structure, generate electricity to be used in a structure or supplied to the electric grid, 
or provide hot water for use in a structure. 
 

END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
    
HB 1036/ Page 26 
Under § 11-207 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of electricity generated by solar energy equipment for use in residential property owned by 
an eligible customer-generator under the State’s net metering law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 26