START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1029 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1029 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Membership - Clarifications 
 
 
This bill makes specified employees of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
members of the Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a condition of their 
employment. It also requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension 
System (SRPS) to transfer service credit earned by affected employees in the 
Employees’ Retirement System (ERS) or the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) to CORS, 
unless an affected employee opts not to have service credit transferred. However, members 
who transfer into CORS with no creditable service in EPS from before July 1, 2008, are 
not eligible to opt out of the transfer of service. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025; some 
provisions related to transfer of service credit terminate June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities increase by $470,000, resulting in State pension 
contributions increasing by $53,600 in FY 2028. Those costs increase annually thereafter 
according to actuarial assumptions and are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 
20% special funds, and 20% federal and other funds. No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
32,100 
33,100 
34,100 
SF Expenditure 
0 
0 
10,700 
11,000 
11,400 
FF Expenditure 
0 
0 
10,700 
11,000 
11,400 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($53,600) 
($55,200) 
($56,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1029/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual who is employed in four specified job classifications at any 
of seven specified facilities on or after July 1, 2025, is a member of CORS as a condition 
of employment. Also, an individual who is employed in any of those positions on or before 
June 30, 2025, is eligible to retire from CORS if vested in CORS with a combined total of 
at least 20 years of eligibility credit in CORS and either EPS or ERS. 
 
Facilities:   
 
 
Eastern Shore Hospital Center; 
 
Thomas B. Finan Center; 
 
Potomac Center/Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment Program; 
 
Spring Grove Hospital Center; 
 
Springfield Hospital Center; 
 
Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents-Baltimore; and  
 
John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and Adolescents. 
 
Job Classifications:   
 
 
CAMH associate supervisor – CI; 
 
Developmental disability associate assistant manager – CI; 
 
Developmental disability associate manager – CI; and 
 
Developmental disability associate supervisor – CI. 
 
Any individual who retires under this provision is entitled to a normal service retirement 
benefit based on creditable service in CORS. 
 
If any of the affected employees is granted an ordinary disability benefit, the SRPS Board 
must calculate and pay the ordinary disability benefit that is greater under either CORS or 
EPS. 
 
The bill includes clarifying provisions related to EPS members affected by Chapters 135 
and 136 of 2024. 
 
Current Law:  Eligibility for CORS membership has been expanded in recent years from 
just correctional officers in the first six job classifications and security attendants at the 
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center to now also include:   
 
 
correctional dietary, maintenance, and supply workers (Chapter 340 of 2006); 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1029/ Page 3 
 
correctional laundry workers and designated employees of Maryland Correctional 
Enterprises (Chapters 408 and 409 of 2008); 
 
correctional case management specialists, supervisors, and managers (Chapters 218 
and 219 of 2016); 
 
parole and probation agents, supervisors, and regional administrators (Chapters 688 
and 689 of 2017); 
 
specified counselors, social workers, psychologists, and recreation officers within 
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) (Chapter 690 
of 2017); 
 
specified detention center employees of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 
and specified supervisory positions within DPSCS (that had been inadvertently 
omitted from earlier legislation) (Chapter 579 of 2018); 
 
specified case management workers and group life managers in DJS (Chapter 147 
of 2022); and 
 
specified hospital employees in MDH and correctional maintenance employees in 
DPSCS (Chapters 135 and 136 of 2024). 
 
Exhibit 1 delineates key provisions for CORS and EPS. As the exhibit shows, 
Chapter 110 of 2006 phased in a higher EPS employee contribution rate, from 2.0% in 
fiscal 2006 to 5.0% in fiscal 2009. Chapter 397 of 2011 made additional changes, raising 
the member contribution rate to 7.0% and reducing the benefit multiplier to 1.5% for 
members hired after June 30, 2011. Prior to July 1, 1998, EPS was noncontributory for 
most members. 
 
“Eligibility service” means service credit that is recognized for determining eligibility for 
a retirement benefit. In general, a member of EPS receives one year of eligibility service 
credit for completing at least 500 hours of employment in a fiscal year. “Creditable service” 
is service credit that is recognized for computing a retirement benefit. In general, it equals 
eligibility service credit plus credit for unused sick leave. 
 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs transfers from EPS to another 
contributory pension system (like CORS). Under Title 37, a “new system” means the 
system into which the member is transferring service credit, and “previous system” means 
the system from which the individual is transferring. Members transferring creditable 
service from EPS to another contributory system must pay the member contribution rates 
in effect for the period of service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. 
They are also refunded any accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in 
excess of the member contributions required by the new system. 
 
Under the terms of Title 37, therefore, EPS members transferring creditable service to 
CORS have to pay the difference between the contribution rate paid to EPS, if any, and the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1029/ Page 4 
5.0% CORS contribution rate, plus interest, for any service credit earned prior to 
fiscal 2009, when the EPS member contribution rate was less than the 5.0% CORS 
contribution. For service credit earned prior to 1998, they likely must pay the full CORS 
contribution of 5.0% (plus interest) since EPS was noncontributory for most members. 
However, they will also receive credit for the higher member contributions (7.0%) paid in EPS 
since June 30, 2011, because those contributions are also transferred to CORS and credited 
to their account. Any net deficiency in their member contributions results in an actuarial 
reduction to their benefit at the time of retirement. The Department of Legislative Services 
notes that there is no actual transfer of assets between plans because CORS and EPS/ERS 
are considered a single plan for the purpose of valuing their assets and liabilities. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Provisions 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System 
 
 
Hired Before July 1, 2011 
Hired After June 30, 2011 
CORS 
Normal Retirement Age 
621 
652 
553 
 
 
 
 
Years of Service for 
Normal Retirement 
30 
Age and service add to 90 
20 
 
 
 
 
Employee Contribution 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006) 
3.0% in 2007 
4.0% in 2008 
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% after June 30, 2011 
7.0% 
5.0% 
 
 
 
 
Benefit Multiplier 
1.8% (after 1998) 
1.2% (before 1998) 
1.5% 
1.818% 
 
CORS:  Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
1 Retiree must have at least 5 years of service. 
2 Retiree must have at least 10 years of service. 
3 Retiree must have 5 years of service if hired before July 1, 2011; otherwise, retiree must have 10 years of 
service if hired on or after July 1, 2011. 
 
Source:  Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1029/ Page 5 
Normal retirement age for most CORS members is age 55 if they have vested; they can 
also retire with 20 years of service regardless of age.  
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, EPS/ERS and CORS are considered a single plan 
for actuarial reasons, so the employer contribution rates for each plan are the same. Also, 
current EPS members transferring creditable service to CORS have to make up any 
difference in member contributions. Therefore, any difference in member contributions has 
no effect on plan assets. Moreover, even though the bill applies to members of both ERS 
and EPS, all affected members are assumed to participate only in EPS (ERS was closed to 
new members in 1980). Based on data provided by MDH, the bill affects at most 
30 individuals currently employed by MDH. 
 
State pension liabilities increase because service credit in EPS accrues at a lower benefit 
level than CORS, whether at the 1.2% level, prior to 1998, or the 1.5% level, for those 
hired on or after July 1, 2011. For EPS service between July 1, 1998, and June 30, 2011, 
benefits accrued at 1.8% (and still accrue at that level for those hired before July 1, 2011), 
which is slightly below the 1.818% rate for CORS. Under the bill, all service credit must 
be paid at the 1.818% CORS level for individuals who transfer creditable service from EPS 
to CORS. This factor increases State pension liabilities because accrued credit is being paid 
at a higher level. 
 
The bill requires the SRPS Board to transfer the service credit on June 30, 2026; members 
have 11 months to opt out of the transfer – they must do so by June 1, 2026. However, this 
analysis assumes that all affected individuals for whom data is available transfer all prior 
creditable service to CORS and retire with a CORS benefit (i.e., they do not opt out of the 
transfer of credit). To the extent that some affected members do opt out, the fiscal effect 
may be less. Based on the date of transfer, this analysis assumes that transferred credit is 
first recognized in the June 30, 2026 valuation, which determines contribution rates for 
fiscal 2028. Therefore, the fiscal effect begins in fiscal 2028. 
 
The General Assembly’s actuary advises that, with these assumptions, State pension 
liabilities increase by $470,000, which are amortized over 11 years, resulting in a 
first-year cost of $53,560 in fiscal 2028. Out-year pension costs increase according to 
actuarial assumptions. State pension costs in the combined employees’ system (which 
includes both CORS and EPS) are assumed to be split 60% general funds, 
20% special funds, and 20% federal/other funds. 
 
This analysis does not include the effect of future individuals hired into the affected 
positions, including currently vacant positions. 
 
The State Retirement Agency can process credit transfers with existing resources. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1029/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 768 (Senator M. Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on 
Pensions) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Maryland Department of Health; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
js/ljm    
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6