START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1065 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1065 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County - Board of Appeals - Membership  
MC/PG 106-25 
 
   
This bill clarifies that the Prince George’s County Council must appoint at least 
three members to the board of appeals in the county, and that a simple majority of board 
members, instead of at least two members, must concur in any resolution.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures may increase, beginning in FY 2026, 
to the extent that additional members are added to the board of appeals. 
Prince George’s County revenues are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Division I of the Land Use Article, legislative bodies, the elected 
body of a local jurisdiction, including the county council, enact zoning ordinances and 
regulations and must appoint a board of appeals, that may, among other things, hear and 
decide special exceptions to, and authorize a variance from, the terms of a local law. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1065/ Page 2 
Prince George’s County Council 
 
Current law relating to zoning stipulates that the Prince George’s County Council is the 
district council for that portion of the regional district located in Prince George’s County. 
Among other things, the district council may, as specified, adopt or amend the text of 
zoning law for the county and may adopt and amend any map accompanying the text of 
the zoning law for that county. 
 
Prince George’s County Board of Appeals 
 
In Prince George’s County, there is a board of appeals that consists of three members, 
appointed by the county council, who serve for a term of four years. Each member of the 
board must be a resident of the regional district in Prince George’s County. The county 
council must provide staff for the board. The board acts by resolution, and at least 
two members must concur with a resolution to enact it. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County advises that the fiscal 2025 budget includes 
$102,000 for the board of appeals. Specifically, $49,800 for stipends, $14,700 for fringe 
benefits, and $37,500 for operating expenses. Prince George’s County expenditures 
increase, beginning in fiscal 2026, to the extent that additional members are added to the 
board.          
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Maryland-National 
Capital Park and Planning Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2