START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1086 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1086 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Coverage for 
Anesthesia - Prohibiting Time Limitations 
 
This bill establishes requirements for certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and 
health maintenance organizations (collectively known as carriers), as well as Medicaid, 
regarding coverage for anesthesia. If anesthesia is covered for a procedure for which a 
licensed provider issues an order, a carrier or Medicaid must cover (1) the delivery of 
anesthesia for the entire duration of the procedure and (2) medical care related to the 
delivery of anesthesia for the procedure that is provided immediately before and after the 
procedure. A carrier or Medicaid may not establish, implement, or enforce a policy, 
practice, or procedure that places time limitations on the delivery of anesthesia. The bill 
takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit 
plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an indeterminate but minimal amount 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below; 
federal fund revenues increase accordingly. No impact on the Maryland Insurance 
Administration or the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1086/ Page 2 
Protection and Affordable Care Act requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 
10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the following 
categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; (3) hospitalization; 
(4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use disorder services, 
including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and 
habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness 
services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services, including dental and 
vision care. 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the 
State benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must 
be the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. Maryland’s State benchmark plan includes coverage for anesthesia. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) advises that the bill has 
an indeterminate, but minimal fiscal impact on Medicaid as Medicaid’s existing policies 
on anesthesia coverage and administration largely align with the bill’s requirements. 
However, Medicaid currently covers both dental anesthesia codes D9222 (deep 
anesthesia/general anesthesia – first 15 minutes) and D9223 (deep anesthesia/general 
anesthesia – each 15 minutes), with a limitation of six units or 90 minutes on D9223. 
According to an analysis conducted by MDH’s dental administrative services organization, 
coverage of six units allows for more than adequate time for any general oral surgery 
procedure, and billing for more than six units does not align with the standard of care. As 
such, eliminating the unit limit for D9223 is expected to have an indeterminate, but 
minimal impact on billing. 
 
MDH further advises that the bill does not prevent standard utilization management 
processes to monitor for fraud, waste, and abuse, which are expected to mitigate any 
fiscal impact in the event that providers submit fraudulent claims. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1086/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3