START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 394

Chapter 394

(House Bill 1007)

AN ACT concerning

~~Genetic~~ ~~Testing~~ ~~–~~ ~~Prohibition~~ ~~on~~ ~~Disability,~~ ~~Life,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Long–Term~~ ~~Care~~
~~Insurance~~
Disability and Life Insurance – Medical Information
(Genetic Testing Protection Act)

FOR the purpose of prohibiting insurance carriers that offer life insurance, ~~long–term~~ ~~care~~
~~insurance,~~ or disability insurance policies or contracts from ~~taking~~ ~~certain~~ ~~actions~~
~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~whether~~ ~~an~~ ~~applicant~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~policy~~ ~~or~~ ~~contract~~ ~~holder~~ ~~has~~
~~requested~~ ~~or~~ ~~undergone~~ ~~genetic~~ ~~testing~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~results~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~genetic~~ ~~testing;~~ unfairly
discriminating against an individual by taking certain actions relating to coverage
based on medical information; prohibiting certain carriers from accessing sensitive
medical information without first obtaining written consent or mandating certain
genetic testing or full genome sequencing for a certain purpose; and generally
relating to ~~genetic~~ ~~testing~~ life and disability insurance.

BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 27–909.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

27–909.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “GENE PRODUCT” MEANS THE BIOCHEMICAL MATERIAL, EITHER
RNA OR PROTEIN, MADE BY A GENE.

(3) (I) “GENETIC INFORMATION” MEANS INFORMATION:

1. DERIVED FROM A GENETIC TEST ABOUT
CHROMOSOMES, GENES, OR GENE PRODUCTS THAT MAY DERIVE FROM AN
INDIVIDUAL OR A FAMILY MEMBER;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 394 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. NOT OBTAINED FOR DIAGNOSTIC OR THERAPEUTIC
PURPOSES; AND

3. OBTAINED AT A TIME WHEN THE INDIVIDUAL TO
WHOM THE INFORMATION RELATES IS ASYMPTOMATIC FOR THE DISEASE,
DISORDER, ILLNESS, OR IMPAIRMENT TO WHICH THE INFORMATION RELATES.

(II) “GENETIC INFORMATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. ROUTINE PHYSICAL MEASUREMENTS;

2. CHEMICAL, BLOOD, AND URINE ANALYSES THAT ARE
WIDELY ACCEPTED AND IN USE IN CLINICAL PRACTICE;

3. TESTS FOR USE OF DRUGS;

4. TESTS FOR THE PRESENCE OF THE HUMAN
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS; OR

5. FAMILY MEDICAL HISTORY, EXCEPT FOR FAMILY
GENETICS AS THEY RELATE TO A GENETIC TEST DESCRIBED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (I)1
OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(4) “GENETIC SERVICES” MEANS HEALTH SERVICES THAT ARE
PROVIDED TO OBTAIN, ASSESS, OR INTERPRET GENETIC INFORMATION OR THE
RESULTS OF GENETIC TESTS.

(5) (2) “GENETIC TEST” MEANS AN ANALYSIS OF HUMAN DNA,
RNA, CHROMOSOMES, PROTEINS, OR METABOLITES THAT DETECTS GENOTYPES,
MUTATIONS, OR CHROMOSOMAL CHANGES.

(6) (3) “INSURANCE CARRIER” MEANS A COMPANY AUTHORIZED
TO SELL INSURANCE POLICIES IN THE STATE.

(B) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO LIFE INSURANCE, LONG–TERM
CARE INSURANCE, AND DISABILITY INSURANCE POLICIES OR CONTRACTS.

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT AN INSURANCE CARRIER THAT
OFFERS, ISSUES, OR DELIVERS A LIFE INSURANCE, LONG–TERM CARE INSURANCE,
OR DISABILITY INSURANCE POLICY OR CONTRACT IN THE STATE FROM:

(I) ACCESSING AN APPLICANT’S MEDICAL RECORD AS PART OF
THE APPLICATION PROCESS; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 394

(II) CONSIDERING A MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS INCLUDED IN AN
INDIVIDUAL’S MEDICAL RECORD, EVEN IF THE DIAGNOSIS WAS BASED ON THE
RESULTS OF A GENETIC TEST.

(C) (1) AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION AND SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
INSURANCE CARRIER THAT OFFERS, ISSUES, OR DELIVERS A LIFE INSURANCE,
LONG–TERM CARE INSURANCE, OR DISABILITY INSURANCE POLICY OR CONTRACT IN
THE STATE MAY NOT: UNFAIRLY DISCRIMINATE AGAINST AN INDIVIDUAL BY
CONDITIONING INSURANCE RATES, THE PROVISION OR RENEWAL OF INSURANCE
COVERAGE, OR OTHER CONDITIONS OF INSURANCE BASED ON MEDICAL
INFORMATION, INCLUDING THE RESULTS OF A GENETIC TEST FOR WHICH THERE IS
NOT A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MEDICAL INFORMATION AND THE COST OF THE
INSURANCE RISK THAT THE INSURER WOULD ASSUME BY INSURING THE APPLICANT.

(2) IN DEMONSTRATING THE RELATIONSHIP DESCRIBED IN
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE INSURER MAY RELY ON ACTUARIALLY
SOUND PRINCIPLES OR ACTUAL OR REASONABLY ANTICIPATED EXPERIENCE.

(3) AN INSURANCE CARRIER THAT OFFERS, ISSUES, OR DELIVERS A
LIFE INSURANCE OR DISABILITY INSURANCE POLICY OR CONTRACT IN THE STATE
MAY NOT:

(I) ACCESS SENSITIVE MEDICAL INFORMATION, INCLUDING
THE GENETIC DATA OF AN INDIVIDUAL, WITHOUT FIRST OBTAINING THE
INDIVIDUAL’S SIGNED, WRITTEN CONSENT; OR

(II) MANDATE EXISTING OR NEW GENETIC TESTING OR FULL
GENOME SEQUENCING AS A PREREQUISITE FOR LIFE INSURANCE OR DISABILITY
INSURANCE ELIGIBILITY OR COVERAGE.

(I) DENY OR LIMIT COVERAGE BASED ON WHETHER AN
APPLICANT OR A POLICY OR CONTRACT HOLDER HAS UNDERGONE A GENETIC TEST;

(II) PROHIBIT, AS A CONDITION OF CONTINUING COVERAGE, A
POLICY OR CONTRACT HOLDER FROM UNDERGOING A GENETIC TEST; OR

(III) USE A GENETIC TEST, THE RESULTS OF A GENETIC TEST,
GENETIC INFORMATION, OR A REQUEST FOR GENETIC SERVICES TO REJECT, DENY,
LIMIT, CANCEL, REFUSE TO RENEW, INCREASE THE RATES OF, AFFECT THE TERMS
OR CONDITIONS OF, OR OTHERWISE AFFECT A LIFE INSURANCE, LONG–TERM CARE
INSURANCE, OR DISABILITY INSURANCE POLICY OR CONTRACT.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 394 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) (4) THE INSURANCE CARRIER, APPLICANT, OR POLICY OR
CONTRACT HOLDER MAY NOT CHANGE, WAIVE, DISCHARGE, OR TERMINATE THE
PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPH (1) (3)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION UNDER ANY
CIRCUMSTANCES.

(D) THE COMMISSIONER MAY ISSUE AN ORDER UNDER §§ 4–113 AND 4–114
OF THIS ARTICLE OR §§ 27–501 AND 27–505 OF THIS TITLE IF THE COMMISSIONER
FINDS A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4