START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1080 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1080 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Local Government - Local Personnel - Leave With Pay 
 
 
This bill authorizes county or municipal governments to provide disaster service leave with 
pay to specified employees. Eligible employees may use up to 30 days of disaster service 
leave in any 12-month period only after obtaining approval from their local governmental 
unit. The bill also authorizes local governmental employers to provide leave with pay for 
jury service, attendance at employee organizational events, uniformed services training (as 
defined in federal law), court testimony, or administrative leave, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local governments. 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase, potentially significantly, to the extent 
local governments award additional leave to employees, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Disaster Service Leave 
 
On request, an employee of a county or municipality may be entitled to disaster service 
leave with pay if (1) the employee is certified by the American Red Cross as a disaster 
service volunteer and the American Red Cross requests the services of the employee during 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1080/ Page 2 
certain disasters designated at level II or above or (2) the employee is a member of the 
Civil Air Patrol, U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, Maryland Voluntary Organizations Active in 
Disaster (VOAD), a volunteer emergency medical services department, a volunteer fire 
department, a volunteer rescue company or volunteer rescue squad, or a community 
emergency response team. 
 
During a prolonged or recurrent disaster, and if doing so would be in the best interest of 
the county or municipality, an employee’s local governmental unit may (1) waive the 
requirement that the employee obtain approval before using the leave and (2) increase the 
number of days of disaster service leave that an employee may use. 
 
Leave with Pay 
 
Each county and municipal governmental unit may provide leave with pay to employees:  
(1) for jury service; (2) to attend employee organization events approved for this purpose 
by the head of the governmental unit; (3) for up to 30 days for uniformed services training 
or active uniformed services duty in a reserve unit of the armed forces or in the organized 
militia; (4) to appear in court, before a grand jury, before an administrative unit, or for a 
deposition in compliance with a subpoena, unless the employee is a party to the action or 
a paid witness; (5) to remove an employee from the work site if the employee is incapable 
of properly performing their duties because of extraordinary circumstances or if the 
employee poses a threat to self, others, or county or municipal property; and (6) for any 
other paid leave the head of a governmental unit considers necessary. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Disaster Service Leave 
 
On request, a State employee in the Executive, Judicial, and Legislative branches, 
including temporary employees, may be entitled to disaster service leave with pay if  
(1) the employee is certified by the American Red Cross as a disaster service volunteer and 
the American Red Cross requests the services of the employee during certain disasters or 
(2) the employee is a member of the Civil Air Patrol, U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, 
Maryland VOAD, a volunteer emergency medical services department, a volunteer fire 
department, a volunteer rescue company or volunteer rescue squad, or a community 
emergency response team. 
 
An employee in the Judicial and Legislative branches may use up to 15 days of disaster 
service leave in any 12-month period, while an employee of the Executive Branch may use 
up to 30 days, after obtaining approval from the employee’s appointing authority. During 
a prolonged or recurrent disaster, and if doing so would be in the best interest of the State, 
an employee’s appointing authority may (1) waive the eligibility requirements for disaster 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1080/ Page 3 
service leave, including the requirement that the employee obtain approval before using 
the leave and (2) increase the number of days of disaster service leave that an employee 
may use. 
 
For purposes of workers’ compensation and the Maryland Tort Claims Act, an employee 
on disaster service leave is not considered a State employee. 
 
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act 
 
A private-sector employer is covered by the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act 
(FMLA) if it employs 50 or more employees in 20 or more workweeks in the current or 
previous calendar year. An employee is considered to be employed each working day of 
the calendar week if the employee works any part of the week. FMLA generally requires 
covered employers to provide eligible employees with up to 12 work weeks of unpaid leave 
during any 12-month period for qualifying family and medical reasons (including for the 
birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child) and requires continuation of their group 
health benefits under the same conditions as if they had not taken leave. 
 
FMLA leave may be unpaid or used at the same time as employer-provided paid leave. 
Employees must be restored to the same or virtually identical position when they return to 
work after FMLA leave. 
 
Eligible employees are individuals employed by a covered employer who have been 
employed for at least 12 months, have at least 1,250 hours of service with the employer 
during the 12 months before their FMLA leave starts, and work at a location where the 
employer has at least 50 employees within 75 miles. 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program 
 
Chapter 48 of 2022 established the FAMLI Program, to be administered by the Maryland 
Department of Labor. Chapters 258 and 259 of 2023 and Chapters 266 and 267 of 2024 
made several modifications to the program, including delaying the program’s start date. 
Employer, employee, and self-employed individual contributions to the program begin 
July 1, 2025, and claims for benefits begin July 1, 2026. 
 
The program generally provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to a covered individual who is 
taking leave from employment due to caring for or bonding with certain family members, 
the individual’s own serious health condition, or a qualifying exigency arising out of a 
family member’s military deployment. The weekly benefit is based on an individual’s 
average weekly wage and is indexed to inflation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1080/ Page 4 
Local Expenditures:  County and municipal governments may incur additional costs to 
the extent that paid leave is awarded to employees. Since the bill is both authorizing in 
nature and requires that the local governmental unit approve the employee’s leave request, 
any potential fiscal impact generated by the employee’s leave would be at the discretion of 
the local government. 
 
In response to a request for information on the potential impact of this legislation, several 
local governments indicated that the bill may lead to increased local costs and negative 
impacts on government services. 
 
Frederick County Public Schools advises that the legislation may lead to an increase in 
payroll and overtime expenditures to the extent that the school system provides increased 
coverage for teachers on leave. In addition, granting additional leave to school employees 
could lead to temporary staff shortages. 
 
Harford, Talbot, and Wicomico counties also advise that the provisions of the bill may lead 
to an increase in local expenditures for overtime and temporary coverage for employees on 
leave.  
 
Since the legislation is only authorizing in nature, several local governments, including the 
City of Frederick, indicate that they would not be affected unless the governmental unit 
decides to move forward with the authority to provide additional paid employee leave. 
 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools indicates that the legislation will have a minimal 
fiscal impact since the school system can control the number of staff members that are 
receiving the new disaster leave.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 652 (Senator Jennings) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Allegany, Harford, 
Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; City of Frederick; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1080/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5