START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1007 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1007 
(Delegate Wells, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Disability and Life Insurance - Medical Information (Genetic Testing Protection 
Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits an insurer that offers, issues, or delivers a life insurance or disability 
insurance policy or contract in the State from taking specified adverse actions related to 
genetic testing against an applicant or insured. Existing enforcement authority for the 
Insurance Commissioner and prohibitions against discrimination in underwriting are 
expressly applied for the enforcement of the bill. The bill does not prohibit an insurer from 
accessing an applicant’s medical record as part of the application process or considering a 
medical diagnosis included in an individual’s medical record, even if the diagnosis was 
based on the results of a genetic test. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2026 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of additional 
filings can be handled with existing resources. General fund revenues may be affected, as 
discussed below; however, any such impact, if realized, is anticipated to be minimal.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Genetic test” means an analysis of human DNA, RNA, chromosomes, 
proteins, or metabolites that detects genotypes, mutations, or chromosomal changes. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1007/ Page 2 
An insurer that offers, issues, or delivers a life insurance or disability insurance policy or 
contract in the State may not unfairly discriminate against an individual by conditioning 
insurance rates, the provision or renewal of insurance coverage, or other conditions of 
insurance based on medical information, including the results of a genetic test for which 
there is not a relationship between the medical information and the cost of the insurance 
risk that the insurer would assume by insuring the applicant. Nevertheless, to demonstrate 
a relationship between the medical information and cost of insurance risk assumed by 
insuring the applicant, an insurer may rely on actuarially sound principles or actual or 
reasonably anticipated experience. 
 
Additionally, an insurer that offers, issues, or delivers a life insurance or disability 
insurance policy or contract in the State may not access sensitive medical information, 
including genetic data of an individual, without first obtaining the individual’s signed, 
written consent. Further, an insurer may never mandate existing or new genetic testing or 
full genome sequencing as a prerequisite for life insurance or disability insurance eligibility 
or coverage; moreover, an insurance carrier, applicant, or policy contract holder may not 
waive this prohibition under any circumstances. 
 
The bill expressly authorizes the Insurance Commissioner to issue an order for a violation 
of the bill using the Commissioner’s existing enforcement powers that allow the 
Commissioner to (1) deny, refuse to renew, suspend, and revoke an insurer’s certificate of 
authority; (2) impose a civil penalty in lieu of suspending or revoking a certificate of 
authority; (3) send and enforce cease and desist orders; and (4) order an insurer to accept a 
risk. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Genetic Information and Insurance Policies 
 
Except for life insurance policies, annuity contracts, long-term care insurance policies, or 
disability insurance policies, an insurer, nonprofit health service plan, or health 
maintenance organization may not:   
 
 
use a genetic test, its results, genetic information, or a request for genetic services, 
to reject, deny, limit, cancel, refuse to renew, increase the rates of, affect the terms 
or conditions of, or otherwise affect a health insurance policy or contract;  
 
request or require a genetic test, the results of a genetic test, or genetic information 
for the purposes of determining whether or not to issue or renew health benefits 
coverage; or  
 
release identifiable genetic information or the results of a genetic test to 
unauthorized persons without the prior written authorization of the individual from 
whom the test results or genetic information was obtained.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1007/ Page 3 
Disclosure of identifiable genetic information may only be used for the purpose of 
providing medical care to patients or conducting research that has been approved by an 
institutional review board established in accordance with federal law.  
 
With respect to these requirements, the Insurance Commissioner may take specified 
enforcement actions, including the (1) denial, refusal to renew, suspension, and revocation 
an insurer’s certificate of authority; (2) imposition of a civil penalty in lieu of suspending 
or revoking a certificate of authority; (3) sending and enforcement of cease and desist 
orders; and (4) ordering of an insurer to accept a risk. Other insurer requirements that 
prohibit discriminatory underwriting practices also apply relating to the use of genetic 
testing and information.  
 
Genetic Information and Commercial Law 
 
Chapter 501 of 2022 established the Genetic Information Privacy Act to regulate the use 
of genetic data by direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies. Broadly speaking, the Act 
requires any such company to (1) provide consumers with information regarding the 
company’s policies and procedures; (2) obtain specified types of consent from the 
consumer prior to collecting, using, or disclosing the consumer’s genetic data; and 
(3) develop and implement policies and procedures to protect genetic data. A violation of 
the Act is considered an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions.  
 
State Revenues:  Title 6 of the Insurance Article imposes a 2% premium tax on each 
authorized insurance company, surplus lines broker, or unauthorized insurance company 
that sells, or an individual who independently procures, any type of insurance coverage 
upon a risk that is located in the State. Revenues accrue to the general fund.  
 
To the extent that the bill affects premium rates charged by life and disability insurers, 
general funds may be affected. However, it is unclear at this time what effect, if any, the 
bill will have on these premiums and, therefore, any such impact cannot be reliably 
predicted or estimated.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 982 and SB 142 of 2024 and HB 155 and SB 212 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 757 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1007/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/rld 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4