START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1064 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1064 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County Planning Board and Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission - Open Meetings - Live Streaming Requirement  
MC/PG 101-25 
 
 
This bill clarifies that a project site visit or an educational field tour does not constitute an 
open meeting for the Montgomery County Planning Board or the Washington Suburban 
Sanitary Commission (WSSC) if no organizational business is conducted; therefore, the 
requirement to stream live video or audio of specified open meetings is not applicable. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations or finances of the 
Montgomery County Planning Board or WSSC. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Montgomery County Planning Board and WSSC are required to 
stream live video or live teleconference audio (or other audio) of open meetings, as 
specified. In addition, the Montgomery County Planning Board and WSSC must maintain 
on their respective websites a complete and unedited archived recording of each open 
meeting that is livestreamed. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1064/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland-National Capital  
Park and Planning Commission; Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; 
Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2