START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1033 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1033 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Reemployment Earnings Limitations - 
Maximum Average Final Compensation 
 
 
This bill exempts from a retirement benefit offset specified retirees of the State Retirement 
and Pension System (SRPS) (1) who are reemployed with a participating employer and 
(2) whose average final compensation (AFC) is less than the minimum annual salary on 
the standard State pay scale (instead of less than $25,000). The bill also exempts specified 
disability retirees who are reemployed with a participating employer from a temporary 
suspension of benefits if their AFC is less than the minimum annual salary on the standard 
State pay scale. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates, as 
SRPS does not account for foregone offsets. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  No discernible effect on local pension liabilities or contribution rates. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to disability retirees who were not law enforcement 
officers, as specified, at the time of retirement and retirees receiving normal service 
retirement benefits from the following SRPS plans:   
 
 
Employees’ Pension System; 
 
Teachers’ Pension System; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1033/ Page 2 
 
Employees’ Retirement System; 
 
Teachers’ Retirement System; or 
 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Normal Service Retirement Offsets 
 
In general, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from SRPS may be reemployed, 
except that the retiree may not be reemployed by the State or any participating SRPS 
employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, a retiree receiving a normal service 
retirement allowance who is rehired by the same employer for whom the retiree worked at 
the time of retirement is subject to an earnings cap. The purpose of the cap, which is the 
member’s AFC at the time of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more in 
retirement than the retiree earned as an active member with the same employer. If the sum 
of a retiree’s earnings and initial retirement allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree 
is subject to a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds 
the cap. For a member who retires directly from State service, the State is regarded as a 
single employer, so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit reduction. 
 
Statute includes several broad exemptions from the offset, including for retirees who:   
 
 
have been retired for at least five years; 
 
retired with an AFC less than $25,000 and are reemployed on a permanent, 
temporary, or contractual basis; or 
 
are serving in any specified elected position. 
 
Suspension of Disability Benefits 
 
Except for specified retired law enforcement officers, SRPS must temporarily suspend a 
disability retiree’s allowance if the retiree (1) began receiving a disability allowance on or 
after July 1, 1998, and (2) is employed by a participating employer at an annual 
compensation that is at least equal to the retiree’s AFC at the time of retirement. The 
disability allowance is reinstated, as specified, when SRPS receives satisfactory 
documentation that the retiree is no longer employed by a participating employer. 
 
Disability Benefit Offsets 
 
Except for specified retired law enforcement officers, disability retirees are subject to a 
benefit offset if (1) the retiree is younger than normal retirement age; (2) the medical board 
certifies that the retiree is employed by a participating employer at an annual compensation 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1033/ Page 3 
that exceeds the sum of the retiree’s AFC and $5,000, adjusted annually for inflation; 
(3) the Board of Trustees agrees with the medical board’s report; and (4) the retiree’s 
allowance has not been suspended. For disability retirees who have been retired for fewer 
than 10 years, the offset is $1 for every $2 that the retiree’s current compensation exceeds 
the cap. For all other disability retirees, the offset is $1 for every $5 that the compensation 
exceeds the cap. Disability retirees reemployed by a participating employer are exempt 
from the offset if their AFC was less than $25,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 693 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3