START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1126 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1126 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Child Support Arrearage to Work Pilot Program - 
Established 
 
   
This bill establishes the Child Support Arrearage to Work Pilot Program in the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MD Labor). The purpose of the pilot program is to connect 
individuals who are unemployed and in arrears under a child support order with 
employment opportunities in the State, including employment opportunities in State 
government. MD Labor, in consultation with the Department of Human Services (DHS) 
and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), must implement the program and 
establish the procedures and safeguards necessary to securely share information related to 
the program and participants in the program. MD Labor may adopt regulations to 
implement these requirements. By July 1, 2026, MD Labor must report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on its findings and any recommendations related to the 
continuation of the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MD Labor may increase by as much as 
$156,600 in FY 2026 only; the effect, if any, generally depends on the size of the pilot 
program, as discussed below. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect nonbudgeted 
revenues or expenditures for the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF).  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1126/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MD Labor’s Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) administers the 
State’s Unemployment Insurance (UI) program. UI provides temporary, partial wage 
replacement benefits of up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through 
no fault of their own and who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking 
employment. Part of the requirement to actively seek work includes registering for the 
Maryland Workforce Exchange – an online job and career services system, which offers 
various employment tools, including job listings, resume assistance, and training and 
educational programs. UI recipients must also participate in reemployment workshops 
designed to minimize their time receiving UI benefits. The exchange and the reemployment 
workshops are administered by MD Labor’s Division of Workforce Development and 
Adult Learning (DWDAL), the State’s main workforce development entity.  
 
Under § 8-807 of the Labor and Employment Article, if a claimant who is eligible for 
UI benefits discloses an obligation to pay child support, the Secretary of Labor must send 
notice of the eligibility to the child support enforcement unit that is enforcing the 
obligation. Subject to specified requirements, the Secretary must deduct and withhold 
funding for child support payments from UI benefit payments and pay those amounts to 
the appropriate child support enforcement unit. The amounts are treated as if they were 
paid to the claimant as UI benefits. The child support enforcement unit must reimburse the 
Secretary for administrative costs incurred.  
 
Under § 8-811 of the Labor and Employment Article, if an agent of a child support 
enforcement unit is under contract with the child support enforcement unit for the purposes 
of establishing and collecting child support obligations from and locating individuals 
owing such obligations, the Secretary of Labor and the Board of Appeals (a unit within 
MD Labor) may allow the agent to inspect specified UI claim information. 
 
Child Support Enforcement – Generally 
 
The Child Support Administration within DHS generally oversees child support services 
provided by the local departments of social services and other offices. Among other 
enforcement actions, noncustodial parents in arrears of a child support order may be subject 
to earnings withholding, interception of certain lottery prizes, and driver’s license 
suspensions.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MD Labor advises that DWDAL will implement the pilot program. 
Any implementation costs are assumed to occur only in fiscal 2026 and generally depend 
on the size of the pilot program, as discussed below. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1126/ Page 3 
MD Labor advises that approximately 2,000 noncustodial parents were both in arrears on 
child support payments and received UI benefit payments in fiscal 2024. Not all 
unemployed individuals receive UI benefit payments, due to lack of eligibility or a variety 
of other reasons; however, as the bill establishes a short-term pilot program, it is reasonable 
to assume that the program is limited in size and scope. 
 
Based on information provided by MD Labor and on the available federally funded services 
for UI recipients, DWDAL can likely establish a pilot program for up to 200 individuals 
with existing staff. Beyond that, and because DWDAL cannot use federal funds to 
administer State-mandated programs, the division requires contractual staff to assist with 
implementation. Based on 2,000 individuals, DWDAL requires two full-time contractual 
staff at an approximate cost of $156,600 in fiscal 2026. This estimate assumes DWDAL 
establishes a pilot program no larger than the 2,000 individuals it has currently identified 
and that participants in the pilot program are otherwise supported with existing budgeted 
funding for training and employment resources. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for MD Labor, specifically DWDAL, may 
increase by as much as approximately $156,600 only in fiscal 2026 for contractual staff to 
implement the pilot program. DUI, DHS, and DBM can otherwise coordinate with 
DWDAL with existing budgeted resources. Based on the limited size and duration of the 
pilot program, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect nonbudgeted revenues or 
expenditures for UITF. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Human 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - April 4, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3