START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1104 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1104 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Appropriations 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Department of Health - AHEAD Model Implementation - Electronic 
Health Care Transactions and Population Health Improvement Fund 
 
This departmental bill establishes the Population Health Improvement Fund to support 
statewide population health targets under the Advancing All-Payer Health Equity 
Approaches and Development (AHEAD) Model. Through December 31, 2027, the Health 
Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) may assess a uniform, broad-based, and 
reasonable amount in hospital rates to be credited to the fund. Electronic health care 
transaction information may be used to support the State’s participation in AHEAD and 
any successor models. By July 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, the Maryland Department 
of Health (MDH) must submit a specified report to the General Assembly. MDH and 
HSCRC must provide periodic updates to designated members of the General Assembly. 
The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates December 31, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  HSCRC special fund revenues increase by $25.0 million in FY 2026 through 
FY 2028 from the assessment; special fund expenditures increase accordingly. The 
FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million (40% general 
funds, 60% federal funds) for Medicaid due to increased hospital rates associated with the 
assessment; federal fund revenues increase accordingly. General fund revenues increase 
minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through FY 2028 (not shown). 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$25.0 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
FF Revenue 
$3.0 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$25.0 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$5.0 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($2.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1104/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Regulations adopted by the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) 
may not restrict the State’s use of financial information, including billed or paid amounts 
available in electronic claims transactions, for public health purposes related to the 
participation of the State in the AHEAD Model and any successor models. 
 
Population Health Improvement Fund 
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by MDH and HSCRC that consists of  
(1) through December 31, 2027, revenues from the uniform, broad-based assessment by 
HSCRC; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and 
(4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Interest 
accrues to the fund beginning in fiscal 2029, as for most special funds; however, from 
fiscal 2026 through 2028, interest is instead credited to the general fund. The composition 
of the fund is altered effective January 1, 2028, by repealing revenues from the assessment. 
 
The fund may be used only for expenses associated with statewide population health 
improvement initiatives in alignment with the Statewide Health Equity Plan (SHEP) 
required under the AHEAD Model State agreement as directed by the Secretary of Health. 
Activities paid for by the fund must support the goal of meeting the statewide population 
health targets outlined in the AHEAD Model State agreement and have at least one of the 
following functions:  (1) reducing rates of common preventable health conditions; 
(2) addressing health-related social needs; or (3) reducing or eliminating health disparities. 
 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. Money 
expended from the fund is supplemental to funding that would otherwise be appropriated 
for Medicaid. The fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits. 
 
Required Report 
 
By July 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, MDH must submit a report to the 
General Assembly. The report must:  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1104/ Page 3 
 
reflect the required elements of the annual progress report as outlined in the State 
agreement and include (1) measures of effectiveness for funded programs and 
targeted populations; (2) any impact on health outcomes and health disparities; and 
(3) relevant components from hospital required reporting to HSCRC on population 
health improvement efforts; and 
 
include (1) an accounting of all sources of funding accepted for the benefit of the 
fund and the amount of funding from each source and (2) a summary of the extent 
to which public comments informed the work of MDH and HSCRC.  
 
MDH must make a draft of its report available for public comment for 30 days.  
 
Periodic Updates 
 
MDH and HSCRC must provide periodic updates on the AHEAD model or any successor 
model to designated members of the Senate and the House of Delegates. The presiding 
officers must designate three senators and three delegates to meet with MDH and HSCRC 
on a monthly basis from July 2025 through December 2026. These provisions terminate 
December 31, 2026. 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH established to contain 
hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, provide access to hospital care, and 
disclose information on the operation of hospitals in the State. HSCRC is responsible for 
implementing the Total Cost of Care (TCOC) Model, the successor to the Maryland 
All-Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based revenues 
(commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
Advancing All-Payer Health Equity Approaches and Development Model 
 
The federal AHEAD Model is an option that would allow Maryland to continue statewide 
efforts to improve health care quality and control costs under the TCOC Model. AHEAD 
seeks to drive state and regional health care transformation and multi-payer alignment, with 
the goal of improving the total health of a state population and lowering costs across all 
payers. 
 
On November 1, 2024, Governor Wes Moore and the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) entered into an agreement for the State to participate in the 
AHEAD Model, following which, MDH and HSCRC successfully applied to participate. 
The new model will enable Maryland to build on its unique all-payer hospital rate setting 
system, expanding its focus on primary care, population health, and health equity. 
Implementation of the AHEAD Model is set to begin January 1, 2026. The Maryland 
Commission on Health Equity (MCHE) serves as the AHEAD Model governance body for 
the State, while HSCRC will coordinate implementation in conjunction with CMS. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1104/ Page 4 
The agreement between CMS and the State requires that the State submit an annual 
progress report to provide updates on the State’s performance and activities from the 
preceding performance (or calendar) year. The first annual progress report must be 
submitted to CMS by March 31, 2026, and include updates on the State’s performance and 
activities that occurred during the pre-implementation period. 
 
Health Information Exchange Data 
 
MHCC is an independent commission that functions within MDH and must coordinate the 
exercise of its functions with MDH and HSCRC to ensure integrated, effective health care 
policy for the State. MHCC must adopt specified regulations for implementing a statewide 
health information exchange (HIE). MHCC designated the Chesapeake Regional 
Information System for Our Patients (CRISP) as the State-designated HIE in 2009, and the 
infrastructure became operational in 2010. An HIE allows clinical information to move 
electronically among disparate health information systems. CRISP offers tools aimed at 
improving the facilitation of care for the region’s health care providers. 
 
If approved by MHCC, electronic clinical information submitted by a nursing home or an 
electronic health network to the State-designated HIE may be combined with other data 
maintained by the HIE to facilitate (1) a State health improvement program; (2) mitigation 
of a public health emergency; and (3) improvement of patient safety. 
 
MHCC must adopt regulations that specify the scope of clinical information to be 
exchanged and provide for a uniform, gradual implementation of the exchange of clinic 
information. Regulations must (1) limit redisclosure of financial information; (2) restrict 
data or patients who have opted out of records sharing through the State-designated HIE or 
a health information exchange authorized by MHCC; (3) restrict data from health care 
providers that possess sensitive health care information; and (4) restrict data of patients 
who have obtained legally protected health care. 
 
Background:  In December 2024, HSCRC commissioners approved a recommendation to 
allocate approximately $25.0 million on a one-time basis through a broad-based, uniform 
hospital assessment to the Population Health Trust. HSCRC advises that these funds will 
be assessed in fiscal 2026 through hospital rates, contingent on establishment of the 
Population Health Improvement Fund under the bill. HSCRC notes that expenditures from 
the fund will align with population health priorities established through the SHEP, which 
is currently being developed by MCHE and is due to the federal Center for Medicare and 
Medicaid Innovation by July 1, 2025. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes HSCRC, each year of the TCOC, AHEAD, or any 
successor model, to assess a uniform, broad-based, and reasonable amount in hospital rates 
to be credited to the Population Health Improvement Fund. This authorization terminates 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1104/ Page 5 
December 31, 2027 (fiscal 2028). Funds may only be used for expenses associated with 
statewide population health improvement initiatives. HSCRC advises that $25.0 million 
will be assessed in hospital rates in fiscal 2026 on a one-time only basis. Therefore, HSCRC 
special fund revenues increase by $25.0 million in fiscal 2026 to reflect assessment revenue 
credited to the Population Health Improvement Fund. Special fund expenditures increase 
accordingly, based on priorities defined in the SHEP. 
 
However, as the bill authorizes HSCRC to make an assessment each year of the TCOC, 
AHEAD, or any successor model through December 31, 2027, special fund revenues (and 
expenditures) may increase by an indeterminate amount in fiscal 2027 and 2028 to the 
extent the assessment is imposed. 
 
Impact on Medicaid 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a total of $5.0 million 
($2.0 million in general funds, $3.0 million in federal funds) for Medicaid due to increased 
hospital rates associated with the assessment; however, the funds are not contingent on the 
enactment of the bill. Medicaid expenditures account for 20% of total hospital revenues 
annually, and increased Medicaid expenditures are therefore estimated to equal 20% of the 
special fund revenues of $25.0 million. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly to 
reflect federal matching funds. Depending on the specific investments from the fund in 
population health improvements, there will likely be indeterminate offsets for Medicaid 
given that the program covers one in five Marylanders. 
 
To the extent that HSCRC imposes the assessment in future years, Medicaid expenditures 
(and associated federal fund revenues) increase accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services - Office of Legislative Audits 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1104/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - March 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1104/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Department of Health - AHEAD Model Implementation - 
Electronic Health Care Transactions and Population Health Improvement 
Fund 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 1104 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact. 
 

END OF PAGE 7