START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 615

Chapter 615

(House Bill 1104)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Department of Health – AHEAD Model Implementation – Electronic
Health Care Transactions and Population Health Improvement Fund

FOR the purpose of clarifying that electronic health care transactions information may be
used to support the participation of the State in the States Advancing All–Payer
Health Equity Approaches and Development (AHEAD) Model and any successor
models; establishing the Population Health Improvement Fund as a special,
nonlapsing fund to invest in population health improvements to support the
statewide population health targets under the AHEAD Model and any successor
models; requiring that interest earnings of the Fund be credited to the Fund;
authorizing the Health Services Cost Review Commission to assess a certain amount
in hospital rates to be credited to the Fund; requiring the Maryland Department of
Health to make a draft of a certain report available for public comment; requiring the
Department and the Commission to meet with certain members of the General
Assembly; and generally relating to the implementation of the AHEAD Model.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–302.3(f)(3)(i), (h)(1), and (j)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–5501 and 13–5502 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 55. Population
Health Improvement Fund”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)204. and 205.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 615 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)206.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 13–5502(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 2 of this Act)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

4–302.3.

(f) (3) (i) If approved by the Maryland Health Care Commission, the
information submitted under paragraph (1) of this subsection may be combined with other
data maintained by the State–designated health information exchange to facilitate:

1. A State health improvement program;

2. Mitigation of a public health emergency; [and]

3. Improvement of patient safety; AND

4. THE PARTICIPATION OF THE STATE IN THE CENTER
FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID INNOVATION’S STATES ADVANCING ALL–PAYER
HEALTH EQUITY APPROACHES AND DEVELOPMENT (AHEAD) MODEL AND ANY
SUCCESSOR MODELS.

(h) (1) An electronic health network shall provide electronic health care
transactions to the State–designated health information exchange for the following public
health and clinical purposes:

(i) A State health improvement program;

(ii) Mitigation of a public health emergency; [and]

(iii) Improvement of patient safety; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 615

(IV) THE PARTICIPATION OF THE STATE IN THE CENTER FOR
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID INNOVATION’S STATES ADVANCING ALL–PAYER
HEALTH EQUITY APPROACHES AND DEVELOPMENT (AHEAD) MODEL AND ANY
SUCCESSOR MODELS.

(j) (3) Regulations adopted under paragraph (1) of this subsection [shall]:

(i) [Limit] SHALL LIMIT redisclosure of financial information,
including billed or paid amounts available in electronic claims transactions;

(II) MAY NOT RESTRICT THE STATE’S USE OF FINANCIAL
INFORMATION, INCLUDING BILLED OR PAID AMOUNTS AVAILABLE IN ELECTRONIC
CLAIMS TRANSACTIONS, FOR PUBLIC HEALTH PURPOSES RELATED TO THE
PARTICIPATION OF THE STATE IN THE CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
INNOVATION’S STATES ADVANCING ALL–PAYER HEALTH EQUITY APPROACHES
AND DEVELOPMENT (AHEAD) MODEL AND ANY SUCCESSOR MODELS;

[(ii)] (III) [Restrict] SHALL RESTRICT data of patients who have
opted out of records sharing through the State–designated health information exchange or
a health information exchange authorized by the Maryland Health Care Commission;

[(iii)] (IV) [Restrict] SHALL RESTRICT data from health care
providers that possess sensitive health care information; and

[(iv)] (V) [Restrict] SHALL RESTRICT data of patients who have
obtained legally protected health care.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 55. POPULATION HEALTH IMPROVEMENT FUND.

13–5501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “AHEAD MODEL” MEANS THE STATES ADVANCING ALL–PAYER
HEALTH EQUITY APPROACHES AND DEVELOPMENT MODEL ADMINISTERED BY THE
CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID INNOVATION.

(C) “FUND” MEANS THE POPULATION HEALTH IMPROVEMENT FUND.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 615 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) “STATEWIDE HEALTH EQUITY PLAN” MEANS THE EQUITY PLAN
REQUIRED UNDER THE AHEAD MODEL STATE AGREEMENT WITH THE CENTER
FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES.

13–5502.

(A) THERE IS A POPULATION HEALTH IMPROVEMENT FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO INVEST IN POPULATION HEALTH
IMPROVEMENTS TO SUPPORT THE STATEWIDE POPULATION HEALTH TARGETS
UNDER THE AHEAD MODEL AND ANY SUCCESSOR MODELS.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW
COMMISSION JOINTLY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE REVENUES FROM THE UNIFORM, BROAD–BASED
ASSESSMENT MADE UNDER SUBSECTION (K) (L) OF THIS SECTION;

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE FUND
MAY BE USED ONLY FOR EXPENSES ASSOCIATED WITH STATEWIDE POPULATION
HEALTH IMPROVEMENT INITIATIVES IN ALIGNMENT WITH THE STATEWIDE HEALTH
EQUITY PLAN AS DIRECTED BY THE SECRETARY.

(2) ACTIVITIES PAID FOR BY THE FUND MUST SUPPORT THE GOAL OF
MEETING THE STATEWIDE POPULATION HEALTH TARGETS OUTLINED IN THE
AHEAD MODEL STATE AGREEMENT WITH THE CENTER FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES AND HAVE AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 615

(I) REDUCING RATES OF COMMON PREVENTABLE HEALTH
CONDITIONS;

(II) ADDRESSING HEALTH–RELATED SOCIAL NEEDS; OR

(III) REDUCING OR ELIMINATING HEALTH DISPARITIES.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(I) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND IS SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT
INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT WOULD OTHERWISE BE
APPROPRIATED FOR THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

(J) THE FUND IS SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
AUDITS AS PROVIDED IN § 2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(K) (1) EACH YEAR, THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION
MAY ASSESS A UNIFORM, BROAD–BASED, AND REASONABLE AMOUNT IN HOSPITAL
RATES TO BE CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(2) FUNDS GENERATED FROM THE ASSESSMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE EXPENSES DESCRIBED IN
SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION.

(K) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, EACH YEAR OF
THE TOTAL COST OF CARE MODEL, THE AHEAD MODEL, OR ANY SUCCESSOR
MODEL, THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION MAY ASSESS A
UNIFORM, BROAD–BASED, AND REASONABLE AMOUNT IN HOSPITAL RATES TO BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(2) THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION SHALL
~~INCLUDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FULL~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ASSESSMENT~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~PARAGRAPH~~
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN THE HOSPITAL RATES.

(3) ANY FUNDS GENERATED FROM THE ASSESSMENT AUTHORIZED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE
EXPENSES DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 615 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(L) (K) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2026,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) REFLECT THE REQUIRED ELEMENTS OF THE ANNUAL
PROGRESS REPORT AS OUTLINED IN THE STATE AGREEMENT AND SHALL INCLUDE:

1. MEASURES OF EFFECTIVENESS FOR FUNDED
PROGRAMS AND TARGETED POPULATIONS;

2. ANY IMPACT ON HEALTH OUTCOMES AND HEALTH
DISPARITIES; AND

3. RELEVANT COMPONENTS FROM HOSPITAL REQUIRED
REPORTING TO THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION ON
POPULATION HEALTH IMPROVEMENT EFFORTS; AND

(II) INCLUDE:

1. AN ACCOUNTING OF ALL SOURCES OF FUNDING
ACCEPTED FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND AND THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING FROM
EACH SOURCE; AND

2. A SUMMARY OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH PUBLIC
COMMENTS INFORMED THE WORK OF THE DEPARTMENT AND THE COMMISSION.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE A DRAFT OF ITS REPORT
AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC COMMENT FOR 30 DAYS.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) 1. This subparagraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024
through 2028.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 615

receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

204. the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund;
[and]

205. the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund; AND

206. THE POPULATION HEALTH IMPROVEMENT FUND.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Health – General

13–5502.

(L) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, EACH YEAR OF
THE TOTAL COST OF CARE MODEL, THE AHEAD MODEL, OR ANY SUCCESSOR
MODEL, THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION MAY ASSESS A
UNIFORM, BROAD–BASED, AND REASONABLE AMOUNT IN HOSPITAL RATES TO BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(2) THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION SHALL
INCLUDE THE FULL AMOUNT OF THE ASSESSMENT AUTHORIZED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN THE HOSPITAL RATES.

(3) ANY FUNDS GENERATED FROM THE ASSESSMENT AUTHORIZED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE USED ONLY FOR THE EXPENSES
DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Health – General

13–5502.

(e) The Fund consists of:

[(1) The revenues from the uniform, broad–based assessment made under
subsection (l) of this section;]

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 615 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(2)] (1) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

[(3)] (2) Interest earnings; and

[(4)] (3) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of
the Fund.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Department of Health and the Health Services Cost Review
Commission shall provide periodic updates on the AHEAD model or any successor model to
designated members of the Senate of Maryland and the House of Delegates.

(b) The President shall designate three members of the Senate of Maryland, and
the Speaker shall designate three members of the House of Delegates, to meet with the
Department and the Commission on a monthly basis beginning July 2025.

(c) The meetings required under this section shall continue through December
2026.

SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 4 of this Act shall take
effect January 1, 2028. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of
December 31, 2030, Section 4 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION ~~2.~~ ~~3.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in
Section 6 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2025. ~~It~~ Sections 1 and 2 of this Act
shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and 6 months and, at the end of December 31,
2030, Sections 1 and 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect. Section 3 of this Act shall remain
effective for a period of 2 years and 6 months and, at the end of December 31, 2027, Section
3 of this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated
and of no further force and effect. Section 5 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of
1 year and 6 months and, at the end of December 31, 2026, Section 5 of this Act, with no
further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force
and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8