START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1100 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1100 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Health Equity Dashboard 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in collaboration with the 
Maryland Commission on Health Equity (MCHE), to develop a clear and 
easy-to-understand graphic data dashboard that includes age-adjusted health disparity data 
disaggregated by race, ethnicity, and gender. The data dashboard must include information 
on health insurance access, cardiovascular disease, chronic disease, mental health and 
substance use, cancer, HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted infection, body mass index, and 
any other health indicators determined relevant by MDH. MDH must update the data 
dashboard on a quarterly basis, as determined by data availability, and post the most recent 
updated data dashboard prominently on its website. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH, in collaboration with MCHE, can develop and update a health equity 
data dashboard using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Established in 2021, the purpose of MCHE is to (1) employ a health equity 
framework to develop a statewide health equity plan and make specified examinations; 
(2) provide advice to the Secretary of Health, the State’s independent health regulatory 
commissions, and others on issues of racial, ethnic, cultural, or socioeconomic health 
disparities; (3) facilitate coordination of expertise and experience in developing a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1100/ Page 2 
comprehensive health equity plan addressing the social determinants of health; and (4) set 
goals for health equity and prepare a plan for the State to achieve health equity in alignment 
with other statewide planning activities. 
 
Among other things, MCHE is responsible for determining the impact of the following 
factors on the health of Maryland residents:  access to safe and affordable housing; 
educational attainment; opportunities for employment; economic stability; environmental 
factors; public safety, as specified; and food insecurity. MCHE must develop and monitor 
a statewide health equity plan as required by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid 
Innovation under any agreement entered into between the State and the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services. MCHE must, in coordination with the State-designated 
health information exchange, establish an advisory committee to make recommendations 
on data collection, needs, quality, reporting, evaluation, and visualization for the 
commission to carry out its work. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 684 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2