START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1146 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Behavioral Health Crisis Response System – Integration of 9–8–8 
Suicide and Crisis Lifeline Network and Outcome Evaluations 
 
This bill alters the program and reporting requirements of the Crisis Response System. The 
system must include a State 9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline in each jurisdiction or region 
to (1) provide a single point of entry to the system; (2) coordinate with the national 
9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline to provide the lifeline’s full range of services (including 
supportive counseling, suicide prevention, crisis intervention, referrals to additional 
resources, and direct dispatch or warm hand-offs to mobile crisis response and stabilization 
services and other immediate services as needed); (3) coordinate with other specified 
entities; and (4) provide other programs. Additionally, the crisis response system must 
include an evaluation of outcomes of services in each jurisdiction or region, as specified. 
The data derived from this evaluation must be collected, analyzed, and publicly reported 
by December 1 annually, beginning in 2026. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund expenditures increase 
by $63,100 in FY 2026 for one part-time employee to oversee data collection and analysis 
for the annual report. Future years reflect ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
63,100 
55,200 
57,700 
60,300 
62,900 
Net Effect 
($63,100) 
($55,200) 
($57,700) 
($60,300) 
($62,900)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that the bill is a replication of responsibilities already 
undertaken by local health departments (LHDs) and local behavioral health authorities 
(LBHAs), local revenues and expenditures are not affected, as described below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1146/ Page 2 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The evaluation of outcomes of services must also encompass an evaluation 
in each jurisdiction or region of:   
 
 
9-8-8 call, text, and chat volume and local answer rate;  
 
9-8-8 call, text, and chat resolution data, including (1) the proportion of crises 
resolved by phone; (2) the proportion of crises resolved by mobile crisis team 
dispatch; and (3) the proportion of crises resolved by transfer to 9-1-1;  
 
mobile crisis team dispatch volume and response time; 
 
mobile crisis team dispatch resolution data, including (1) the proportion of crises 
resolved safely in the community and (2) the proportion of crises resolved through 
transfer to a higher level of care;  
 
crisis stabilization center usage; and  
 
crisis stabilization center discharge data, including (1) the proportion of crises 
resolved through a discharge to home and (2) the proportion of crises resolved 
through a discharge to a higher level of care.  
 
The evaluation of outcomes of services must be through (1) data obtained from consumers 
and family members who have received services from the system – via ongoing collection 
from 9-8-8 call, text, and chat providers and other crisis providers that is reported annually 
and (2) annual crisis services data on the involvement of law enforcement, involuntary 
status of clients, and diversion from higher levels of care, including hospitals.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Crisis Response System 
 
The Behavioral Health Crisis Response System must (1) operate a statewide network 
utilizing existing resources and coordinating interjurisdictional services to develop 
efficient and effective crisis response systems to serve all individuals in the State, 24 hours 
a day and 7 days a week; (2) provide skilled clinical intervention to help prevent suicides, 
homicides, unnecessary hospitalizations, and arrests or detention, and to reduce dangerous 
or threatening situations involving individuals in need of behavioral health services; and 
(3) respond quickly and effectively to community crisis situations.  
 
The crisis response system must include:   
 
 
a crisis communication center in each jurisdiction or region to provide (1) a single 
point of entry to the system; (2) coordination with the local core service agency or 
LBHA, police, local mental health hotlines, emergency medical services personnel, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1146/ Page 3 
and behavioral health providers; and (3) programs that may include hotlines, 
walk-in crisis services, critical incident stress management teams, crisis residential 
beds, transportation coordination, and mobile crisis teams, among others;  
 
community awareness promotion and training programs; and  
 
an evaluation of outcomes of services through annual survey by the Behavioral 
Health Administration of consumers and family members and annual data 
collection, as specified.  
 
The data derived from the evaluation of outcomes of services must be (1) collected, 
analyzed, and publicly reported at least annually; (2) disaggregated by race, gender, and 
zip code; and (3) used to formulate policy recommendations.  
 
9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide Hotline 
Designation Act of 2020, MDH designated 9-8-8 as the State’s behavioral health crisis 
hotline on July 16, 2022. The 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential 
support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for people in distress, prevention and crisis 
resources, and best practices for professionals.  
 
Chapters 145 and 146 also established the 9-8-8 Trust Fund to provide reimbursement for 
costs associated with designating and maintaining 9-8-8 as the universal telephone number 
for a national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline and developing and 
implementing a statewide initiative for the coordination and delivery of the continuum of 
behavioral health crisis response services. The fund may also be used for behavioral health 
crisis response services in the State, including (1) crisis call centers; (2) mobile crisis team 
services; (3) crisis stabilization centers; and (4) other acute behavioral health care services.  
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that it already possesses much of the data required 
under the bill; however, the data collection system has not been fully implemented. To that 
end, MDH would need to establish data systems for mobile crisis teams and crisis 
stabilization centers, as well as processes for reviewing and verifying data. To accomplish 
this, MDH advises that it would need one part-time (50%) epidemiologist to oversee data 
collection and reporting systems and analyze data, and one part-time (50%) health policy 
analyst to prepare the reports. Under these assumptions, MDH general fund expenditures 
would increase by $95,995 in fiscal 2026.  
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that report writing 
responsibilities can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. Thus, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $63,092 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s 
July 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) 
epidemiologist to establish data systems for mobile crisis teams and crisis stabilization 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1146/ Page 4 
centers and oversee data collection and reporting. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$55,999 
Operating Expenses 
    7,093 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$63,092 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) 
advises that crisis communication centers are currently integrated and coordinated with 
the 9-8-8 helpline through LBHAs. Additionally, most of the data that would be collected 
under the bill is already collected and reported to the federal Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration (better known as SAMHSA). Thus, there would be 
no fiscal or operational impact on LHDs and LBHAs.  
 
However, MACHO advises that if a separate reporting system were required, LHDs would 
require additional staff support to complete the duplicate reports, incurring an 
indeterminate fiscal impact.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 900 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4