START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1195 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1195 
(Montgomery County Delegation and Prince George's 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission - Membership, Reporting, Billing, 
and Planning (WSSC Planning and Reporting Act of 2025)  
MC/PG 105-25 
 
 
This bill alters the membership and operations of the Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission (WSSC). The bill requires WSSC to submit its long-range comprehensive 
financial plans and updates of commission policies to the Montgomery and 
Prince George’s county councils and publish certain information on its website. By 
June 1, 2026, and every three years thereafter, the WSSC Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG) must undergo an external, independent peer review to assess whether the office’s 
quality control system is effectively designed and operating in compliance with 
government auditing standards. The bill requires OIG to conduct a review of the efficiency 
and sustainability of WSSC operations and report its findings and recommendations to the 
General Assembly by October 1, 2027. By October 1, 2028, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) must review OIG’s report and forward its findings to the 
General Assembly. The bill also requires WSSC to hire a consultant to conduct, in 
consultation with DLS, an independent evaluation of the efficiency and sustainability of 
WSSC. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  WSSC can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
WSSC revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1195/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Membership of the Commission 
 
The bill requires the Director of the Montgomery County Department of Environmental 
Protection, or the director’s designee, to serve as one of the WSSC commissioners 
appointed from Montgomery County. The individual serves as a voting member of the 
commission and may serve as the chair or vice chair. The individual is not required to be a 
registered voter of Montgomery County; does not receive any additional compensation for 
duties performed as a commissioner; and is exempt from the term limits set for other 
commissioners under statute. 
 
Independent Evaluation on Efficiency and Sustainability 
 
The bill requires WSSC to hire a consultant to conduct, in consultation with DLS, an 
independent evaluation of the efficiency and sustainability of WSSC. The evaluation must 
include, among other things, a review of WSSC’s budgetary process, including the annual 
setting of rates through the relevant county councils. By October 1, 2027, the independent 
evaluation must be submitted to WSSC, the county councils, and the General Assembly, 
as specified, no later than October 1, 2027. WSSC must also publish the evaluation on its 
website. 
 
Long-range Comprehensive Financial Plan 
 
By November 1, 2025, WSSC must submit to the Montgomery and Prince George’s county 
councils and the General Assembly a long-range comprehensive financial plan that is 
developed by WSSC in conjunction with an independent financial advisor and any updated 
commission policies related to financial management. 
 
The long-range financial plan must include stress testing based on industry standards and 
test the impact of a wide range of economic conditions that may affect WSSC and its 
financial solvency. 
 
By June 1, 2026, and every five years thereafter, WSSC must submit to the Montgomery 
and Prince George’s county councils and the General Assembly an updated version of the 
long-range financial plan and any updated commission policies relating to financial 
management.  
 
WSSC must also publish its long-range financial plan on its website. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1195/ Page 3 
Ad Valorem Tax Study and Report 
 
The bill requires WSSC to work with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
and other stakeholders to assess the ad valorem taxes necessary to support WSSC debt.  
 
By December 1, 2026, WSSC must report on the assessment to the county councils and 
delegations of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. 
 
Procedural Changes and Customer High Bill Adjustments  
 
By November 1, 2025, WSSC must report to the General Assembly on procedural changes 
that are being developed and finalized to enhance the customer engagement process for 
customers receiving high bills. By November 1, 2026, WSSC must report to the 
General Assembly on the full implementation of these procedural changes. 
 
By November 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, WSSC must report to the Montgomery and 
Prince George’s county councils on the total number of customers in the immediately 
preceding year that reported bills exceeding the limits for high bill adjustments under 
WSSC regulations.  
 
WSSC must publish its procedural changes on its website and include this information in 
customer notification letters. 
 
Review by the Office of the Inspector General  
 
By June 1, 2026, and every three years thereafter, OIG must undergo an external, 
independent peer review to assess whether the office’s quality control system is effectively 
designed and operating in compliance with generally accepted government auditing 
standards. 
 
To the extent practicable, the peer review must include a review of whether the office is 
sufficiently independent of WSSC and an analysis of whether additional reviews and 
reports would help achieve the duties of the office. 
 
OIG must submit the results of the peer review to the delegations and county councils of 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties and WSSC. 
 
Each peer review must be published on the WSSC website. 
 
Additionally, OIG is required to conduct a review of the efficiency and sustainability of 
WSSC operations. The study must include (1) benchmarking with other systems across a 
range of operating cost metrics related to the efficiency and sustainability of WSSC; (2) a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1195/ Page 4 
review of the effectiveness of the WSSC’s capital program and its ability to maintain water 
and sewer distribution pipelines and processing plants that meet asset management 
standards; (3) a study on the commission’s use of its police force; (4) an analysis on the 
impact of WSSC not being a government entity in the context of access to government 
programs that provide customer water assistance or other available funding; and (5) a 
review of WSSC’s approach to coordinating road work with other utilities and government 
agencies. 
 
Additional Website Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill updates the types of information that WSSC is required to report on its website 
and modifies provisions related to the frequency of customer billing and billing 
adjustments. Specifically, the commission is required to publish on its website:   
 
 
any documents relating to a bond rating received from a major credit rating agency; 
 
data related to the WSSC Refund Hearing Board, including (1) the number of cases 
filed; (2) the number of cases closed; (3) the number of cases granted; (4) the 
number of cases denied; (5) the refund amount requested in each case; and (6) the 
refund amount granted in each case;  
 
data related to the WSSC Dispute Resolving Board, including (1) the number of 
cases filed; (2) the number of cases closed; (3) the number of cases granted; (4) the 
number of cases denied; (5) the unpaid amount disputed in each case; and (6) the 
amount of relief granted in each case; and 
 
a copy of any stress testing completed for a long-range comprehensive financial 
plan. 
 
Any data provided may not contain any personally identifiable information. 
 
Other Provisions 
 
The bill establishes that it is the intent of the General Assembly for WSSC to bill its 
customers on a fixed periodic basis, such as monthly or quarterly billing, without the use 
of estimated billing. The bill does not endorse a particular technology or approach to 
implementing the intent of the General Assembly. 
 
The bill establishes that the budget authorization for OIG must be approved independently 
and without the involvement of WSSC staff. 
 
Current Law:  WSSC is among the largest water and wastewater utilities in the country, 
providing water and sewer services to 1.9 million residents in Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. It has more than 475,000 customer accounts, serves an area of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1195/ Page 5 
nearly 1,000 square miles, and has a network of 5,900 miles of drinking water pipeline and 
over 5,600 miles of sewer main lines. 
 
WSSC has six commissioners:  three from Montgomery County; and three from 
Prince George’s County. Each commissioner from Prince George’s County must be a 
resident of the sanitary district, and all commissioners must be a registered voter of the 
county they represent. The commissioners are appointed by their respective county 
executive subject to the confirmation of the county council. In Montgomery County, no 
more than two commissioners may be from the same political party. 
 
The members of the commission receive the following annual salaries:   
 
 
the chair receives $13,500, 
 
the vice-chair receives $13,000, and 
 
a commissioner receives $13,000. 
 
WSSC Office of the Inspector General 
 
The primary responsibility of OIG is to guard against fraud and waste and assure ratepayers 
of WSSC’s financial integrity. OIG operates independently and investigates 
mismanagement, misconduct, fraud, waste, and abuse within WSSC programs and 
operations. OIG conducts audits, investigations, and management reviews of operations 
and programs to ensure that WSSC is operating efficiently and safely. 
 
Billing 
 
WSSC is authorized to bill for water and sewage usage to each property monthly, every 
other month, four times a year, or twice a year, as determined by WSSC. 
 
High Bill Adjustments 
 
Generally, under Chapter 3.20 of WSSC’s Code of Regulations, if a single unit residential 
owner receives a bill with an average daily consumption (ADC) that is at least three times 
the comparable ADC, WSSC must make an adjustment at the customer’s request. A 
comparable ADC is a property’s daily average consumption one year earlier during the 
same or roughly the same period as the bill for which an adjustment is requested. In such 
a case, WSSC waives 50% of the water and sewer use in excess of the property’s 
comparable ADC, or current ADC if the comparable data is unavailable. A customer may 
only receive one high bill adjustment for up to two consecutive billing periods in any 
three-year period. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1195/ Page 6 
A single-unit commercial property account holder, that is not eligible for any other 
adjustments, can also request a one-time high bill adjustment if they receive a bill with an 
ADC that is three times that of the comparable ADC or the current ADC if the comparable 
data is unavailable. In such a case, WSSC waives 25% of the water and sewer use in excess 
of the comparable ADC, or the current ADC if the comparable data is unavailable. A 
customer may receive such an adjustment only once, for up to two consecutive billing 
periods. 
 
WSSC Website 
 
The WSSC is responsible for reporting various information to the public on a searchable 
website it maintains. The website must contain WSSC payment data including the name 
and location of each payee and the amount of the payment. A payee is defined as a person 
that receives from WSSC an aggregate payment of $25,000 in a single fiscal year, not 
including employees or retirees of WSSC. The website must allow the user to search data 
for fiscal 2019 and each fiscal year thereafter for data fields including the name and 
location of the payee. Any information that is required to be kept confidential under federal, 
State, or local law is not to be included. 
 
WSSC Financial Reports 
 
WSSC is required to (1) publish annually in at least one newspaper in Montgomery County 
and one newspaper in Prince George’s County a copy of its current financial statement; 
(2) employ a certified public accountant licensed to practice in the State to audit its books 
and accounts; (3) make available for public inspection during business hours at its principal 
office the annual audit and current financial statement; and (4) file a certified copy of its 
annual audit and current financial statement annually with the county executives and 
county councils of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties, as well as to each county’s 
Senate and House delegations to the Maryland General Assembly. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1195/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7