START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1172 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Authorizations and Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to impose a fee of 
up to $250 for expedited processing of a Class C per diem license application if that 
application is submitted less than two weeks before the scheduled event requiring the  
per diem license. The bill authorizes the board to issue a Class C beer and light wine 
license, a Class C beer and wine license, and a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to 
specified locations in the 40th alcoholic beverages district. The bill also prohibits certain 
license holders within a specified area of the 40th alcoholic beverages district from selling 
alcoholic beverages before 10 a.m. or after 10 p.m. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase beginning in FY 2026 to the extent 
additional licenses are issued or fees are imposed under the bill. Baltimore City 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board is authorized to adopt regulations relating to the Class C  
per diem license application process, including the denial, revocation, and limitation on the 
number of Class C per diem licenses that may be issued to a person for the same location 
within a calendar year. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1172/ Page 2 
The bill authorizes the board to issue a Class C beer and light wine license in the 2500 block 
of West North Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district to be used during on-campus 
events if (1) the applicant executes a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the  
Greater Mondawmin Coordinating Council and (2) the board waives any requirements that 
sales can be made only to members and the guests of members. 
 
The board may issue a Class C beer and wine license on the odd side of the 800 block of 
North Howard Street in the 40th alcoholic beverages district if (1) the applicant does not 
convert the license to a different license class; (2) the applicant does not transfer the license 
to a different location; (3) alcoholic beverages are served only to patrons indoors; 
(4) alcoholic beverages sales begin not earlier than 10:00 a.m. and end not later than 
9:00 p.m.; (5) the applicant provides not more than two 12-ounce offerings of beer or 
two 6-ounce offerings of wine by the glass for on-premises consumption by a patron while 
the patron is provided a barbering service, as specified; (6) the board waives any 
requirements that sales can be made only to members and the guests of members; and 
(7) the applicant executes an MOU with the Mount Vernon – Belvedere Association. 
 
The board may issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license for a restaurant on the even 
side of the unit block of South Carrollton Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district 
if (1) the applicant executes an MOU with the Hollins Roundhouse Association; and (2) the 
board waives the minimum seating requirement of 75 individuals. 
 
The bill also removes the Class M-F (municipal family fun center) license from certain 
restrictions limiting the hours of sale for alcoholic beverages within the 40th alcoholic 
beverages district from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m., as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class C Per Diem Licenses – Generally 
 
The board must set the license fee for a Class C per diem beer license and a Class C 
per diem beer and wine license, and a Class C per diem beer, wine, and liquor license. 
Additionally, the board is authorized to collect from the license holder reimbursement for 
costs incurred while monitoring the event which the license is issued. 
 
A Class C per diem beer license, Class C per diem beer and wine, or Class C per diem beer, 
wine, and liquor license entitles the license holder to exercise any of the privileges 
conferred by the respective class of license (1) for the use of a person holding an 
entertainment event that is conducted by a club; (2) at the place described in the license; 
and (3) for a period not exceeding seven consecutive days. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1172/ Page 3 
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor Licenses— Generally 
 
The board may issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to a restaurant in the 
40th alcoholic beverages district if that restaurant (1) has a minimum capital investment, 
not including the cost of land and buildings, of $200,000 for restaurant facilities and (2) has 
a minimum seating capacity of 75 individuals. 
 
Class M-F (Municipal Family Fun Center) 
 
In Baltimore City, there is a Class M-F (municipal family fun center) license for use at a 
municipal bowling alley and skating rink located in a specified area. The board may issue 
the license to an individual who (1) is authorized by the mayor and city council through a 
management agreement to sell food, beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption, 
as specified; and (2) has executed a memorandum of understanding with the Upton West 
Community Association. The annual license fee is $500. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 939 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3