START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1143 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Collaborative to Improve Children's Oral Health Through School-
Based Programs - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Maryland Collaborative to Improve Children’s Oral Health Through 
School-Based Programs to be staffed by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). 
Members of the collaborative may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. The collaborative must submit to the Governor and the 
General Assembly (1) an interim report of its findings and recommendations by 
December 1, 2025, and (2) a final report by October 1, 2026. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $38,000 in FY 2026 and 
$16,700 in FY 2027 to staff the collaborative and develop the required report. Travel and 
expense reimbursement for the collaborative is assumed to be minimal and absorbable with 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
38,000 
16,700 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($38,000) 
($16,700) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1143/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The collaborative must study and make recommendations to improve the 
oral health of children in the State through school-based programs by analyzing the impact 
of (1) supporting schools and community dental partners in linking families and children 
to permanent dental facilities; (2) increasing the number of dental hygienists providing 
school-based services through policy initiatives; (3) authorizing school nurses to provide 
fluoride varnishes among other clinically appropriate services by modifying school health 
guidelines and providing reimbursement through Medicaid; (4) expanding the capacity of 
school-based health centers (SBHCs) to provide dental services; (5) clarifying the law 
governing the practice of dental hygienists in school settings to reduce confusion among 
practitioners and school-based programs; and (6) other innovative models for providing 
dental services to children in schools. 
 
The collaborative may consult with any other individual or organization with expertise in 
school-based dental programs. 
 
Current Law:  Under the Health Occupations Article, an individual must obtain a license 
from the State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) to practice dentistry or dental hygiene. 
BDE is mandated to protect the public by regulating the practice of dentistry and dental 
hygiene in Maryland. BDE issues licenses, adopts standards of practice, investigates 
complaints based on alleged violations of regulations and statutes, and disciplines 
licensees. 
 
Dental Hygiene 
 
To qualify for a license to practice dental hygiene, an individual must be of good moral 
character, pass a specified examination given by BDE, and graduate from a school for 
dental hygienists that (1) requires at least two years of education in an institution of 
higher education; (2) is accredited by the American Dental Association Commission on 
Dental Accreditation; and (3) is approved by BDE. 
 
In general, a dental hygienist is licensed to practice dental hygiene (1) under the supervision 
of a licensed dentist who is on the premises and available for personal consultation while 
the services are being performed or not on the premises under specified circumstances and 
(2) only in a dental office or clinic, hospital, school, charitable institution, or certified 
health maintenance organization. 
 
A licensed dental hygienist is authorized to perform a preliminary dental exam; perform a 
complete prophylaxis, including the removal of any deposit, accretion, or stain from the 
tooth surface or restoration; polish a tooth or restoration; chart cavities, restorations, 
missing teeth, periodontal conditions, and other features observed; apply a medicinal agent 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1143/ Page 3 
to a tooth for a prophylactic purpose; take a dental X-ray; or perform any other intraoral 
function authorized by the board. A dental hygienist who complies with specified 
requirements may prescribe (1) topical and systemic types of prescription or 
over-the-counter fluoride preparations; (2) topical antimicrobial oral rinses; and 
(3) ibuprofen not exceeding 600 mg every six hours for up to three days after nonsurgical 
periodontal therapy. 
 
School-based Health Centers  
 
SBHCs are health centers located in a school or on a school campus that provide on-site 
comprehensive preventive and primary health services. Services may also include 
behavioral health, oral health, ancillary, and supportive services. Chapters 605 and 606 of 
2021 require the Governor to transfer administration of SBHC grants and any related 
functions from the Maryland State Department of Education to the Bureau of Maternal and 
Child Health within MDH by July 1, 2022. According to MDH’s fiscal 2023 School-based 
Health Centers Report, for the 2022-2023 school year, there were 96 SBHCs operating 
across 17 local jurisdictions. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $38,019 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date. 
 
MDH has determined that the equivalent of two regular full-time health policy analysts are 
needed to implement the bill as existing resources are insufficient to staff the collaborative, 
conduct any needed research, and complete the required report. However, the Department 
of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that the added responsibilities incurred by this 
legislation are not permanent and, thus, may be performed by contractual employees. 
DLS further advises that, given the large membership of the collaborative, the 
two-year timeframe to generate a report of findings and recommendations, and existing 
budgeted resources at MDH, one part-time (50%) contractual position is likely sufficient 
to staff the collaborative and generate a report. 
 
Thus, this estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) health policy analyst to 
manage the collaborative and assist in the generation of a final report. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$31,064 
Operating Expenses 
    6,955 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$38,019 
 
The contractual position terminates December 31, 2026, three months after the deadline 
for the collaborative’s final report, to wind down the collaborative as necessary. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1143/ Page 4 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 988 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4