START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1124 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1124 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Dorchester County - Well and On-Site Sewage Disposal Activities - Privatization 
Program 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), at the request of 
the Dorchester County government and the delegated approval authority, to establish a 
privatization program for the performance of any activities associated with MDE-delegated 
authority relating to a well or on-site sewage disposal system (a septic system) in 
Dorchester County. The bill establishes related duties for MDE and authorizes MDE to 
suspend or halt the privatization program under certain circumstances. The bill also 
establishes eligibility standards for program participants and related responsibilities for the 
delegated approval authority. MDE may adopt implementing regulations. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming MDE receives a request for and establishes a privatization 
program, general fund expenditures increase by $96,000 in FY 2026 for contractual staff; 
out-years reflect inflation, ongoing costs, and the termination of contractual staff at the end 
of FY 2028. State revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
96,000 
84,500 
88,200 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($96,000) 
($84,500) 
($88,200) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Dorchester County Health Department operations and finances may be 
affected, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on some small 
businesses, as discussed below.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1124/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  At the request of the Dorchester County government and the delegated 
approval authority, MDE may establish a privatization program for the performance of any 
activities associated with the delegation of well or septic system authority by MDE. If MDE 
establishes such a privatization program, MDE must specify (1) whether the program is 
ongoing or of limited duration and (2) the activities associated with a well or septic system 
delegation of authority covered under the program. MDE must also (1) establish reporting 
and performance monitoring requirements, as determined appropriate; (2) conduct 
mandatory compliance audits on at least an annual basis; (3) consider reasonable consumer 
protection requirements, including fee caps and dispute resolution mechanisms; (4) require 
participants to carry appropriate insurance and provide financial assurances, as specified; 
(5) ensure that the privatization program complies with applicable procurement laws; 
(6) establish appropriate ethics policies, as specified; and (7) require participants to transfer 
related records to the delegated approval authority, at which time the records are considered 
public records subject to the Public Information Act.  
 
MDE may halt or suspend the privatization program if MDE determines that the program 
(1) is failing to comply with any requirement established pursuant to the bill; (2) is failing 
to meet reporting or performance monitoring requirements established pursuant to the bill; 
or (3) poses a risk to public health or the environment.  
 
In order to be eligible to participate in the program, a person must (1) be a State-licensed 
environmental health specialist; (2) have demonstrated satisfactory experience in the 
activities associated with the delegated authority covered under the program; and (3) meet 
any other requirements established by MDE or requested by the delegated approval 
authority to ensure the quality of the work performed under the privatization program.  
 
The delegated approval authority must review and approve or disapprove any work 
performed by a person under a privatization program, consistent with the delegation of 
authority by MDE. In addition, a delegated approval authority seeking to establish a 
privatization program under the bill must work with MDE and the Dorchester County 
government to implement the program.  
 
Current Law:  In Dorchester County, the local approving authority with respect to well 
and septic system activities delegated by MDE is the county’s health department. 
 
Septic Systems Permitting 
 
MDE delegates the authority to issue permits to construct and repair conventional 
septic systems to local approving authorities. Pursuant to current regulations, a person may 
not construct or attempt to construct a septic system without first obtaining a permit from 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1124/ Page 3 
the appropriate approving authority. A person also may not alter a septic system or cause 
it to receive any increase in flow or change in the character of wastewater unless permitted. 
A person must obtain an appropriate septic system permit, well construction permit, public 
or private water supply system permit, or public or private sewerage permit before 
constructing or altering any structure, residence, floating home, or commercial 
establishment that is served or planned to be served by a septic system or a private water 
supply system. Local approving authorities, which are generally local health departments 
(LHDs), conduct inspections.  
 
Water Well Construction Permitting 
 
MDE’s water well construction program regulates the permitting and installation of water 
wells in the State, including for potable and nonpotable supply wells. Wells must be 
installed by a Maryland-licensed well driller, and the licensed well driller must obtain a 
well construction permit prior to drilling. MDE delegates authority to enforce the State’s 
water well construction regulations to LHDs and other local approving authorities. 
Licensed well drillers apply to the local approving authority to obtain a well construction 
permit prior to drilling. After obtaining a permit to drill, the well driller must also submit 
a completion report to the approving authority. If the well is to be used as a potable water 
supply, a Certificate of Potability is required before the well is put into service. 
 
Study and Report Related to Well and Septic Systems Permitting 
 
Chapter 577 of 2023 required MDE, in consultation with the Department of Legislative 
Services and the University of Maryland Agriculture and Food Systems Extension 
Program, to study the implications of the delegation of MDE’s well and septic systems 
permitting authority to the Maryland Department of Health. MDE was required to submit 
an interim report of its findings and any recommendations for legislative or administrative 
changes to the Governor and the General Assembly. The final report can be found here. 
 
Privatization Program for Soil Percolation Tests  
 
MDE is authorized to establish a privation program for performing soil percolation tests in 
one or more counties in the State. Qualified program participants must be a State-licensed 
sanitarian or a qualified professional, as specified, have demonstrated experience in 
working with septic systems, and meet any other requirements established by the LHD to 
ensure the quality of testing performed under the program. The LHD seeking to establish 
a privatization program must work with MDE to implement the program.  
 
State Expenditures:  Assuming MDE receives a request for and establishes a privatization 
program in Dorchester County, as authorized by the bill, general fund expenditures 
increase by $96,043 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1124/ Page 4 
This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual sanitarian to (1) develop and 
implement the privatization program in Dorchester County, including promulgating 
regulations, establishing appropriate ethics policies, and ensuring the program complies 
with applicable procurement laws; (2) conduct audits; (3) monitor private entities’ 
compliance; (4) handle any complaints, disputes, and enforcement; and (5) process any 
necessary documentation, maintain records, and track compliance. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$88,398 
Operating Expenses 
    7,645 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$96,043 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a salary with annual increases and employee turnover; 
(2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) termination of the contractual 
employee at the end of fiscal 2028, when the bill terminates.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Expenditures:  To the extent a privatization program is established in 
Dorchester County, county health department operations are affected, but county 
expenditures are likely not materially affected, as discussed below.  
 
According to the Dorchester County Planning and Zoning Department, due in large part to 
staffing constraints at the county health department, there have been significant delays in 
well and septic system activities that are delegated by MDE. MDE advises that establishing 
a privatization program provides an opportunity for the county to duplicate a service 
currently provided by the county health department. By allowing for privatization, MDE 
notes that the county can anticipate streamlining in the permitting and inspection processes, 
thus reducing delays and improving service delivery for residents and businesses. 
 
Because the bill still requires the delegated approval authority (i.e., the county health 
department) to review and approve or disapprove any work performed by a person under a 
privatization program (consistent with the delegation of authority by MDE), the health 
department is still involved – at least to some extent – in delegated well and septic activities 
conducted under the privatization program. Thus, the extent to which the establishment of 
a privatization program results in efficiencies and related workload reductions for the 
county is somewhat unclear. Ultimately, the overall effect on the workload of the county 
health department depends on the specifics of the privatization program established, which 
cannot be determined in advance. Even so, to the extent the establishment of a privatization 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1124/ Page 5 
program results in a decrease in workload for the county health department, it is assumed 
that this merely allows existing staff to redirect their time and does not necessarily result 
in any decrease in staffing levels or associated expenditures.  
 
Local Revenues:  The Dorchester County Health Department charges fees for septic and 
well services, which can be found here (along with other fees that do not relate to the bill). 
Any effect on the county health department’s fee revenues depends on the specifics of the 
privatization program and cannot be predicted in advance. The county health department 
advises, however, that it assumes that it continues to collect some fees even under a 
privatization program since, as the delegated approval authority, the county health 
department is still responsible for reviewing and approving or disapproving any work 
performed under the privatization program (consistent with the delegation of authority by 
MDE). As a result, the overall effect on fee revenues collected by the county health 
department cannot be determined at this time. 
 
Small Business Effect:  If a privatization program is established in Dorchester County, the 
bill may create meaningful opportunities for small businesses to perform delegated 
activities associated with well and septic systems (such as permitting and inspections) in 
the county.  
 
Other small businesses may benefit to the extent well and septic system services (such as 
inspections) are expedited under a privatized program in the county. As noted above, the 
Dorchester County Planning and Zoning Department advises that there have been 
significant delays in well and septic system services, which have led to delays in permitting 
for other projects that hinge on those services (for example, building permits that require a 
well or septic system inspection).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 964 (Dorchester County Senators) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Dorchester County; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1124/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6