START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1142 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1142 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group - Establishment 
 
 
This bill generally codifies the federally required Maryland Interested Parties Advisory 
Group (IPAG) in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The primary purpose of 
IPAG is to advise and consult on Medicaid payment rate sufficiency, ensuring adequate 
access to “applicable service” categories (homemaker, home health aide, personal care, and 
habilitation services). IPAG must (1) evaluate the sufficiency of Medicaid payment rates 
for applicable service categories and (2) evaluate challenges to accessing care for 
applicable Medicaid home- and community-based services (HCBS). The Deputy Secretary 
of Health Care Financing (or their designee) must appoint the initial members of IPAG by 
October 1, 2025. Beginning November 1, 2025, IPAG must meet annually, and IPAG must 
report by September 1 each year (starting in 2026) on its activities and recommendations 
to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill generally codifies IPAG as required by federal rule, there is no 
fiscal impact on MDH as a result of the bill. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Advisory Group – Input and Membership 
 
IPAG may hold opportunities to solicit and collect testimony from the public and invite 
input from employer organizations, worker organizations, consumer advocacy groups, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1142/ Page 2 
other stakeholders in the direct care industry. An employer or State agency may not take 
retaliatory action against a direct care worker or consumer for participation in IPAG. 
 
IPAG comprises (1) the Deputy Secretary of Health Care Financing (or their designee), 
who must serve as chair; (2) the Secretary of Labor (or their designee); and (3) the 
following members appointed by the Deputy Secretary (or their designee):  
three consumers, two representatives of consumer organizations, three direct care workers, 
two representatives of worker organizations, and three representatives of provider 
associations (two from a residential service agency and one from an employer trade 
association). 
 
The Deputy Secretary of Health Care Financing (or their designee) must establish an 
application process that is accessible to the general public for the recruitment of members. 
The application and selection criteria must be published on the MDH website. A member 
of IPAG may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
 
Duties of the Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH must establish standardized procedures for the administration of IPAG and make the 
procedures available to the public on a dedicated page of the MDH website, which must 
include specified information. MDH must provide sufficient data and resources at least 
30 days in advance of an IPAG meeting to support informed participation, including: 
 
 
current and proposed payment rates; 
 
federally required information, as specified; 
 
Bureau of Labor Statistics publicly available wage data and other labor market and 
workforce data; 
 
benchmarking and rate studies for HCBS conducted by MDH; 
 
rate information from neighboring or similarly situated states; and 
 
access-to-care metrics, as specified. 
 
MDH post IPAG’s annual report on the MDH website within 30 days after the report has 
been finalized. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Ensuring Access to Medicaid Services Final Rule 
 
On May 10, 2024, the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services published the 
Ensuring Access to Medicaid Services Final Rule, 89 FR 40542 (2024 Access Final Rule). 
The rule requires states to establish an IPAG to advise and consult on provider 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1142/ Page 3 
fee-for-service rates where payments are made to direct care workers providing 
self-directed and agency-directed personal care, home health aide, and homemaker 
services. IPAG must also advise and consult with the Medicaid agency on current and 
proposed payment rates, HCBS payment adequacy data, and access-to-care metrics to 
ensure the relevant Medicaid payment rates are sufficient to ensure access to homemaker 
services, home health aide services, personal care, and habilitation services for Medicaid 
beneficiaries at least as great as available to the general population in the geographic area 
and to ensure an adequate number of qualified direct care workers to provide self-directed 
personal assistance services. 
 
IPAG must include, at a minimum, direct care workers, beneficiaries and their authorized 
representatives, and other interested parties. IPAG must meet at least every two years. The 
state Medicaid agency must ensure the group has access to current and proposed payment 
rates, HCBS provider payment adequacy minimum performance and reporting standards, 
and applicable access-to-care metrics for HCBS to produce these recommendations. These 
materials must be made available with sufficient time for IPAG to consider them, formulate 
recommendations, and transmit those recommendations to the state. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, establishment of IPAG is required under 
federal rule. Thus, expenditures related to IPAG, as outlined in the federal rule, are not 
attributable to this legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 920 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3