START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1111 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1111 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities - Solar Energy Generating Systems - Systems Located on or Over 
Water Retention Ponds, Quarries, or Brownfields 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility under the Small Solar Energy Generating System Incentive 
Program to include specified solar energy generating systems located on or over a water 
retention pond or quarry currently or previously designated for industrial use. The systems 
must have generating capacities between 20 kilowatts and 5 megawatts and otherwise meet 
all other program eligibility requirements. The bill also authorizes local governments to 
grant a property tax credit for nonresidential solar energy generating systems constructed 
on a brownfield or a water retention pond or quarry currently or previously designated for 
industrial use. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Public Service Commission (PSC), State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation (SDAT), and the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) can 
handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent the property tax credit is granted. Local finances and operations are not otherwise 
materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1111/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local governments are authorized to grant a (real and personal) property 
tax credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on a nonresidential solar 
energy generating system constructed on a brownfield or a water retention pond or quarry 
currently or previously designated for industrial use. Local governments may provide for 
(1) the amount and duration of the property tax credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria for 
the property tax credit; and (3) any other provision necessary to carry out the property tax 
credit. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Small Solar Energy Generating System Incentive Program 
 
The Brighter Tomorrow Act of 2024 (Chapter 595) requires PSC to establish a Small Solar 
Energy Generating System Incentive Program and begin determining eligibility by 
January 1, 2025. Under the program, a solar energy generating system that meets specified 
requirements and is certified by PSC generates certified solar renewable energy credits 
(SRECs), which have a compliance value of 150%, for electricity suppliers to put toward 
meeting the solar carve-out for the State Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS). The 
total amount of in-state generating capacity for certified systems under the program may 
not exceed (1) 300 megawatts for systems with a generating capacity of less than 
20 kilowatts and (2) 270 megawatts for systems with a generating capacity between 
20 kilowatts and 5 megawatts. 
 
To be eligible for certification, a solar energy generating system must: 
 
 
be located in the State; 
 
be eligible for inclusion in meeting the State RPS; 
 
have a generating capacity of no more than 5 megawatts; 
 
be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and January 1, 2028, inclusive; and 
 
be a system with a generating capacity of (1) no more than 20 kilowatts; (2) no more 
than 2 megawatts, if the system is used for aggregate net metering; or (3) between 
20 kilowatts and 5 megawatts, if the system is located on a rooftop, a parking 
canopy, or a brownfield. 
 
The Act specifies the process for the owner of a solar energy generating system to apply to 
PSC for certification under the program. At the time of certification, the owner must pay 
PSC a one-time per-system fee of up to $50, or up to $200, depending on the system size. 
PSC must use the fees to pay for costs associated with administering the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1111/ Page 3 
A certified system must continue to be eligible to generate certified SRECs for 15 years 
after the date of certification by PSC, or January 1, 2025, whichever is later, after which 
the system is eligible to generate noncertified SRECs as long as the system meets the 
requirements as a Tier 1 renewable resource. An electricity supplier may apply certified 
SRECs toward RPS compliance starting with the 2025 compliance year. 
 
Other Solar Incentives 
 
State law establishes multiple incentives for solar energy generating systems of 
different types, sizes, and locations. For an overview of notable incentives, see the 
Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems. 
 
Brownfields 
 
Under § 7-207 of the Public Utilities Article, “brownfields site” means (1) a former 
industrial or commercial site identified by federal or State laws or regulation as 
contaminated or polluted; (2) a closed landfill regulated by MDE; or (3) mined land. 
 
Approvals Generally Required for Projects in Wetlands 
 
Wetlands in the State are protected, and the Wetlands and Waterways Program within the 
MDE administers a statewide program for the management, conservation, and protection 
of Maryland’s tidal wetlands and nontidal wetlands and waterways. Generally, a person 
must obtain a permit or license before working in wetlands in the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC, SDAT, and MDE can handle the bill’s requirements with 
existing budgeted resources. Allowing additional solar energy generating systems to be 
eligible to generate certified SRECs has no material effect on State finances. For context, 
PSC has not received a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity application for a 
floating solar energy generating system. MDE advises that the approval process for floating 
solar energy generating systems on water retention ponds or quarries would have minor 
operational impacts on its Water and Science Administration, which can be handled with 
existing staff. Such systems may be allowable in nontidal areas on a case-by-case basis, 
subject to various review considerations. Any resulting fiscal effect is likely minimal. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 to 
the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue decrease depends 
on the number of nonresidential solar energy generating systems constructed on eligible 
brownfields, retention ponds, or quarries, the assessed value of each, local property tax 
rates, and the amount and duration of the property tax credit. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1111/ Page 4 
For context, the 2024 Maryland Landfill Solar Assessment, conducted by the 
Maryland Energy Administration in partnership with the Maryland Environmental Service, 
identifies 45 landfills (27 closed), 4 brownfields, 5 rubble fills, and 2 superfund sites, as 
those terms are used in the report, as suitable for solar development and recommends a 
total of 7 sites as most suitable. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Energy Administration; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1111/ Page 5 
Appendix – Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
 
State law establishes multiple incentives for solar energy generating systems of different 
types, sizes, and locations. The following is an overview of notable State incentives, which 
may be combined, depending on the specifics of a particular solar energy generating 
system.  
 
Production Incentives 
 
 
Net Metering 
 
Under § 7-306 of the Public Utilities Article, the Public Service Commission (PSC) must 
require electric companies to develop and make net metering tariffs available to eligible 
customer-generators. Net metering is the measurement of the difference between the 
electricity that is supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by 
the customer and fed back to the grid over the customer’s billing period. Under net 
metering, the customer pays only for energy used, netted against energy generated, plus 
the fixed monthly customer charge. In the event that more energy is generated than used, 
the electric company must pay the customer the value of the difference, subject to specified 
requirements. Generally, net excess generation payments are made annually, although 
certain customers may instead choose to accrue net excess generation indefinitely.  
 
Generally, the generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may 
be up to 2 megawatts, although there are exceptions allowing for larger capacities, 
including for community solar. Community solar systems are those that meet specified 
requirements, have multiple subscribers, and engage in virtual net metering.  
 
There are multiple eligible energy sources for net metering, although most of the installed 
capacity is solar. The statewide capacity limit is 3,000 megawatts.  
 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Under Title 7, Subtitle 7 of the Public Utilities Article, which establishes the State 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS), utilities and other competitive energy 
suppliers must submit renewable energy credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail 
electricity sales specified in statute each year or else pay an alternative compliance payment 
(ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. Generally, an REC is a tradable commodity equal to 
one megawatt-hour of electricity generated or obtained from a renewable energy 
generation source. In program compliance year 2025, RPS percentage requirements 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1111/ Page 6 
include 7.0% from solar, which must be connected to the electric distribution grid serving 
Maryland.  
 
Under § 7-709.1 of the Public Utilities Article, PSC must establish a Small Solar Energy 
Generating System Incentive Program and begin determining eligibility by 
January 1, 2025. Under the program, a solar energy generating system that meets specified 
requirements and is certified by PSC generates certified solar RECs, which have an RPS 
compliance value of 150%, for 15 years. In addition to other requirements, an eligible 
system must be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and January 1, 2028, inclusive.  
 
Grant and Loan Incentives 
Under § 9-20B-05 of the State Government Article, the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) must administer the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF). Among other 
revenue sources, SEIF receives funds from the sale of carbon dioxide emissions allowances 
under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) and ACP revenues through the State 
RPS. RGGI-sourced funding is allocated through a statutory formula that provides 
significant annual funding for clean energy programs and initiatives, in addition to other 
purposes. In practice, MEA offers a variety of residential and commercial grants and 
rebates for different types of solar installations. Solar ACP revenues must be used make 
grants and loans to support the creation of new solar energy sources in the State that are 
owned by or directly benefit low- to-moderate income communities, overburdened or 
underserved communities, or households with low- to-moderate income.  
 
Tax Incentives 
 
 
Solar Energy Property Generally Not Subject to State or Local Real Property Tax 
 
Under § 7-242 of the Tax-Property Article, solar energy property is generally not subject 
to State or local real property tax. “Solar energy property” means equipment that is installed 
to use solar energy or solar thermal electric energy to generate electricity to be used in a 
structure or supplied to the electric grid or provide hot water for use in a structure.  
 
Specified Nonresidential Solar Systems Exempt from Valuation or State or Local 
Property Taxes 
 
Under § 7-249 of the Tax-Property Article, specified nonresidential solar energy generating 
systems that are constructed on the rooftops of buildings or on parking facility canopies 
are not subject to valuation or to State or local property taxes. The exemption applies only 
to a system approved by PSC for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
(CPCN) or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1111/ Page 7 
 
Community Solar Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
Under § 7-237 of the Tax-Property Article, a community solar energy generating system 
with up to 5 megawatts of capacity that meets specified requirements is exempt from the 
county and municipal personal property tax through the life cycle of the system. To be 
eligible, a system must (1) be placed in service after June 30, 2022, and be approved by 
PSC by December 31, 2030; (2) provide at least 50% of the energy produced to low- to 
moderate-income customers at reduced prices, as specified; and (3) be used for agrivoltaics 
or be installed on a rooftop, brownfield, parking facility canopy, landfill, or clean fill.  
 
 
Community Solar Real Property Tax Credit 
 
Under § 9-111 of the Tax-Property Article, the State and local governments must grant a 
50% property tax credit for a brownfield, landfill, or clean fill on which a specified 
community solar energy generating system is installed. 
 
 
Optional Local Property Tax Credit for Solar Energy Devices 
 
Under § 9-203 of the Tax-Property Article, counties and municipalities are authorized to 
grant tax credits against county or municipal property taxes for the use of a solar energy, 
geothermal energy, or qualifying energy conservation device in a structure for the purposes 
of heating and cooling, electricity generation, or the provision of hot water. Local 
governments may establish related definitions in determining eligibility for the credit. 
 
 
Optional Local Real Property Assessment Reduction for Certain Parking Canopies 
 
Under § 7-250 of the Tax-Property Article, the governing body of a county or municipality 
may reduce or eliminate, by law, the percentage of the assessment of any real property that 
is subject to the county or municipal property tax if the real property includes a parking 
facility on which a solar energy generating system has been constructed on its canopy. 
These provisions apply only to real property that includes a parking facility on which a 
system has been approved by PSC for a CPCN or CPCN exemption on or after July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemptions 
 
Under § 11-230 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of solar energy equipment, which is defined as equipment that uses solar energy to heat or 
cool a structure, generate electricity to be used in a structure or supplied to the electric grid, 
or provide hot water for use in a structure. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1111/ Page 8 
Under § 11-207 of the Tax-General Article, the sales and use tax does not apply to the sale 
of electricity generated by solar energy equipment for use in residential property owned by 
an eligible customer-generator under the State’s net metering law. 
 

END OF PAGE 8