START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1108 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1108 
(Allegany County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Allegany County - Alcoholic Beverages - Minimum Age for Employment of 
Underage Individuals 
 
 
This bill increases, from 16 to 18 years, the minimum age an alcoholic beverages licensee 
in Allegany County may employ an individual if the licensee does not derive more than 
half of its revenues from the sale of food. A licensee that derives more than half of their 
revenues from the sale of food may employ an individual between the ages of 16 and 
21 years, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:   None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Allegany County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An alcoholic beverages licensee in Allegany County may employ an 
individual between the ages of 16 and 21 years. To be allowed to sell or serve beer, light 
wine, and liquor, an individual must be at least 18 years old. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1108/ Page 2 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2