START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1125 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1125 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring - Report Alterations and Data 
Collection 
 
 
This bill expands the requirements for the Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring to 
include studying and making recommendations regarding (1) the policies and practices that 
apply when a person violates a condition of home detention monitoring, such as absconding 
from monitoring, and (2) the responses of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS) and home detention monitoring agencies when a person violates a 
condition of home detention monitoring. The bill also requires DPSCS to annually collect 
and report to the workgroup related data for the prior fiscal year. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DPSCS can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By September 1 each year, DPSCS must collect and report to the 
workgroup the following data for the prior fiscal year:   
 
 
the number of people placed on home detention monitoring, disaggregated by race, 
gender, jurisdiction, and company or agency providing the home detention 
monitoring service;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1125/ Page 2 
 
the number of times a person on home detention monitoring violated a condition of 
home detention monitoring, disaggregated by race, gender, jurisdiction, nature of 
the violation, and company or agency providing the home detention monitoring 
service;  
 
the number of times that a violation of a condition of home detention monitoring 
was reported to law enforcement; and  
 
the number of times that a violation of a condition of home detention monitoring 
was reported to a judge.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 597 of 2021 established the Workgroup on Home Detention 
Monitoring to study and make recommendations regarding the costs and availability of 
both publicly and privately provided pretrial home detention monitoring systems. 
Chapter 544 of 2022 extended the termination date of the workgroup from June 30, 2022, 
to December 31, 2023, and required the workgroup to submit an annual report by 
December 31 each year. The workgroup was not fully appointed and never met.  
 
Chapter 763 of 2024 reestablished the Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring to study 
and make recommendations regarding the costs and availability of both publicly and 
privately provided pretrial home detention monitoring systems. By December 31 each year, 
the workgroup must submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the 
General Assembly. The workgroup terminates June 30, 2027.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2