START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1131 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1131 
(Delegates Vogel and Tomlinson) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Buprenorphine - Training Grant Program and Workgroup 
 
 
This bill establishes the Buprenorphine Training Grant Program in the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) to assist a county with offsetting the cost of training 
paramedics to administer buprenorphine. A county may apply to MDH for a grant from the 
program, which may only be used to train paramedics to administer buprenorphine. The 
Governor must include an appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $50,000 from 
the Opioid Restitution Fund (ORF) for the program. The authorized purposes of ORF are 
expanded to include the program. The Maryland Office of Overdose Response (MOOR) 
must establish a workgroup to study access to buprenorphine in the State and report to 
specified committees of the General Assembly by December 31, 2025. The bill’s 
provisions relating to the workgroup take effect July 1, 2025, and terminate 
June 30, 2026; provisions establishing the grant program, including the mandated 
appropriation, take effect October 1, 2025, and terminate September 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH special fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2027 through 
2031 due to the mandated appropriation. In the absence of the bill, ORF monies could be 
used for other currently authorized and discretionary purposes. Accordingly, there is no net 
impact on total ORF spending reflected below. MOOR general fund expenditures increase 
by $56,100 in FY 2026 only for contractual personnel to staff the workgroup. Revenues 
are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2027 through 
2031. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
56,100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($56,100) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1131/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  To the extent that local health departments (LHDs) and counties apply for 
and receive grants for buprenorphine training, local revenues and expenditures may 
increase beginning in FY 2027. Local behavioral health agencies (LBHAs) that participate 
in the workgroup may incur indeterminate expenditures, as described below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must include (1) one member of the Senate, appointed by 
the President of the Senate; (2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the 
Speaker; and (3) representatives of the Maryland Institute of Emergency Medical Services 
Systems, the Behavioral Health Administration, hospitals, LBHAs, and the 
Maryland Association of Counties. 
 
The workgroup must examine (1) how buprenorphine services are offered in the State; 
(2) the capacity of providers to provide buprenorphine; (3) any geographic areas where 
significant gaps in buprenorphine services may exist; (4) the feasibility of financial support 
for a long-term expansion of buprenorphine services; (5) a plan for ongoing data collection 
for the purpose of the monitoring and improvement of buprenorphine services; (6) how to 
effectively grow a hub-and-spoke model to ensure access to buprenorphine in the State; 
and (7) any other strategies that would improve buprenorphine services in the State. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Buprenorphine 
 
Buprenorphine, methadone, and naltrexone are used in medication-assisted treatment to 
help people reduce or quit their use of heroin or other opiates. Buprenorphine is used to 
treat opioid use disorders (OUDs) and may be prescribed or dispensed in physician’s 
offices. 
 
Authorized Uses of the Opioid Restitution Fund 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 established ORF, a special fund to retain any revenues received by 
the State relating to specified opioid judgments or settlements, which may be used only for 
opioid-related programs and services. Chapter 270 of 2022 specifies that ORF may be used 
for programs, services, supports, and resources for evidence-based substance use disorder 
(SUD) prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction that have the purpose of 
currently authorized outcomes and activities. ORF may also be used for:   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1131/ Page 3 
 
supporting community-based nonprofit recovery organizations that provide 
nonclinical substance abuse recovery support services in the State; 
 
evidence-informed SUD prevention, treatment recovery, or harm reduction pilot 
programs or demonstration studies that are not evidence based if the advisory 
council determines that emerging evidence supports funding or that there is a 
reasonable basis for funding with the expectation of creating an evidence-based 
program and approves the use of money for the pilot program or demonstration 
study; and 
 
evaluations of the effectiveness and outcomes reporting for SUD abatement 
infrastructure, programs, services, supports, and resources for which the fund is 
used. 
 
For more information about ORF and OUDs in the State, please see Appendix – Opioid 
Crisis. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Use of Opioid Restitution Fund for the Grant Program 
 
As the bill requires that ORF monies (as appropriated through the State budget) be used 
for the grant program, MDH ORF special fund expenditures increase by $50,000 beginning 
in fiscal 2027 as a result of the mandated appropriation. To the extent discretionary funding 
is provided, MDH special fund expenditures could also increase by $50,000 in fiscal 2026. 
 
As the program and associated mandated appropriation terminate September 30, 2030, 
funding is assumed to be provided through fiscal 2031 (which begins July 1, 2030), with 
grants made in the first quarter of that year. 
 
MOOR advises that ORF has sufficient funds to cover the annual appropriation. However, 
ORF spending for other purposes authorized under State law decreases by an equivalent 
amount each year, assuming available funding is fully subscribed. As of November 2024, 
the balance in ORF was $90.0 million. Accordingly, there may be no net effect on total 
ORF spending. 
 
Workgroup 
 
MOOR advises that the workgroup necessitates additional staff given the six-month 
timeframe from the workgroup’s establishment until the report is due. Thus, MOOR 
general fund expenditures increase by $56,066 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s 
July 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual health 
policy analyst to staff the workgroup and prepare the required report. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1131/ Page 4 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$48,874 
Operating Expenses 
   7,192 
Total FY 2026 General Fund Expenditures 
$56,066 
 
Future year expenditures reflect termination of the position on January 31, 2026, one month 
after submission of the workgroup’s required report. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers advises that 
applications for grants could be completed with existing resources and could result in 
increased revenue for LHDs and LBHAs. Additionally, to the extent that ORF monies that 
would otherwise go to local governments and/or LHDs for other purposes are instead used 
for the grant program, local governments and LHDs may be impacted. 
 
Under the bill, representatives of LBHAs are required to participate in the workgroup. 
Participation may result in indeterminate operational and fiscal effects in fiscal 2026 
depending on the number of LBHA representatives required to participate and their 
municipality of origin.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Baltimore and 
Charles counties; Maryland’s Office of Overdose Response; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1131/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1131/ Page 6 
Appendix – Opioid Crisis 
 
 
Opioid Overdose Deaths 
 
Between April 2015 and April 2024, 22,286 individuals died from overdose in Maryland. 
Approximately 89% of the deaths involved opioids, and 73% involved synthetic opioids 
excluding methadone (primarily fentanyl). During the same period, 801,436 individuals 
died from overdoses nationally, with 71.5% of those fatalities involving opioids. 
Since 2021, there has been a gradual decrease in overdose deaths both in Maryland and 
nationally. 
 
According to preliminary data covering April 2023 through April 2024, overdose deaths 
have decreased in both the United States and Maryland by approximately 1.9% and 2.4%, 
respectively. However, overdose fatalities remain high. Exhibit 1 shows the number of 
overdose fatalities recorded in a 12-month period (April to April) in Maryland and the 
United States from 2015 to 2024. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Overdose Fatalities in Maryland and the United States 
April 2015 to April 2024 
 
 
 
U.S.:  United States 
 
Note:  Data for 2022-2024 is preliminary. 
 
Source:  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Department of Legislative Services 
  
 
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
U.S. Overdose Fatalieies
Maryland Overdose Fatalities
Maryland Total
Maryland Opioid-related
U.S. Total
U.S. Opioid-related

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1131/ Page 7 
In Maryland, disparities in overdose fatalities persist across race, age, gender, and 
jurisdiction. Statewide, Black men, particularly those aged 55 and older, have the 
highest overdose fatality rate, which is nearly double that of white men, the group with the 
second highest overdose fatality rate. Across race groups, more than twice the number of 
males die by overdose compared to females, and individuals aged 55 and older comprise 
the highest number of overdose deaths among each race and gender category except for 
white females. The Maryland Overdose Response Advisory Council voted in June 2024 to 
reinstate the Racial Disparities in Overdose Task Force to study the causes of 
racial disparities and recommend solutions. 
 
Although opioid overdose fatalities are problematic statewide, the greatest concern is in 
Baltimore City. Between calendar 2018 and 2022, Baltimore City experienced an 
overdose fatality rate nearly twice that of any other U.S. city. According to the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), there were 1,891 overdose-related fatalities 
across the State from October 2023 to September 2024, of which 846 occurred in 
Baltimore City, representing approximately 45% of the State’s total overdose fatalities but 
just 9% of the State’s population. 
 
Maryland Actions to Address the Opioid Crisis 
 
Legislative Response:  The General Assembly has passed numerous bills to address the 
State’s opioid crisis, including prevention, treatment, overdose response, and prescribing 
guidelines. 
 
 
Chapters 573 and 574 of 2017 expand drug education in public schools to include 
heroin and opioid addiction prevention; require local boards of education to require 
each public school to store naloxone and other overdose-reversing medication; and 
require institutions of higher education that receive State funding to establish a 
policy that addresses heroin and opioid addiction and prevention. 
 
 
Chapter 570 of 2017 requires a health care provider to prescribe the lowest effective 
dose of an opioid and a quantity that is no greater than that needed for the expected 
duration of pain severe enough to require an opioid that is a controlled dangerous 
substance, with specified exceptions. 
 
 
Chapters 215 and 216 of 2018 require a health care provider to advise a patient of 
the benefits and risks associated with a prescribed opioid or co-prescribed 
benzodiazepine. 
 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 establishes the Opioid Restitution Fund (ORF), a special fund 
to retain any revenues received by the State relating to specified opioid judgments 
or settlements, which may be used only for opioid-related programs and services. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1131/ Page 8 
 
Chapter 82 of 2022 requires MDH to adopt a reporting system to monitor the 
prescribing of medications to treat opioid use disorders (OUDs) in the State, identify 
and reach out to prescribers who regularly prescribe nonpreferred medications, and 
identify barriers to individuals who need medication to treat an OUD to obtaining 
the medication in a timely manner. 
 
 
Chapter 224 of 2022 requires the Prescription Drug Monitoring Program to monitor 
the dispensing of naloxone medication and to maintain confidentiality with regard 
to naloxone medication data.  
 
 
Chapter 239 of 2022 broadens existing requirements and protections relating to the 
administration or provision of naloxone to encompass any opioid overdose reversal 
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and authorizes 
specified providers and organizations across the State to offer naloxone free of 
charge to individual community members. 
 
 
Chapter 408 of 2024 requires MDH to report to the legislature each year until 2026 
on (1) current opioid overdose reversal drugs approved by the FDA and (2) whether 
MDH has added each current FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to a 
standing order. 
 
 
Chapter 764 of 2024 expands the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator 
(AED) Program to include an initiative to locate up to two doses of naloxone with 
each AED in a public building. 
 
 
Chapter 886 of 2024 requires hospitals, beginning January 1, 2025, to establish 
protocols to provide appropriate care for patients admitted for opioid-related 
conditions, including overdose, possess specified medication for the treatment of 
OUD, and treat a patient who presents in an emergency room for opioid-related 
overdose or emergency medical condition, as specified. 
 
Maryland has a statewide standing order for opioid overdose reversal drugs that authorizes 
any Maryland-licensed pharmacist to dispense unlimited prescriptions and refills of 
naloxone and devices for its administration to any individual, as specified. A pharmacist 
must provide consultation with the individual regarding the naloxone dosage that is most 
appropriate, select and dispense two doses of naloxone, and provide directions for use. If a 
patient cannot afford naloxone or related copayments, or does not wish to use insurance 
coverage, pharmacists are instructed to refer them to the Opioid Response Program, where 
they can obtain a naloxone kit free of charge. 
 
Legal Actions Related to the Opioid Crisis: In October 2020, the U.S. Department of 
Justice announced a global resolution of its criminal and civil investigations of opioid 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1131/ Page 9 
manufacturer Purdue Pharma. However, the resolution was subject to approval by the 
bankruptcy court for the Southern District of New York, which rejected the bankruptcy 
settlement in December 2021. After multiple rejected settlements, including a  
$6 billion settlement rejected by the Supreme Court, in January 2025, Purdue agreed to a 
$7.4 billion settlement, which still requires court approval. If the deal proceeds, the 
Sackler family must also give up ownership of Purdue. 
 
Maryland and a coalition of states were part of the $21 billion Janssen settlement, a 
settlement with opioid manufacturer Johnson & Johnson and three of its distributors – 
McKesson, Cencora (formerly Amerisource Bergen), and Cardinal Health. Maryland’s 
share of the settlement is approximately $395 million over 18 years.  
 
Maryland and several other states also reached a $573 million settlement with 
McKinsey & Company in 2021. Maryland’s share of the settlement is about $12.0 million, 
the final installment of which was received in July 2024. The State was part of several other 
settlements, including ones with Walmart, Walgreens, Allergan, Teva, and Publicis Health. 
All settlement revenues are allocated to ORF, as described below. 
 
Opioid Restitution Fund:  Exhibit 2 shows the actual and projected ORF revenue from 
opioid settlements from fiscal 2022 through 2039, which is expected to total $668 million. 
 
MDH distributes this funding to local health departments, correctional facilities, and 
community organizations through block grants and competitive grants, and annually 
reports its spending to the General Assembly. The ORF Advisory Council meets 
throughout the year to discuss the best uses of funding and submit recommendations on 
spending priorities. Per the various settlement agreements, most ORF funding will be 
expended through competitive grants, and some will be distributed to local governments 
as block grants through a formula. Some ORF funding is expended at the discretion of the 
Secretary of Health who, in 2024, committed to distributing all discretionary funds through 
grants to local governments and organizations. 
 
While each Maryland county will receive block grant funding through ORF, 
Baltimore City will only receive ORF funds from just one settlement, as it opted out of all 
other settlements to pursue separate litigation in pursuit of higher award amounts. As of 
December 2024, Baltimore City has announced approximately $409.7 million in settlement 
awards, with additional settlements in progress. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1131/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 2 
Sources of Opioid Restitution Fund Revenue 
Fiscal 2022-2039 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Funding to Address the Opioid Crisis:  Maryland receives federal funding to address 
opioid misuse and overdose. Active federal grants include the Substance Abuse Block 
Grant (SABG) to address substance use disorder (SUD) and the State Opioid Response 
Grant Program targeted to address opioid misuse. MDH distributes SABGs to each 
jurisdiction for activities related to substance abuse prevention, education, and treatment, 
including for alcohol. Federal regulations require that 20% of each SABG be directed 
toward supporting prevention activities. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes nearly $485 million 
for substance abuse treatment programs, overdose response, behavioral health investment, 
and other substance abuse-related programs. There is $67.6 million budgeted for ORF, 
$10.0 million for the Office of Overdose Response, and $959,020 for the Lieutenant 
Governor’s Heroin and Opioid Task Force, all from general funds. The fiscal 2026 budget 
$71.0
$24.2
$37.0
$55.6
$44.0$41.2
$48.6 $49.3 $49.3
$36.9
$27.7$27.7
$27.7$27.7$27.7$27.7
$22.3$22.3
$0
$10
$20
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
$80
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
Distributors
Janssen
McKinsey & Co.
Teva
Allergan
Walmart
Walgreens

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1131/ Page 11 
also includes $71.7 million in general funds invested in the Behavioral Health 
Administration, which can be used for a variety of purposes, including crisis services, 
inpatient services, hospital overstay, and SUD prevention and treatment. Lastly, between 
general funds, special funds, federal dollars, and reimbursable expenditures, there is a total 
$334.6 million budgeted for substance abuse-related grant programs, including SABG and 
the State Opioid Response Grant Program. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11