START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1144 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1144 
(Delegate Addison, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
State Public Transit Service and Stations - Exclusion for Assault and Bodily 
Injury 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA), by June 1, 2025, in 
consultation with specified entities, to convene a workgroup to create a rider code of 
conduct and implement a comprehensive internal safety program to strengthen protections 
for MTA operators and passengers, as specified. Until the rider code of conduct is adopted 
and the comprehensive internal safety program is implemented, a person who is alleged by 
a public transit operator to have committed an assault or other intentional act causing bodily 
injury to a public transit operator or a passenger while the person is on board a State public 
transit service or at a State public transit service station may be prohibited from using a 
State public transit service or entering a State public transit service station, under guidelines 
and subject to an appeals process established by MTA. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by $18,800 in 
FY 2025 and by $131,200 in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
18,800 
131,200 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($18,800) 
($131,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1144/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions and Limitations  
 
“State public transit service” means any bus service, train service, light rail service, and 
subway service, if operated by MTA or another State agency. “Public transit operator” 
means an individual who is (1) employed by MTA, the Washington Metropolitan Area 
Transit Authority (WMATA), or a political subdivision and (2) engaged in providing 
public transportation services, including bus service, train service, light rail service, and 
subway service. “Public transit operator” includes a transit station manager and a person 
engaged in official duties as a station agent, conductor, or station attendant who is 
employed by (1) an entity that provides transit service under contract with MTA; (2) a 
private entity that provides public transit service; and (3) an entity that provides transit 
service under a transportation compact (i.e., service provided by WMATA).  
 
The bill’s provision that authorizes a person who is alleged to have committed an assault 
or other intentional act causing bodily injury to a public transit operator or a passenger, as 
specified, to be prohibited from using a State public transit service or entering a State public 
transit service station (which terminates when MTA adopts the rider code of conduct and 
implements the comprehensive internal safety program), does not increase the duty of care 
for MTA or another State agency or their employees, contractors, or contractor’s 
employees for any tort or other liability purposes in connection with actions by a person 
alleged to have committed an assault on a public transit operator or passenger.  
 
Workgroup Requirements  
 
By June 1, 2025, MTA, in consultation with WMATA, the Joint Safety Committee, and 
operator union representatives, must convene a workgroup to create a rider code of conduct 
and implement a comprehensive internal safety program to strengthen protections for MTA 
operators and passengers through clear safety protocols, strengthened safety policies, and 
improved risk mitigation measures. The workgroup:   
 
 
must address consequences for violations in MTA facilities that must include 
ridership bans for an assault on a public transit operator or passenger as soon as 
practicable, the possibility of legal action, and an appeals process; 
 
may not require a criminal conviction as a prerequisite to a ban on public transit 
service usage; and  
 
must authorize, under standards set by the workgroup, the use of public transit 
facilities by a person accused of assault on a public transit operator or passenger, if 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1144/ Page 3 
the assault was directly related to the person’s disability and the person is 
accompanied by a direct support professional or another appropriate caregiver when 
using public transit facilities.  
 
By October 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to MTA 
and specified committees of the General Assembly. After issuing its report, the workgroup 
must continue to assess the effectiveness of the proposed code of conduct and internal 
safety program and recommend ongoing improvements.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Transit – Generally  
 
MTA is a modal unit within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), and it 
operates a comprehensive transit system throughout the Baltimore-Washington 
metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, 
such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro subway, commuter buses, MARC trains, and 
mobility/paratransit vehicles. Aside from the District of Columbia transit system, MDOT 
and MTA are generally the agencies responsible for the construction and operation of 
transit lines in the State. 
 
Additionally, some State institutions of higher education provide shuttle services that may 
meet the bill’s definition of a State public transit service. For example, the University of 
Maryland operates the Shuttle-UM service. 
 
Annual Report on Assaults on Public Transit Operators 
 
MTA is required to submit an annual report on assaults on public transit operators. The 
report must include the following information for the immediately preceding 12 months:  
(1) for each assault on a public transit operator, the nature of the assault, the mode of transit 
where the assault occurred, the location of the assault, whether police were involved in 
responding to the assault, and the outcome of any investigation into the assault, as 
specified; (2) a comparison of the aggregate data compiled pursuant to item (1) with at 
least two other states with similar transit systems or populations; and (3) a review of current 
transit industry best practices to prevent and mitigate assaults on public transit operators. 
By December 1 each year, MTA must submit the report to each local executive authority, 
the State’s Attorney for each county, and specified committees of the General Assembly.  
 
“Public transit operator” means an individual who is (1) employed by MTA, WMATA, or 
a political subdivision and (2) engaged in providing public transportation services, 
including bus service, train service, light rail service, and subway service. The term 
includes a transit station manager. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1144/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  In the execution of its duties, MDOT and MTA often engage expert 
consultants to handle research, evaluations, studies, and staffing duties, and MTA 
anticipates engaging a consultant to staff the workgroup and assist in developing and 
implementing the rider code of conduct and comprehensive internal safety program. 
Therefore, TTF expenditures increase by an estimated $18,800 in fiscal 2025 (due to the 
bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date) and by $131,200 in fiscal 2026 for consultant services. 
MTA can handle workgroup staffing duties in future fiscal years using existing budgeted 
resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  MTA is required to convene the workgroup by June 1, 2025, 
which is also the bill’s effective date. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 20, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4