START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

Chapter 369

(House Bill 1121)

AN ACT concerning

Child Care Scholarship Program – Youth Transitioning From Foster Placement
to Successful Adulthood ~~Pilot~~ Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Youth Transitioning From Foster Placement to
Successful Adulthood ~~Pilot~~ Program in the Child Care Scholarship Program; and
generally relating to the establishment of the Youth Transitioning From Foster
Placement to Successful Adulthood ~~Pilot~~ Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–113(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–113(c)(1) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 9.5–113.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.5–113.

(a) In this section, “Program” means the Child Care Scholarship Program.

(b) The Department shall administer the Program in accordance with federal law.

(c) (1) The Department shall [establish]:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 369 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) ESTABLISH a process that meets the requirements of this
subsection for granting presumptive eligibility for a subsidy under the Program; AND

(II) INCORPORATE THE FRAMEWORK OF THE YOUTH
TRANSITIONING FROM FOSTER PLACEMENT TO SUCCESSFUL ADULTHOOD PILOT
PROGRAM AS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9.5–113.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(d) The Department shall award a scholarship under the Program in an amount
sufficient to ensure that an individual will not be required to pay a copay for child care if
the individual provides proof, as determined by the Department, of:

(1) (I) Participation in one of the following programs:

[(i)] 1. Federal Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
Infants, and Children;

[(ii)] 2. Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program;

[(iii)] 3. Federal Housing Act Housing Choice Voucher Program;

[(iv)] 4. Supplemental Security Income benefits; or

[(v)] 5. Temporary cash assistance; and

[(2)] (II) Employment or enrollment in an education or career training
program; OR

(2) PARTICIPATION IN THE YOUTH TRANSITIONING FROM FOSTER
PLACEMENT TO SUCCESSFUL ADULTHOOD PILOT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER
§ 9.5–113.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

9.5–113.2.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FOSTER YOUTH” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(I) IS AT LEAST 16 YEARS OLD AND UNDER THE AGE OF 22
YEARS; AND

(II) 1. IS IN OUT–OF–HOME CARE UNDER THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

2. WAS IN OUT–OF–HOME CARE UNDER THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE ON THE INDIVIDUAL’S 18TH BIRTHDAY.

(3) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE YOUTH TRANSITIONING FROM
FOSTER PLACEMENT TO SUCCESSFUL ADULTHOOD PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THERE IS A YOUTH TRANSITIONING FROM FOSTER PLACEMENT
TO SUCCESSFUL ADULTHOOD PILOT PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST A FOSTER
~~YOUTH~~ ~~IN~~ ~~APPLYING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ACCESSING~~ ~~SUBSIDIES~~ ~~IN~~ REMOVE CERTAIN
APPLICATION BARRIERS FOR PARENTING FOSTER YOUTH AND INCREASE
ELIGIBILITY ACCESS TO THE CHILD CARE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM FOR THE
FOSTER YOUTH’S CHILD.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE PILOT PROGRAM SHALL BEGIN ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1,
2026, AND SHALL END ON DECEMBER 31, 2028.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REMOVE BARRIERS IN THE CHILD CARE
SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM APPLICATION PROCESS FOR FOSTER YOUTH IN THE PILOT
PROGRAM BY REMOVING THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS:

(1) PROOF OF A FOSTER YOUTH’S EMPLOYMENT OR ENROLLMENT IN
AN EDUCATION OR CAREER TRAINING PROGRAM;

(2) THE NAME OF THE OTHER PARENT OF THE FOSTER YOUTH’S
CHILD; AND

(3) A WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION FROM A PARENT IF THE PARENT IS
NOT RESIDING IN THE SAME HOUSEHOLD AS THE CHILD; AND

(4) APPLICATION INFORMATION, INCLUDING INCOME, THAT
RELATES TO A FOSTER YOUTH’S FOSTER PARENTS RATHER THAN TO THE FOSTER
YOUTH.

(E) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL TRACK EXPENDITURES ON
SCHOLARSHIPS PROVIDED UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM ON A MONTHLY BASIS,
~~INCLUDING:~~

(I) THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF FOSTER YOUTH RECEIVING
SUBSIDIES UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 369 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE AVERAGE SCHOLARSHIP AMOUNT RECEIVED BY
FOSTER YOUTH UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 OF EACH YEAR OF THE PILOT
PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, REGARDING:

(I) THE STATUS OF THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(II) AN EVALUATION IN MEETING THE PILOT PROGRAM’S
~~GOALS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REMOVE~~ ~~BARRIERS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~FOSTER~~ ~~YOUTH~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCESSING~~ ~~SCHOLARSHIPS~~
THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES SHALL MAKE REFERRALS TO THE
DEPARTMENT REGARDING THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025. ~~It~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~4~~ ~~years~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2029,~~
~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~
~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4