START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1155 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1155 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of the Environment - Definition of Ecological Restoration 
 
 
This bill establishes a definition of “ecological restoration” in the Environment Article; the 
term means an activity undertaken with the goal of recovering, re-establishing, or 
enhancing a degraded, damaged, or destroyed ecosystem through (1) improvements to 
physical, chemical, or biological characteristics or processes; (2) returning natural or 
historical functions or services; or (3) protecting or improving resiliency. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to directly affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Although ecological restoration is referenced in conjunction with the Green 
and Blue Infrastructure Policy Advisory Committee under Title 5, Subtitle 14 of the 
Environment Article, the phrase is not defined in State statute or regulations. 
 
Chapter 465 of 2022 required the Maryland Department of the Environment’s (MDE) 
Wetlands and Waterways Program Division, in consultation and coordination with 
specified entities, including the Department of Natural Resources, to conduct a 
comprehensive study, analysis, and evaluation of various items related to the permitting 
and completion of ecological restoration projects. The Wetlands and Waterways Program 
Division was required to develop legislative and regulatory recommendations based on the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1155/ Page 2 
results of the study, analysis, and evaluation. MDE submitted the resulting Ecological 
Restoration Permitting Study Report to the General Assembly in August 2024. 
 
Additional Comments:  This bill addresses one of the recommendations included in the 
Ecological Restoration Permitting Study Report referenced above (see pp. 7-8). 
Specifically, the report recommended that the General Assembly should adopt a definition 
for ecological restoration that is consistent with the definition included in the bill. The 
report further stated that MDE will incorporate the statutory definition in regulation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 722 (Senators Henson and Augustine) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Harford, Montgomery, and 
Wicomico counties; Baltimore City; Maryland Association of Counties; Northeast 
Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Board of Public 
Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2