START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1173 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1173 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County - Speed Monitoring Systems - High-Risk Highways  
MC 17-25 
 
 
This bill authorizes the placement of speed monitoring systems (i.e., speed cameras) on 
highways in Montgomery County that have been identified in the municipality’s, county’s, 
or State’s most recent Strategic Highway Safety Plan or Vision Zero Plan as having a 
high risk for motor vehicle crashes that result in serious bodily injury or death. Existing 
penalties, requirements, and limitations that apply for other speed cameras used in the State 
generally apply to cameras established under the bill. However, the bill includes additional 
specifications related to (1) how local governments must use revenues from speed cameras 
implemented under the bill; (2) the evaluation of speed cameras implemented under the 
bill; and (3) limitations on the placement of any speed camera used in Montgomery County. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the bill is authorizing in nature, the District Court must be prepared 
should any systems be deployed, with programming costs totaling approximately 
$12,200 in FY 2026 only. General fund revenues increase, likely minimally and potentially 
beginning as early as FY 2026, from additional contested cases in the District Court. 
 
Local Effect:  The impact on local government finances depends on the extent to which 
speed cameras are placed, as authorized under the bill. Local expenditures and revenues 
may increase, correspondingly and potentially significantly, beginning as early as FY 2026, 
as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1173/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Existing penalties, limitations, and requirements for other speed cameras 
authorized to be used in the State generally apply to the speed cameras authorized by the 
bill. Notably, and among other things, for speed cameras placed under the bill’s authority: 
 
 
the cameras must first be authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction 
by local law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing; 
 
the cameras may not be placed or moved until certain signs are installed to inform 
motorists about the cameras, and the signs must be proximate to a device that 
displays a real-time posting of the speed at which a driver is traveling; and 
 
the maximum civil penalty for a speed violation captured by a speed camera is $40. 
 
However, there are two additional specifications for the speed cameras established under 
the bill and one new prohibition that applies for every speed camera established in 
Montgomery County. First, from the fines collected by Montgomery County from speed 
cameras established under the bill, any balance remaining after cost recovery must be used 
to fund the study, design, and construction of safety-related projects on roadways or 
intersections in Montgomery County that have been identified in the county’s or State’s 
most recent Strategic Highway Safety Plan or Vision Zero Plan as roadways or 
intersections that are at high risk for motor vehicle crashes that result in serious bodily 
injury or death. Fines collected by a municipality in the county must be used in a similar 
manner for safety-related projects in the municipality.  
 
Also, by October 1, 2030, and by October 1 every five years thereafter, 
Montgomery County or a municipality within the county must evaluate each speed camera 
established under the bill’s authority for its effectiveness in reducing the motor vehicle 
speed at or below which 85% of the drivers travel at the location of the speed camera. 
 
Finally, neither Montgomery County nor a municipal government in Montgomery County 
may place, have placed, or use any speed monitoring system to enforce speed limits on a 
controlled access highway, an expressway, or an interstate highway in the county. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1173/ Page 3 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by the State Highway Administration (SHA). Similar requirements apply to speed 
cameras established on Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of 
institutions of higher education in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, 
Maryland Route 175 in Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the 
Maryland Route 175/295 interchange and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, 
and at the intersection of Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in 
Talbot County. 
 
In Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties only, speed monitoring 
systems may be used on a highway in a residential district with a maximum posted speed 
limit of 35 miles per hour. The aforementioned signage requirements do not apply to these 
speed cameras. 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner that includes specified information, including a copy of the recorded 
image, the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty 
imposed and the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a 
citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation, directly to 
the political subdivision; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
The civil penalty may not exceed $40, and the District Court must prescribe: 
 
 
a uniform citation form that includes specified information and allows the person 
receiving the citation to pay the citation or contest the citation by standing trial, as 
specified; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1173/ Page 4 
 
a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons who 
choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the relevant political subdivision, 
in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and consequently the general 
fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Generally, from the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction 
may recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
State Traffic Safety Programs  
 
The State’s traffic safety program was renamed to be Vision Zero by Chapter 377 of 2019 
but is currently referred to as Zero Deaths Maryland. The program is administered by the 
Maryland Highway Safety Office (MHSO) and housed within the Motor Vehicle 
Administration. SHA partners closely with MHSO to implement traffic and highway safety 
programs, policies, and best practices. MHSO’s Strategic Highway Safety Plan includes a 
list of and information about high priority safety corridors in the State. 
 
In support of Vision Zero and Zero Deaths Maryland, Chapters 153 and 154 of 2022 require 
SHA to perform an infrastructure review of each pedestrian or bicyclist fatality that occurs 
on a State highway or at an intersection of a State highway and another highway or 
municipal street. Additionally, Chapter 603 of 2024 (1) substantially expanded the 
responsibilities of the Vision Zero coordinator (the individual in charge of overseeing the 
implementation of Vision Zero throughout the State), with respect to the implementation 
of the State’s Vision Zero program and (2) requires the coordinator to hold quarterly public 
meetings on the implementation of Vision Zero. 
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for citations issued under 
the bill, general fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2026. Any such impact depends 
on the extent to which local governments in Montgomery County elect to deploy speed 
cameras under the bill, the amount of the fine established for a violation, and whether 
citations are contested (and, therefore, paid into the general fund upon a guilty disposition). 
However, general fund revenues are likely to be minimal. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the District Court increase for 
programming changes necessary to collect payments for citations that may be issued under 
the bill. Programming-related costs total approximately $12,208 in fiscal 2026. This 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1173/ Page 5 
estimate includes about 94 hours of reprogramming. Any increase in District Court 
caseloads can be handled with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to the extent that Montgomery County (and municipalities within the county) 
authorize and place additional speed cameras as a result of the bill. Expenditures also 
increase for those jurisdictions beginning in fiscal 2026 to procure, install, and maintain 
additional speed cameras. Based on historical data and the use of speed camera systems in 
the State to date, the increase in revenues is likely to exceed the increase in expenditures. 
After cost recovery, the remaining revenues may only be expended for specified safety 
improvements; thus, expenditures also increase for those purposes. 
 
The precise impact of the bill depends on several factors (e.g., the number of additional 
cameras placed pursuant to the bill’s authorization, the volume of traffic in the areas where 
cameras are placed, the deterrent effect additional cameras may have on the roadways over 
time, etc.). As a result, the exact impact on local revenues and expenditures can only be 
determined with experience under the bill. Exhibit 1 shows historical speed monitoring 
systems data over a five‐year period for Montgomery County and municipalities operating 
speed cameras within the county. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Speed Monitoring Systems in Montgomery County 
Gross Revenues 
Fiscal 2019-2023 
 
FY 2019 
FY 2020 
FY 2021 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
Montgomery County 
$15,975,215 $14,069,006 $13,016,387 $11,319,587 $10,615,283 
Gaithersburg 
2,174,823 
1,995,256 
1,948,260 
1,938,036 
1,607,471 
Rockville 
1,808,045 
1,333,829 
1,185,204 
1,230,123 
1,260,113 
Takoma Park 
1,227,061 
991,915 
886,614 
817,201 
996,767 
Chevy Chase Village 
957,565 
760,304 
731,189 
636,471 
688,128 
Total in the County 
$22,142,709 $19,150,310 $17,767,654 $15,941,418 $15,167,762 
 
Source:  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Additional Comments:  House Bill 182, if enacted, would increase the maximum penalty 
for certain speed camera violations that apply under this bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1173/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 665 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6