START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1162 
(Delegate Stein) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, or Refrigeration Contractors - 
Equipment Sales 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from knowingly selling (or offering to sell) heating, ventilation, 
air-conditioning, or refrigeration (HVACR) equipment to another person unless the 
individual purchasing the equipment (1) holds a master license, a master restricted license, 
or a limited license (or employs an individual with a license) issued by the State Board of 
Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and Refrigeration Contractors to provide (or assist 
in providing) HVACR services; (2) operates a business that resells HVACR equipment to 
individuals licensed by the board; or (3) is not required to be licensed under specified 
provisions of State law. This requirement does not apply to a person who (1) sells 
construction materials other than materials involved in the installation of HVACR 
equipment and (2) derives less than 25% of the person’s revenues from the sale of HVACR 
equipment. The bill also establishes requirements for sellers to provide notice to purchasers 
of HVACR equipment at the time of sale. By January 1, 2026, the board must adopt 
regulations to carry out the bill’s requirements. A person who violates the bill’s 
requirements is subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for a first violation or $5,000 for 
a second or subsequent violation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and 
Refrigeration Contractors can implement the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues due to the bill’s penalty provisions. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1162/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person that sells HVACR equipment must, at the time of sale, provide 
a written notice to the individual purchasing the equipment that contains information 
prescribed by the board regarding the requirement that an individual must be licensed by 
the board before providing (or assisting in providing) HVACR services in the State, as 
specified. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and 
Refrigeration Contractors licenses and regulates individuals who provide commercial and 
residential HVACR services in accordance with Title 9A of the Business Regulation 
Article. The board is also authorized to adopt applicable regulations for the provision of 
HVACR services, including codes and minimum standards for the installation, alteration, 
remodeling, maintenance and repair of HVACR systems. 
 
The board investigates complaints against licensees and complaints related to unlicensed 
practice. The board may pursue disciplinary charges against an individual for violations of 
applicable laws or regulations, conduct hearings and, if warranted, impose administrative 
sanctions including suspension or revocation of a license and/or assessment a civil penalty 
of up to $5,000 for each violation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business owners that currently purchase HVACR 
equipment and are not licensed as required by the bill (or do not employ a licensed 
individual) may be unable to purchase HVACR equipment, assuming such business owners 
are not otherwise exempt under the bill’s requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1162/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3