START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 193

Chapter 193

(House Bill 1141)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County – Alcoholic Beverages – Change of Location

FOR the purpose of establishing an additional circumstance under which the Board of
License Commissioners for Baltimore County may approve a change of location for a
certain alcoholic beverages license; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages
licenses in Baltimore County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 13–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 13–1702
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

13–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore County.

13–1702.

(a) If the Board approves an application from a contract purchaser, an owner of
the location, or a developer under § 13–1404 of this title, the applicant may apply to transfer
the license to an operator of the type of business for which the license was approved if:

(1) the license is for a location in the site for which the license was
approved; and

(2) the application for transfer occurs within 5 years after the original
application for the site is approved or construction at the location is completed, whichever
is later.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 193 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Board may approve a change of
location of a license issued under § 13–1404 of this title if:

(1) the license holder has engaged in an active alcoholic beverages business
under the license for at least 1 year before applying for the change; [or]

(2) (i) the license holder has not engaged in an active alcoholic
beverages business under the license; and

(ii) the Board approved a change of location of the license from
another location within the same [county] election district at least 5 years before the
application for the change of location under this item; OR

(3) THE LICENSE WAS ORIGINALLY ISSUED WITHIN THE SAME
ELECTION DISTRICT AND HAS BEEN AT THE SAME LOCATION FOR AT LEAST 10
YEARS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2