START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1148 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1148 
(Delegate Wivell, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Residential Condominium Unit Insurance - Lapses in Coverage - Prohibition on 
Denial 
 
 
This bill prohibits an insurer from refusing to issue a residential condominium insurance 
policy based solely on a prior lapse in coverage of the applicant if the lapse in coverage 
was due to an insurer’s withdrawal from the market and other conditions are met. 
Specifically, the lapse in coverage cannot have been for more than 90 days, and the 
applicant must provide certain documentation as may be required by the insurer, if 
applicable. The bill applies to new residential condominium unit insurance policies issued 
on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State government operations 
or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and the Insurance 
Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties include, among other things, certifying 
insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and approving the rates and forms used by 
insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance professionals. MIA and the Commissioner 
have broad authority to enforce the requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1148/ Page 2 
and insurance professionals. For example, depending on the type of violation and following 
the administrative processes required by Insurance Law and regulations, the Commissioner 
is authorized to issue orders directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain 
actions, impose administrative penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or 
licenses. 
 
The Insurance Article expressly prohibits certain insurer practices and activities as unfair 
trade practices. One such practice is that, with respect to any type of insurance, an insurer 
may not cancel or refuse to provide or renew coverage for a reason based wholly or partly 
on race, color, creed, sex, or blindness of an applicant or policyholder or for any arbitrary 
capricious, or unfairly discriminatory reason. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2