START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1174 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1174 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class BD-BWL Licenses - Multiple 
Licenses  
MC 18-25 
 
 
This bill increases, from one to two, the maximum number of Class BD-BWL licenses a 
licensee may hold in Montgomery County, as specified. However, if a person holds two 
Class BD-BWL licenses, the establishment for which the second license is issued must 
have average daily receipts from the sale of food that exceed the average daily receipts 
from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The bill also makes conforming changes. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Montgomery County can handle any additional enforcement activity with 
existing resources. Montgomery County revenues increase to the extent additional 
Class BD-BWL licenses are issued under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Montgomery County, the Class BD-BWL license authorizes the license 
holder to sell beer and wine for on- or off-premises consumption, in addition to liquor for 
on-premises consumption. As a prerequisite for the initial issuance of the license, the owner 
of the establishment must attest in a sworn statement that food will be available for sale for 
on-premises consumption during the hours that alcoholic beverages are permitted to be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1174/ Page 2 
served. The Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners by regulation must 
specify the type of food that is required to be available for sale for on-premises 
consumption during the hours that alcoholic beverages are permitted to be served. The 
holder of a Class BD-BWL license (1) may also hold a Class 7 micro-brewery license 
issued for a location in the county but (2) may not hold more than one Class B-BWL 
license. The annual license fee is $3,500. 
 
Multiple licenses may be issued for the same premises or to an individual for the use of 
that individual, a partnership, a corporation, an unincorporated association, or a limited 
liability company if (1) the licenses are Class H beer and wine licenses and (2) each 
premises is a restaurant in a bowling establishment that has at least 30 lanes with automatic 
pinsetters. 
 
Except as otherwise provided under current law, the board may not authorize the  
same license holder to hold more than 10 licenses. The 10 licenses that may be held by the 
same license holder may include (1) 1 or more Class H-BW licenses and 1 or more 
Class B-K licenses and (2) may not include more than 1 Class B-BWL license. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Montgomery County revenues increase to the extent additional 
Class BD-BWL licenses are issued to current license holders, under the bill. The annual 
license fee for a Class BD-BWL licenses is $3,500, and Montgomery County advises there 
are currently 52 Class BD-BWL alcoholic beverages licenses issued in the county as of 
February 2025. Montgomery County further advises there is an initial application fee of 
$600 for each new alcoholic beverages license and a $100 renewal fee. For illustrative 
purposes only, if each holder of a Class BD-BWL alcoholic beverages license in the county 
applies for a second license and continues to maintain that second license,  
Montgomery County revenues increase by $213,200 in fiscal 2026 and by $187,200 
annually thereafter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1174/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 8, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3