START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1152 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1152 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Residential Rental Property - Pet Policy Disclosure (Pet Policy 
Transparency Act) 
 
  
This bill requires that a landlord of any residential rental property provide a link to the 
property’s pet policy on the property’s website, if applicable. A written copy or summary 
of the pet policy must also be included in any rental application form. The pet policy must 
state any (1) breed and weight restrictions; (2) required fees (including up-front, 
nonrefundable pet fees, refundable pet deposits, and monthly pet fees); (3) limit on the 
number of pets allowed in a unit; (4) vaccination requirements; (5) liability insurance 
requirements; and (6) additional requirements for pet owners imposed by the landlord. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute does not expressly govern pet policies for residential rental 
properties or a landlord’s obligation to disclose any such policies. However, current law 
does include limited protections for certain tenants in Montgomery County related to pet 
ownership. Specifically, in Montgomery County, a landlord may not prohibit an elderly 
person (an individual who is age 60 or older) from keeping a household pet, unless 
specifically prohibited in writing at the time occupancy took place. Under the applicable 
provisions, a tenant is liable for any damage done to the premises by the tenant’s pet, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1152/ Page 2 
a landlord may establish reasonable rules governing the type, size, and number of pets 
allowed, disposal of pet waste, and aspects of pet conduct and pet control related to the 
protection of the health and safety of other tenants and the property of the landlord. 
 
State statute also outlines certain procedures and requirements for landlords to protect 
certain pets (domesticated cats and dogs) when property is repossessed in failure to pay 
rent, breach of lease, tenant holding over, and wrongful detainer actions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 896 (Senator Love) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2