START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1141 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1141 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Change of Location 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes the Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners to 
approve a change of location of a license, as specified, if the license was originally issued 
within the same election district and has been at the same location for at least 10 years.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board may accept an application for a license from (1) a contract 
purchaser of a property that becomes the owner of record of the premises to be licensed 
before the license is issued; (2) an owner of a premises that is proposed to be licensed; or 
(3) a developer of a property with the consent and authority of the owner of the property.  
 
The board may approve a change of location of the license if (1) the license holder has 
engaged in an active alcoholic beverages business under the license for at least one year 
before applying for the change or (2) the license holder has not engaged in an active 
alcoholic beverages business under the license and the board approved a change of location 
of the license from another location within the same county election district at least 
five years before the application for the change of location.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1141/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2