START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

Chapter 593

(House Bill 1195)

AN ACT concerning

Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission – Membership, ~~Transparency~~
Reporting, Billing, and Planning
(WSSC ~~Transparency~~ ~~and~~ ~~Reform~~ Planning and Reporting Act of 2025)

MC/PG 105–25

FOR the purpose of requiring one of the commissioners from Montgomery County on the
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission to be the Director of the Montgomery
County Department of Environmental Protection or the Director’s designee;
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~certain~~ ~~long–range~~ ~~planning~~ ~~scenarios~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~
~~periodic~~ ~~basis;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~
~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~searchable~~ ~~website;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~
~~Commission~~ ~~from~~ ~~limiting~~ ~~how~~ ~~frequently~~ ~~certain~~ ~~customers~~ ~~may~~ ~~receive~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~billing~~ ~~adjustment;~~ ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~billing~~ ~~frequency~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~charges;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~appoint~~ ~~a~~ ~~representative~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~coordinating~~
~~committee;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Program~~ ~~Evaluation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Government~~
~~Accountability~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Legislative~~ ~~Services~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~review~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~efficiency~~ ~~and~~ ~~sustainability~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~operations~~ requiring the
Commission to submit a certain long–range comprehensive financial plan in a
certain manner; requiring the Commission to publish and include certain
information on its website; requiring the budget authorization for the Office of the
Inspector General in the Commission to be approved independently and without the
involvement of Commission staff; requiring the Office to undergo a certain external,
independent peer review of the Office’s quality control system with a certain
frequency; requiring the Commission to report in a certain manner certain
information relating to bills exceeding certain limits for high bill adjustments;
requiring the Commission to report to the General Assembly on certain procedural
changes to enhance the customer engagement process for certain customers and to
include information relating to the changes in customer notification letters;
requiring the Commission to work with the State Department of Assessments and
Taxation and, as necessary, other stakeholders to assess certain ad valorem taxes;
requiring the Commission to hire a consultant to conduct, in consultation with the
Department of Legislative Services, a certain independent evaluation; requiring the
Office to conduct a certain review of the efficiency and sustainability of the
operations of the Commission and the Department of Legislative Services to conduct
a review of the review; and generally relating to the Washington Suburban Sanitary
Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 17–102, 17–107, 17–401, ~~and~~ ~~25–504(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(b)~~ 17–607, and 25–504(b)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 17–202.1 ~~and~~ ~~28–102,~~ 17–610, and 25–504(h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

17–102.

(a) The Commission consists of:

(1) three commissioners from Prince George’s County, appointed by the
County Executive subject to the confirmation of the County Council; and

(2) three commissioners from Montgomery County, OF WHOM:

(I) TWO ARE appointed by the County Executive subject to the
confirmation of the County Council; AND

(II) ONE IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE.

(b) (1) Each commissioner from Prince George’s County shall be a resident of
the sanitary district.

(2) (i) Each EXCEPT FOR THE COMMISSIONER WHO ALSO SERVES
AS THE DIRECTOR OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, OR IS THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE, EACH
commissioner from Montgomery County shall be a registered voter of Montgomery County.

(ii) Each commissioner from Prince George’s County shall be a
registered voter of Prince George’s County.

(c) (1) [An] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (A)(2)(II) OF THIS
SECTION, AN individual may not be appointed or continue in office as a commissioner if
the individual holds any other position of profit or trust under the Constitution or laws of
the State or any political subdivision of the State.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

(2) Not more than two commissioners from Montgomery County may be of
the same political party.

(d) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO THE COMMISSIONER WHO
ALSO SERVES AS THE DIRECTOR OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE.

(2) The term of a commissioner is 4 years and begins on June 1 of the year
of appointment.

(2) (3) The terms of commissioners are staggered as required by the
terms provided for commissioners on July 1, 1982.

(3) (4) At the end of a term, a commissioner continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and takes the oath of office.

(4) (5) A commissioner who is appointed after a term has begun serves
only for the rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and takes the oath of office.

(5) (E) A vacancy on the Commission does not impair the right of the
remaining commissioners to exercise all the powers of the Commission.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION WHO ALSO SERVES AS THE DIRECTOR
OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION,
OR IS THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE:

(1) SERVES AS A VOTING MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) MAY SERVE AS THE CHAIR OR VICE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION.

17–107.

(a) (1) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION,
THE members of the Commission are entitled to the following annual salaries:

(i) chair $13,500;

(ii) vice chair $13,000; and

(iii) commissioners $13,000.

(2) The salary shall be paid every 2 weeks.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) While in office, commissioners may participate in any Commission program of
group health, life, and disability insurance to the same extent and under the same terms
as Commission staff.

(c) The Commission may employ a staff in accordance with the Commission’s
budget.

(D) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION WHO ALSO SERVES AS THE DIRECTOR
OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION FOR DUTIES PERFORMED AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION.

17–202.1.

(A) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EVERY 5 FISCAL YEARS THEREAFTER, THE
COMMISSION SHALL DEVELOP LONG–RANGE PLANNING SCENARIOS FOR ITS
OPERATING AND CAPITAL BUDGETS AND DEBT SERVICE.

(B) THE SCENARIOS SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) PROJECTIONS THAT DO NOT INCLUDE THE AD VALOREM TAX
AUTHORIZED UNDER § 22–112 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(2) PROJECTIONS THAT INCLUDE A RANGE OF AD VALOREM TAXES;
~~AND~~

(3) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS SECTION, STRESS
~~TESTING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMPACT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~WIDE~~ ~~RANGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ECONOMIC~~ ~~CONDITIONS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~MAY~~
AFFECT THE COMMISSION AND ITS FINANCIAL SOLVENCY, INCLUDING CHANGES IN
EMPLOYMENT RATES, INTEREST RATES, AND WATER USAGE.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSION MAY CONSULT WITH INDEPENDENT EXPERTS
IN DEVELOPING LONG–RANGE PLANNING SCENARIOS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) STRESS TESTING DONE UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL BE BASED ON INDUSTRY STANDARDS.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1, 2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL
SUBMIT THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION TO THE COUNTY COUNCILS OF
MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY AND, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY:

(I) A LONG–RANGE COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL PLAN THAT:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

1. IS DEVELOPED BY THE COMMISSION IN
CONJUNCTION WITH AN INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL ADVISOR; AND

2. MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF
THIS SECTION; AND

(II) ANY UPDATED COMMISSION POLICIES RELATING TO
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.

(2) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2026, AND EVERY 5 YEARS THEREAFTER,
THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE COUNTY COUNCILS OF MONTGOMERY
COUNTY AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY:

(I) AN UPDATED VERSION OF THE LONG–RANGE
COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL PLAN; AND

(II) ANY UPDATED COMMISSION POLICIES RELATING TO
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.

(B) A LONG–RANGE COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL PLAN SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE STRESS TESTING BASED ON INDUSTRY STANDARDS; AND

(2) TEST THE IMPACT OF A WIDE RANGE OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
THAT MAY AFFECT THE COMMISSION AND ITS FINANCIAL SOLVENCY, INCLUDING
CHANGES IN EMPLOYMENT RATES, INTEREST RATES, AND WATER USAGE.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL PUBLISH THE LONG–RANGE COMPREHENSIVE
FINANCIAL PLAN ON THE COMMISSION’S WEBSITE ESTABLISHED UNDER § 17–401
OF THIS TITLE.

17–401.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Payee” means a person that receives from the Commission an
aggregate payment of $25,000 in a single fiscal year.

(ii) “Payee” does not include:

1. a Commission employee with respect to the employee’s
compensation; or

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. a Commission retiree with respect to the retiree’s
retirement allowance.

(3) “Searchable website” means a website created in accordance with this
section that displays and searches payment data of the Commission.

(b) The Commission shall:

(1) publish annually in at least one newspaper in Montgomery County and
one newspaper in Prince George’s County a copy of the current financial statement of the
Commission;

(2) employ a certified public accountant licensed to practice in the State to
audit the books and accounts of the Commission;

(3) keep available for public inspection during business hours at its
principal office the annual audit and current financial statement; and

(4) file annually with the county executives and county councils of
Montgomery County and Prince George’s County, and the Montgomery County and Prince
George’s County Senate and House delegations to the Maryland General Assembly a
certified copy of the annual audit and current financial statement.

(c) On or before July 1, 2020, the Commission shall develop and operate a single
searchable website accessible to the public at no cost through the Internet.

(d) The searchable website shall contain Commission payment data including:

(1) the name of each payee receiving a payment;

(2) the location of the payee by postal zip code; and

(3) the amount of the payment.

(e) The searchable website shall allow the user to:

(1) search data for fiscal year 2019 and each fiscal year thereafter; and

(2) search by the following data fields:

(i) a payee receiving a payment; and

(ii) the zip code of a payee receiving a payment.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

(F) THE SEARCHABLE WEBSITE SHALL CONTAIN ALL BOND RATING
REPORTS ISSUED FOR THE COMMISSION FROM ONE OF THE MAJOR CREDIT RATING
~~AGENCIES,~~ ~~INCLUDING:~~

(1) A COPY OF ANY AUDITS COMPLETED IN RELATION TO A BOND
RATING REPORT; AND

(2) A COPY OF ANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PROVIDED IN RELATION
TO A BOND RATING REPORT.

(G) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
SEARCHABLE WEBSITE SHALL CONTAIN DATA RELATED TO THE REFUND HEARING
BOARD OF THE COMMISSION AND THE DISPUTE RESOLUTION BOARD OF THE
~~COMMISSION,~~ ~~INCLUDING:~~

(I) THE NUMBER OF CASES FILED;

(II) THE NUMBER OF CASES CLOSED;

(III) THE NUMBER OF CASES GRANTED;

(IV) THE NUMBER OF CASES DENIED;

(V) THE REFUND AMOUNT REQUESTED IN EACH CASE; AND

(VI) THE REFUND AMOUNT GRANTED IN EACH CASE.

(2) THE DATA PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT CONTAIN ANY PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION.

(H) THE SEARCHABLE WEBSITE SHALL INCLUDE A COPY OF ANY STRESS
TESTING COMPLETED FOR ANY LONG–RANGE PLANNING SCENARIOS DEVELOPED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 17–202.1 OF THIS TITLE.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
SEARCHABLE WEBSITE SHALL CONTAIN:

(I) ANY DOCUMENTS RELATING TO A BOND RATING RECEIVED
FROM A MAJOR CREDIT RATING AGENCY;

(II) DATA RELATED TO THE REFUND HEARING BOARD OF THE
COMMISSION, INCLUDING:

1. THE NUMBER OF CASES FILED;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. THE NUMBER OF CASES CLOSED;

3. THE NUMBER OF CASES GRANTED;

4. THE NUMBER OF CASES DENIED;

5. THE REFUND AMOUNT REQUESTED IN EACH CASE;
AND

6. THE REFUND AMOUNT GRANTED IN EACH CASE;

(III) DATA RELATED TO THE DISPUTE RESOLVING BOARD OF
THE COMMISSION, INCLUDING:

1. THE NUMBER OF CASES FILED;

2. THE NUMBER OF CASES CLOSED;

3. THE NUMBER OF CASES GRANTED;

4. THE NUMBER OF CASES DENIED;

5. THE UNPAID AMOUNT DISPUTED IN EACH CASE; AND

6. THE AMOUNT OF RELIEF GRANTED IN EACH CASE;
AND

(IV) A COPY OF ANY STRESS TESTING COMPLETED FOR A
LONG–RANGE COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL PLAN DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 17–202.1 OF THIS TITLE.

(2) THE DATA PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT CONTAIN ANY PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION.

[(f)] (I) (G) This section may not be construed to require the disclosure of
information that is required to be kept confidential under federal, State, or local law.

[(g)] (J) (H) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the county council or
county executive of Montgomery County or Prince George’s County may, in person or by a
duly authorized agent, audit and examine the books and records of the Commission.

(2) The Commission may not be required to pay the cost of the audit or
examination under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

17–607.

(a) (1) The Commission shall include in the Commission’s annual operating
budget proposal the amounts recommended for the Office.

(2) THE BUDGET AUTHORIZATION FOR THE OFFICE SHALL BE
APPROVED INDEPENDENTLY AND WITHOUT THE INVOLVEMENT OF COMMISSION
STAFF.

(b) Subject to budget authorization and adequate funds:

(1) the Commission’s general counsel shall provide legal services to the
inspector general and may employ special counsel if appropriate or required by law; and

(2) the inspector general may employ and be represented by a special legal
counsel without consent of the general counsel if the Commission approves of a request
after considering any recommendation or comment offered by the general counsel relating
to the request.

17–610.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2026, AND EVERY 3 YEARS THEREAFTER,
THE OFFICE SHALL UNDERGO AN EXTERNAL, INDEPENDENT PEER REVIEW TO
ASSESS WHETHER THE OFFICE’S QUALITY CONTROL SYSTEM IS EFFECTIVELY
DESIGNED AND OPERATING IN COMPLIANCE WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED
GOVERNMENT AUDITING STANDARDS.

(2) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE INITIAL PEER REVIEW
CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL
INCLUDE:

(I) A REVIEW OF WHETHER THE OFFICE IS SUFFICIENTLY
INDEPENDENT OF THE COMMISSION AND COMMISSION STAFF; AND

(II) AN ANALYSIS OF WHETHER ADDITIONAL REVIEWS AND
REPORTS, INCLUDING THOSE EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
COMMISSION’S INTERNAL CONTROLS OVER FINANCES, OPERATIONS, AND
COMPLIANCE ACTIVITIES, WOULD HELP ACHIEVE THE DUTIES OF THE OFFICE.

(B) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL SUBMIT THE RESULTS OF THE PEER REVIEW
CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO:

(I) THE COUNTY COUNCILS OF MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND
PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY;
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE MEMBERS OF THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND
PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY DELEGATIONS TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; AND

(III) THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE COMMISSION SHALL PUBLISH EACH PEER REVIEW
CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SECTION ON THE COMMISSION’S WEBSITE.

25–504.

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Commission:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~may~~ ~~provide~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~billing~~ ~~and~~ ~~collection~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~water~~ ~~and~~ ~~sewer~~ ~~usage~~
~~charges~~ ~~on~~ ~~an~~ ~~estimated~~ ~~basis~~ ~~for~~ ~~periods~~ ~~of~~ ~~6~~ ~~months~~ ~~or~~ ~~less,~~ ~~based~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~historical~~ ~~daily~~
~~average~~ ~~consumption~~ ~~calculated~~ ~~from~~ ~~actual~~ ~~previous~~ ~~usage;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~read~~ ~~the~~ ~~meter~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~once~~ ~~every~~ ~~6~~ ~~months;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~base~~ ~~the~~ ~~final~~ ~~bill~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~6–month~~ ~~period~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~actual~~
~~consumption~~ ~~adjusted~~ ~~by~~ ~~previous~~ ~~estimates,~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~meter~~ ~~had~~ ~~not~~ ~~been~~ ~~read~~ ~~because~~ ~~it~~ ~~was~~
~~inaccessible;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~shall~~ ~~base~~ ~~the~~ ~~final~~ ~~bill~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~6–month~~ ~~period~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~historical~~
~~daily~~ ~~average~~ ~~consumption,~~ ~~calculated~~ ~~from~~ ~~actual~~ ~~previous~~ ~~usage,~~ ~~if~~ ~~a~~ ~~final~~ ~~reading~~ ~~cannot~~
~~be~~ ~~made~~ ~~because:~~

~~1.~~ ~~the~~ ~~meter~~ ~~malfunctioned;~~

~~2.~~ ~~the~~ ~~meter~~ ~~had~~ ~~been~~ ~~taken~~ ~~out~~ ~~of~~ ~~service~~ ~~for~~ ~~repairs,~~
~~maintenance,~~ ~~or~~ ~~water~~ ~~system~~ ~~relining~~ ~~purposes;~~ ~~or~~

~~3.~~ ~~there~~ ~~was~~ ~~theft~~ ~~of~~ ~~service;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~may~~ ~~modify~~ ~~the~~ ~~historical~~ ~~daily~~ ~~average~~ ~~consumption~~ ~~calculation~~
based on appropriate evidence submitted by the owner; [and]

(iv) MAY NOT LIMIT HOW FREQUENTLY A CUSTOMER MAY
RECEIVE AN ADJUSTMENT UNDER § 3.20.040(A) OR (B) OF THE WASHINGTON
SUBURBAN SANITARY COMMISSION CODE OF REGULATIONS; AND

(V) may not base a final bill on estimated usage for two consecutive
~~6–month~~ ~~periods.~~

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

(b) (1) (I) The Commission shall bill for the amount of water and sewer
usage charges to each property served monthly, every other month, OR four times a year,
[or twice a year,] as the Commission determines.

(II) 1. IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT
THE COMMISSION SHALL BILL ON A MONTHLY BASIS FIXED PERIODIC BASIS, SUCH
AS MONTHLY OR QUARTERLY BILLING, WITHOUT THE USE OF ESTIMATED BILLING.

2. SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH MAY
NOT BE CONSTRUED TO ENDORSE ANY PARTICULAR TECHNOLOGY OR APPROACH TO
IMPLEMENTING THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(2) On receipt each bill is payable to the Commission.

(H) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1, 2026, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
COMMISSION SHALL REPORT TO THE COUNTY COUNCILS FOR MONTGOMERY
COUNTY AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CUSTOMERS IN
THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR THAT REPORTED BILLS EXCEEDING THE
LIMITS FOR HIGH BILL ADJUSTMENTS UNDER THE WASHINGTON SUBURBAN
SANITARY COMMISSION CODE OF REGULATIONS.

~~28–102.~~

THE COMMISSION SHALL APPOINT A REPRESENTATIVE TO SERVE ON THE
COORDINATING COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED UNDER PART IV OF THE 1984 AVENEL
FARM DEVELOPMENT PLAN MASTER AGREEMENT SIGNED BY THE COMMISSION.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Washington~~ ~~Suburban~~ ~~Sanitary~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~study~~ ~~the~~ ~~feasibility~~ ~~of~~
~~using~~ ~~differential~~ ~~rates~~ ~~among~~ ~~different~~ ~~customer~~ ~~classes~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~service~~ ~~rates~~
~~and~~ ~~charges,~~ ~~including~~ ~~studying~~ ~~the~~ ~~revenue~~ ~~possibilities~~ ~~of~~ ~~and~~ ~~economic~~ ~~impact~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~
~~different~~ ~~customer~~ ~~classes.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2026,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~report~~ ~~its~~ ~~findings~~ ~~and~~
~~recommendations,~~ ~~including~~ ~~any~~ ~~recommended~~ ~~statutory~~ ~~changes,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Montgomery~~ ~~County~~ ~~and~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~delegations~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~in~~
~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Director of the Montgomery County Department of Environmental
Protection, or the Director’s designee, shall become a member of the Washington Suburban
Sanitary Commission beginning on the date that the term expires for one of the next two
commissioners from Montgomery County whose terms expire after October 1, 2025.
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) In accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the County Executive of
Montgomery County shall determine which commissioner term shall apply as the
beginning of the term for the Director of the Montgomery County Department of
Environmental Protection, or the Director’s designee, to serve as a member of the
Commission.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) On or before November 1, 2025, the Washington Suburban Sanitary
Commission shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, on procedural changes that are being developed and finalized to
enhance the customer engagement process for customers that receive high bills.

(2) On or before November 1, 2026, the Commission shall report to the
General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the
full implementation of the procedural changes described under paragraph (1) of this
subsection.

(b) The Commission shall:

(1) publish the procedural changes reported under subsection (a) of this
section on the Commission’s website; and

(2) include information on the procedural changes in customer notification
letters.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) Notwithstanding recognition by the General Assembly that the authority for
the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission to consider an ad valorem tax in
accordance with § 22–112 of the Public Utilities Article has never been used by the
Commission and that the Commission has no intention of imposing an ad valorem tax, the
Commission shall work with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation and, as
necessary, other stakeholders, including Montgomery County and Prince George’s County,
to assess the ad valorem taxes necessary to support the Commission’s debt solely for the
purpose of compliance with this section.

(b) (1) On or before December 1, 2026, the Commission shall report the
assessment under subsection (a) of this section to the county councils of Montgomery
County and Prince George’s County and the members of the Montgomery County and
Prince George’s County delegations to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257
of the State Government Article.

(2) In the report submitted under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the
Commission may, solely for the purpose of compliance with this section, show additional ad

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

valorem possibilities based on factors such as the level of debt service it can support or
economic conditions.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission shall hire a consultant to
conduct, in consultation with the Department of Legislative Services, an independent
evaluation of the efficiency and sustainability of the Commission.

(b) The independent evaluation conducted under subsection (a) of this section
shall include:

(1) a review of the Commission’s budgetary process, including the annual
setting of rates through the relevant county councils;

(2) a review of the Commission’s process for entering into consent decrees;
and

(3) a review of the role the Public Service Commission plays in oversight of
the Commission, including in the Public Service Commission’s review of the reasonableness
of any rate, charge, or assessment done in accordance with § 25–105 of the Public Utilities
Article.

(c) On or before October 1, 2027, the independent evaluation required under
subsection (a) of this section shall be submitted to the Commission, the county councils of
Montgomery County and Prince George’s County, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, the General Assembly.

(d) The Commission shall publish the independent evaluation on the
Commission’s website.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Office of ~~Program~~ ~~Evaluation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Accountability~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Legislative~~ ~~Services~~ the Inspector General in the Washington Suburban
Sanitary Commission shall conduct a review of the efficiency and sustainability of the
operations of the ~~Washington~~ ~~Suburban~~ ~~Sanitary~~ Commission.

(b) The review conducted under subsection (a) of this section shall include:

(1) ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~statutory~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission,~~
~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~regulations,~~ ~~policies,~~ ~~and~~ ~~procedures;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~budgetary~~ ~~process,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~
~~setting~~ ~~of~~ ~~rates~~ ~~through~~ ~~the~~ ~~relevant~~ ~~county~~ ~~councils;~~

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 593 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission’s~~ ~~process~~ ~~for~~ ~~entering~~ ~~into~~ ~~consent~~ ~~decrees;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~subject~~ ~~matter~~ ~~expertise~~ ~~of~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~commissioners;~~

~~(5)~~ benchmarking with other systems across a range of operating cost
metrics related to the efficiency and sustainability of the Commission;

~~(6)~~ (2) a review of the effectiveness of the Commission’s capital program and
its ability to maintain water and sewer distribution pipelines and processing plants that
meet asset management standards;

~~(7)~~ (3) a study on the Commission’s use of its police force, including:

(i) a comparison of the size and scope of the Commission’s police
force with the police force of other utilities; and

(ii) whether there are more efficient approaches to water utility
security and policing;

~~(8)~~ (4) an analysis on the impact of the Commission not being a government
entity in the context of access to government programs that provide customer water
assistance or other available funding; and

~~(9)~~ ~~a~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~role~~ ~~the~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~plays~~ ~~in~~ ~~oversight~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~Commission,~~ ~~including~~ ~~in~~ ~~its~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~reasonableness~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~rate,~~ ~~charge,~~ ~~or~~
~~assessment~~ ~~done~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~25–105~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Utilities~~ ~~Article;~~ ~~and~~

~~(10)~~ ~~an~~ ~~analysis~~ ~~of~~ ~~whether~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Inspector~~ ~~General~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Commission~~ ~~is~~ ~~effective~~ ~~in~~ ~~achieving~~ ~~the~~ ~~purposes~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office,~~ ~~including:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~whether~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~is~~ ~~sufficiently~~ ~~independent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~
~~and~~ ~~management~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~whether~~ ~~the~~ ~~mandate~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~should~~ ~~include~~ ~~additional~~
~~reviews~~ ~~and~~ ~~reports~~ ~~that~~ ~~would~~ ~~help~~ ~~achieve~~ ~~the~~ ~~purposes~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office,~~ ~~including~~ ~~reports~~
~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~effectiveness~~ ~~of~~ ~~internal~~ ~~controls~~ ~~over~~ ~~finance,~~ ~~operations,~~ ~~and~~ ~~compliance~~ ~~activities~~

(5) a review of the Commission’s approach to coordinating road work with
other utilities and government agencies.

(c) (1) On or before October 1, 2027, the Office ~~of~~ ~~Program~~ ~~Evaluation~~ ~~and~~
~~Government~~ ~~Accountability~~ shall report its findings and recommendations to the
Department of Legislative Services and the members of the Montgomery County and Prince
George’s County delegations to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

(2) The Department shall conduct a review of the report submitted under
paragraph (1) of this subsection and report its findings to the General Assembly, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on or before October 1, 2028.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025. ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~1~~ ~~year~~ ~~and~~ ~~1~~
~~month~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~October~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2026,~~ ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~
~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~
~~Section~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~2~~ ~~years~~ ~~and~~ ~~1~~ ~~month~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~
~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~October~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2027,~~ ~~Section~~ ~~3~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15