START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1121 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1121 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Child Care Scholarship Program - Youth Transitioning From Foster Placement 
to Successful Adulthood Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Youth Transitioning from Foster Placement to Successful 
Adulthood Program, administered by the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE), to remove certain application barriers for parenting foster youth and increase 
eligibility access to the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program for the foster youth’s child. 
The program must begin by January 1, 2026. MSDE must remove barriers in the CCS 
Program application process for foster youth in the program by removing specified 
requirements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $91,000 in FY 2026 only for MSDE 
to make reprogramming changes. General fund expenditures further increase, potentially 
significantly, beginning in FY 2026 to the extent additional families are eligible for 
scholarships under the CCS Program, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Foster youth” means an individual who (1) is at least age 16 and younger 
than age 22 and (2) is in out-of-home care under the responsibility of the State or was in 
out-of-home care under the responsibility of the State on the individual’s 18th birthday.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1121/ Page 2 
MSDE must remove the following CCS Program application requirements for program 
participants:  (1) proof of a foster youth’s employment or enrollment in an education or 
career training program; (2) the name of the other parent of the foster youth’s child; (3) a 
written authorization from a parent if the parent is not residing in the same household as 
the child; and (4) application information, including income, that relates to a foster youth’s 
foster parents rather than to the foster youth. MSDE must incorporate the framework of the 
Youth Transitioning from Foster Placement to Successful Adulthood Program into the 
CCS Program.  
 
MSDE must award a scholarship under the CCS Program in an amount sufficient to ensure 
that an individual will not be required to pay a copay for child care if the individual 
provides proof, as determined by MSDE, of participation in the Youth Transitioning from 
Foster Placement to Successful Adulthood Program.  
 
The Department of Human Services (DHS) must make referrals to MSDE regarding the 
program. 
 
Current Law:  The State oversees a variety of early education services that are provided 
to Maryland children and their families in cooperation with local governments, local school 
systems, and private child care providers. The Division of Early Childhood coordinates the 
State’s early childhood care and education system and is composed of three subdivisions:  
(1) the Office of Child Care; (2) the Office of Early Learning and Instruction; and (3) the 
Office of Family Support Services.  
 
The CCS Program (formerly known as the Child Care Subsidy Program) provides financial 
assistance with child care costs to low-income families that meet applicable State or federal 
requirements. The program is funded through a combination of State funds and the federal 
Child Care and Development Block Grant. All participating parents or guardians must meet 
a variety of technical requirements and must be working or enrolled in school, a training 
program, or a work-related activity.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that it must update its Child Care Administrative 
Tracking System and CCS Program portals to accommodate the new application and 
eligibility requirements. Therefore, in fiscal 2026, general fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $91,000 to make the necessary reprogramming changes. This estimate is 
based on a similar modification that MSDE made to its system in 2022.  
 
MSDE advises that the eligible population is likely relatively small (based on information 
from DHS, fewer than 40 families are expected to be eligible); accordingly, it is estimated 
that MSDE can handle administrative aspects of the program using existing budgeted 
resources. MSDE did not provide a specific estimate on providing CCS Program benefits 
to families under the program. However, general fund expenditures are assumed to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1121/ Page 3 
increase, potentially significantly, to the extent that additional individuals receive 
scholarships under the bill who would not have otherwise been eligible. CCS scholarships 
per child vary depending on the age of the child, the region where care is being provided, 
and the type of care (i.e., child care centers vs. family child care homes). For illustrative 
purposes only, if 30 families under the program receive a scholarship for one child, general 
fund expenditures may increase by $355,680 on an annual basis (based on an average of 
the regional rates for infants served in family child care homes).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 687 (Senator Benson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3