START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 754

Chapter 754

(House Bill 1142)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group to ensure
adequate access to applicable home– and community–based services ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~existence~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~adequate~~ ~~direct~~ ~~care~~ ~~workforce~~ in the State; requiring the Maryland
Department of Health to provide certain support to the Advisory Group; and
generally relating to the Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–1201 through 15–1205 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 12.
Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 12. MARYLAND INTERESTED PARTIES ADVISORY GROUP.

15–1201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADVISORY GROUP” MEANS THE MARYLAND INTERESTED PARTIES
ADVISORY GROUP ESTABLISHED UNDER § 15–1202 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND
REQUIRED UNDER 42 C.F.R. § 447.203.

(C) “APPLICABLE SERVICE CATEGORIES” MEANS HOMEMAKER SERVICES,
HOME HEALTH AIDE SERVICES, PERSONAL CARE SERVICES, AND HABILITATION
SERVICES.

(D) “CONSUMER” MEANS AN APPLICANT FOR, A RECIPIENT OF, OR AN
INDIVIDUAL ELIGIBLE FOR MEDICAID HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES,
OR THE INDIVIDUAL’S AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 754 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) “CONSUMER ORGANIZATION” MEANS A STATE OR LOCAL CONSUMER
ADVOCACY GROUP OR OTHER COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATION THAT
REPRESENTS THE INTERESTS OF, OR PROVIDES DIRECT SERVICES TO, CONSUMERS
OF MEDICAID HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES.

(F) “DIRECT CARE WORKER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL:

(1) EMPLOYED BY A MEDICAID PROVIDER, STATE AGENCY, OR THIRD
PARTY;

(2) WHO CONTRACTS WITH A MEDICAID PROVIDER, STATE AGENCY,
OR THIRD PARTY;

(3) DELIVERING SERVICES UNDER A SELF–DIRECTED SERVICES
DELIVERY MODEL; OR

(4) WHO IS PAID TO PROVIDE HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED
SERVICES THROUGH AN APPLICABLE SERVICE CATEGORY.

(G) “HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES” MEANS MEDICAID
HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES DELIVERED THROUGH THE STATE PLAN,
A WAIVER UNDER § 1915(C) OF THE FEDERAL SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, A MANAGED
CARE PROGRAM, OR OTHER DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.

(H) “PERSONAL CARE” HAS THE MEANING STATED UNDER § 19–301 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(I) “PROVIDER ASSOCIATION” MEANS A TRADE ASSOCIATION EXEMPT
FROM FEDERAL INCOME TAXATION UNDER § 501(C)(6) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE
CODE THAT REPRESENTS DIRECT CARE EMPLOYERS.

(J) “WORKER ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION THAT:

(1) IS EXEMPT FROM FEDERAL INCOME TAXATION UNDER §§
501(C)(3) THROUGH (6) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE;

(2) IS NOT DOMINATED, CONTROLLED, OR FUNDED BY A DIRECT CARE
EMPLOYER; AND

(3) HAS AT LEAST 2 YEARS OF DEMONSTRATED EXPERIENCE
ENGAGING WITH AND ADVOCATING FOR DIRECT CARE WORKERS.

15–1202.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 754

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND INTERESTED PARTIES ADVISORY GROUP
WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF THE ADVISORY GROUP IS TO ENSURE:

(1) ADVISE AND CONSULT ON MEDICAID PAYMENT RATES ARE
SUFFICIENT TO PROVIDE RATE SUFFICIENCY, ENSURING ADEQUATE ACCESS TO
APPLICABLE SERVICE CATEGORIES; AND

(2) THE EXISTENCE OF AN ADEQUATE AND QUALIFIED DIRECT CARE
WORKFORCE TO PROVIDE SERVICES IN THE STATE.

15–1203.

(A) THE ADVISORY GROUP CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY, OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING, OR THE
DEPUTY SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(3) (2) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE; AND

(4) (3) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE DEPUTY
SECRETARY OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING, OR THE DEPUTY SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE:

(I) THREE CONSUMERS;

(II) TWO REPRESENTATIVES OF CONSUMER ORGANIZATIONS;

(III) THREE DIRECT CARE WORKERS;

(IV) TWO REPRESENTATIVES OF WORKER ORGANIZATIONS; AND

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A PROVIDER ASSOCIATION; AND

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC; AND

(3) ONE NONVOTING ADVISORY MEMBER FROM THE DIVISION OF
HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND MEDICAID WITH ADVANCED DATA LITERACY TO
~~ADDRESS~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~QUESTION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ISSUE~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DATA~~ ~~EXAMINED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 754 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ADVISORY GROUP THREE REPRESENTATIVES OF PROVIDER ASSOCIATIONS, OF
WHOM:

1. TWO SHALL BE REPRESENTATIVES OF A RESIDENTIAL
SERVICE AGENCY; AND

2. ONE SHALL BE A REPRESENTATIVE OF AN EMPLOYER
TRADE ASSOCIATION.

(B) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE MEMBERS APPOINTED TO THE
ADVISORY GROUP SHALL REFLECT THE DIVERSITY OF LIVED EXPERIENCE WITH
DISABILITY, AS WELL AS THE GEOGRAPHIC, RACIAL, ETHNIC, CULTURAL, GENDER,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, GENDER EXPRESSION, AGE, AND
SOCIOECONOMIC DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(C) (1) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING, OR THE
DEPUTY SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE, SHALL ESTABLISH AN APPLICATION PROCESS
THAT IS ACCESSIBLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC FOR THE RECRUITMENT OF
MEMBERS.

(2) THE APPLICATION AND CRITERIA FOR SELECTION SHALL BE
PUBLISHED ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(D) (1) THE DEPUTY SECRETARY, OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING, OR THE
DEPUTY SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE, SHALL CHAIR THE ADVISORY GROUP.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF AND SUPPORT FOR
THE ADVISORY GROUP, INCLUDING APPROPRIATE LOGISTICAL, AND
INFORMATIONAL, AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO ENSURE MEANINGFUL
PARTICIPATION OF DIRECT CARE WORKERS AND CONSUMERS IN THE ADVISORY
GROUP.

(E) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY GROUP
IS 3 YEARS.

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL ENSURE THAT MEMBERS SERVE
STAGGERED TERMS.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, AN APPOINTED MEMBER CONTINUES TO
SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 754

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~AND~~
~~QUALIFIES.~~

(5) THE SECRETARY MAY REMOVE OR SUSPEND A MEMBER OF THE
ADVISORY GROUP FOR MISCONDUCT, INCOMPETENCE, OR NEGLECT OF DUTIES
AFTER AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THE MEMBER TO BE HEARD.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY GROUP:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
ADVISORY GROUP; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) (1) BEGINNING NOVEMBER 1, 2025, THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL
MEET ON A QUARTERLY BASIS ANNUALLY.

(2) MEETING DATES, TIMES, AND LOCATIONS SHALL BE SELECTED TO
MAXIMIZE MEMBER ATTENDANCE.

15–1204.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH STANDARDIZED
PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ADVISORY GROUP AND MAKE THE
PROCEDURES AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC ON A DEDICATED PAGE OF THE
DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(2) THE DEDICATED PAGE ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE SHALL
ALSO INCLUDE:

(I) A LIST OF CURRENT ADVISORY GROUP MEMBERS;

(II) THE APPLICATION PROCESS AND SELECTION CRITERIA FOR
ADVISORY GROUP MEMBERS;

(III) THE LOCATION, DATE, AND TIME OF EACH ADVISORY
GROUP MEETING WITH AT LEAST 30 CALENDAR DAYS’ ADVANCE NOTICE;

(IV) OPTIONS FOR VIRTUAL PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS OF
THE ADVISORY GROUP;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 754 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) PROCEDURES TO ENSURE MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION
FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES AND LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY;

(VI) A NOTATION OF AT WHICH MEETINGS THE GENERAL PUBLIC
WILL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO TESTIFY OR MAKE COMMENTS; AND

(VII) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT, THE
AGENDA AND MEETING MINUTES OF THE PREVIOUS MEETING OF THE ADVISORY
GROUP, INCLUDING A LIST OF MEETING ATTENDEES.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE SUFFICIENT DATA AND RESOURCES
AT LEAST 30 DAYS IN ADVANCE OF A MEETING TO SUPPORT INFORMED
PARTICIPATION IN ADVISORY GROUP DISCUSSIONS, INCLUDING:

(1) DISTRIBUTING INFORMATION COLLECTED BY THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR UNDER § 15–156 OF THIS TITLE, INCLUDING DATA
~~COLLECTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~RESIDENTIAL~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~AGENCIES~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~CARE~~
~~WORKFORCE:~~

(I) STABILITY, INCLUDING TOTAL NUMBERS OF FULL–TIME
AND PART–TIME HOME CARE WORKERS, PERCENTAGE OF THE YEAR THAT THE
EMPLOYEES WERE EMPLOYED, AVERAGE LENGTH OF EMPLOYMENT, TURNOVER
RATE, VACANCIES, AND UNSTAFFED HOURS MEASURED BY HOURS ALLOTTED IN
PLANS OF SERVICE FOR WHICH THE CONSUMER IS NOT RECEIVING CARE;

(II) COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS, INCLUDING THE HIGHEST,
LOWEST, MEDIAN, AND AVERAGE HOURLY WAGE PAID BY PROVIDER AGENCIES,
NUMBER OF HOURS AUTHORIZED FOR OVERTIME PAY, NUMBER OF HOURS PAID FOR
TRAVEL TIME BETWEEN CLIENTS, AND AVERAGE DAYS OF EARNED SICK AND SAFE
LEAVE PAID TO HOME CARE WORKERS EACH YEAR;

(III) EMPLOYEE BENEFITS, INCLUDING HEALTH, DENTAL, AND
VISION BENEFITS, LIFE AND DISABILITY INSURANCE, PAID LEAVE, RETIREMENT,
AND TUITION REIMBURSEMENT;

(IV) PROVIDER COSTS RELATED TO THE WORKFORCE,
INCLUDING COSTS OF REQUIRED TRAININGS, TRAVEL COSTS FOR DIRECT CARE
~~WORKERS~~ ~~SUCH~~ ~~AS~~ ~~MILEAGE~~ ~~REIMBURSEMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~
SUBSIDIES, AND COSTS OF PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT FOR DIRECT CARE
WORKERS; AND

(V) DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION INCLUDING AGE, GENDER,
RACE AND ETHNICITY, HIGHEST EDUCATIONAL LEVEL ATTAINED, CERTIFICATIONS

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 754

HELD, AND NUMBER OF YEARS OF DIRECT CARE WORK EXPERIENCE CURRENT AND
PROPOSED PAYMENT RATES;

(2) FEDERALLY REQUIRED INFORMATION WITH A DETAILED
EXPLANATION OF THE METHODOLOGY AND DATA LIMITATIONS FOR EACH REPORT,
INCLUDING:

(I) HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES PAYMENT
TRANSPARENCY REPORTS;

(II) PAYMENT ADEQUACY REPORTS AS REQUIRED UNDER 42
C.F.R. § 441.311(E); AND

(III) ACCESS–TO–CARE DATA, AS REQUIRED UNDER 42 C.F.R. §
441.311(D)(2);

(3) BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS PUBLICLY AVAILABLE WAGE
DATA AND OTHER LABOR MARKET AND WORKFORCE DATA;

(4) BENCHMARKING AND RATE STUDIES FOR HOME– AND
COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES CONDUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(5) RATE INFORMATION FROM NEIGHBORING OR SIMILARLY
SITUATED STATES; AND

(6) ACCESS–TO–CARE METRICS, INCLUDING:

(I) THE NUMBER OF CONSUMERS RECEIVING APPLICABLE
SERVICES; AND

(II) THE NUMBER OF UTILIZATION HOURS FOR APPLICABLE
SERVICE CATEGORIES;

(III) A DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE STATE MAINTAINS THE
MEDICAID WAIVER WAITING LIST FOR HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES;

(IV) THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS ON THE WAITING LIST;

(V) THE AVERAGE LENGTH OF TIME NEW WAIVER ENROLLEES
WAITED TO ENROLL; AND

(VI) THE NUMBER OF TIMES INDIVIDUALS MUST RE–APPLY TO
RECEIVE SERVICES.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 754 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT THE ADVISORY GROUP BEFORE
~~MAKING~~ ~~CHANGES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PAYMENT~~ ~~RATES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~APPLICABLE~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~CATEGORIES~~ ~~AND~~
SHALL AFFORD DEFERENCE TO THE ADVISORY GROUP’S RECOMMENDATIONS.

(D) (1) TO SUPPORT THE ADVISORY GROUP AND ENGAGE THE BROADER
DIRECT CARE WORKFORCE AND CONSUMERS ACROSS THE STATE, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP A PUBLIC EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION PLAN
TO INFORM DIRECT CARE WORKERS AND DIRECT CARE CONSUMERS OF:

(I) THE ADVISORY GROUP, ITS PURPOSE, MEETINGS, AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR INPUT; AND

(II) A SUMMARY OF ITS ANNUAL REPORT AND ANY
~~RECOMMENDATIONS.~~

(2) THE PUBLIC EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION PLAN MUST:

(I) ENSURE BROAD LANGUAGE ACCESS AND BE CULTURALLY
~~COMPETENT;~~

(II) USE TARGETED METHODS THAT WILL EFFECTIVELY
ENGAGE DIRECT CARE WORKERS AND DIRECT CARE CONSUMERS, INCLUDING
ADVERTISING AND OTHER MARKETING TOOLS;

(III) INCLUDE AN OPTION FOR DIRECT CARE WORKERS AND
DIRECT CARE CONSUMERS TO PROVIDE INFORMATION, INCLUDING A MAILING
ADDRESS, E–MAIL ADDRESS, OR TELEPHONE NUMBER, FOR PURPOSES OF
RECEIVING ONGOING COMMUNICATION FROM THE DEPARTMENT CONCERNING THE
ADVISORY GROUP AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENGAGEMENT WITH THE ADVISORY
GROUP; AND

(IV) REQUIRE EACH RESIDENTIAL SERVICE AGENCY TO
PROVIDE INFORMATION REGARDING THE ADVISORY GROUP DIRECTLY TO ITS
~~EMPLOYEES.~~

15–1205.

(A) THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL:

(1) EVALUATE THE SUFFICIENCY OF MEDICAID PAYMENT RATES FOR
APPLICABLE SERVICE CATEGORIES; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 754

(2) EXAMINE WORKING CONDITIONS FOR THE DIRECT CARE
WORKFORCE, INCLUDING CURRENT WAGE RATES AND OFFERED BENEFITS,
INITIATIVES FOR RETENTION AND RECRUITMENT OF WORKERS, TRAINING
REQUIREMENTS, AND ACCESS TO WORKER ORGANIZATIONS;

(3) EVALUATE CHALLENGES TO ACCESSING CARE FOR APPLICABLE
MEDICAID HOME– AND COMMUNITY–BASED SERVICES; AND

(4) DEVELOP A COMMUNICATION PLAN FOR THE DEPARTMENT’S
ENGAGEMENT WITH DIRECT CARE WORKERS AND CONSUMERS.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2026,
THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL REPORT ITS ACTIVITIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(2) THE REPORT OF THE ADVISORY GROUP SHALL ADDRESS:

(I) RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INCREASING MEDICAID
PAYMENT RATES FOR APPLICABLE SERVICE CATEGORIES;

(II) EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS FOR DIRECT CARE WORKERS,
~~INCLUDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~WAGE~~ ~~FLOOR~~ ~~AND~~ ~~EFFORTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMBAT~~ ~~MISCLASSIFICATION~~ ~~OF~~
~~EMPLOYEES;~~

(III) REMOVING BARRIERS TO ACCESS TO CARE AND
~~RECOMMENDATIONS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~HOW~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPROVE~~ ~~ACCESS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CONTINUOUS~~
~~CARE;~~

(IV) MEANS THE STATE CAN USE TO COMMUNICATE
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~WORKERS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CONSUMERS~~ ~~ABOUT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURVIEW~~
OF THE ADVISORY GROUP, ITS PURPOSE, ITS MEETINGS AND HEARINGS, AND
OPPORTUNITIES TO PROVIDE INPUT; AND

(V) THE ADVISORY GROUP’S REVIEW OF ANY RACIAL, GENDER,
~~OR~~ ~~ECONOMIC~~ ~~DISPARITIES~~ ~~IMPACTING~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~WORKERS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~CONSUMERS~~
~~AND~~ ~~EXAMPLES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RATES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~DELIVERY~~ ~~SYSTEMS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~APPLICABLE~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~IN~~
~~OTHER~~ ~~STATES~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~FAVORABLE~~ ~~CONDITIONS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~WORKERS~~ ~~AND~~
~~CONSUMERS.~~

(3) ANY RECOMMENDATIONS ADOPTED BY THE ADVISORY GROUP
MUST RECEIVE ~~AN~~ ~~AFFIRMATIVE~~ ~~VOTE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AT~~ ~~LEAST~~ ~~SEVEN~~ ~~MEMBERS~~ A MAJORITY
VOTE.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 754 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) BEFORE THE SUBMISSION OF THE REPORT UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REVIEW THE REPORT ON
RECEIPT FROM THE ADVISORY GROUP AND WITHIN 60 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE
REPORT RESPOND TO ANY RECOMMENDATION, INCLUDING ANY JUSTIFICATION FOR
DECLINING TO IMPLEMENT A RECOMMENDATION OF THE ADVISORY GROUP.

(5) FOLLOWING THE DEPARTMENT’S REVIEW OF THE ANNUAL
REPORT, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(I) PROVIDE THE ADVISORY GROUP WITH AN OPPORTUNITY
TO MAKE CHANGES TO THE REPORT; AND

(II) (C) POST THE DEPARTMENT SHALL POST THE REPORT
TO THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE REPORT HAS BEEN
FINALIZED.

(C) (D) THE ADVISORY GROUP MAY HOLD OPPORTUNITIES TO SOLICIT
AND COLLECT TESTIMONY FROM THE PUBLIC AND INVITE INPUT FROM EMPLOYER
ORGANIZATIONS, WORKER ORGANIZATIONS, CONSUMER ADVOCACY GROUPS, AND
OTHER STAKEHOLDERS IN THE DIRECT CARE INDUSTRY.

(D) (E) (1) AN EMPLOYER OR STATE AGENCY MAY NOT TAKE
RETALIATORY ACTION AGAINST A DIRECT CARE WORKER OR CONSUMER FOR
PARTICIPATION IN THE ADVISORY GROUP.

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT LIMIT THE RIGHTS OF DIRECT CARE
WORKERS UNDER STATE OR FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT OR LABOR LAW, OR
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Deputy Secretary of
Health Care Financing, or the Deputy Secretary’s designee, shall appoint the initial
members of the Maryland Interested Parties Advisory Group on or before October 1, 2025.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10