START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1122 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1122 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Office of Child Care Advisory Council - Membership - Alterations 
 
 
This bill increases the maximum number of members of the Office of Child Care Advisory 
Council (from 30 to 31) and adds a representative of the Maryland Association of Public 
Library Administrators to the membership of the council. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Early Childhood Development Advisory Council is responsible for 
(1) advising and counseling the Early Childhood Development Division of the Maryland 
State Department of Education; (2) reviewing regulations proposed by State agencies 
regulating child care to ensure coordination and consistency; (3) reviewing issues and 
problems relating to care of children and suggesting priorities for consideration by the 
division; and (4) identifying interdepartmental issues of importance to child care providers 
and users that should be addressed by the division and other State agencies. The council 
consists of numerous members, including representatives from specified State agencies. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1122/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2