START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1193 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1193 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing Development Permits - Local Reporting Requirements (Maryland 
Housing Data Transparency Act) 
 
This bill requires each county – that meets the definition under the Land Use Article of a 
local jurisdiction with at least 150,000 residents – to report to the Maryland Department of 
Planning (MDP), quarterly, beginning January 1, 2027, specified information relating to 
building or development permits that include a residential housing component. The bill 
also authorizes municipalities to report such information in the same manner. A county 
must make the reports publicly available. By July 1, 2027, and as information becomes 
available thereafter, MDP must publish reported information on a public, interactive, and 
searchable website and annually report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
information collected under the bill as well as specified information collected under current 
law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $86,100 in FY 2026. Future years 
reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
86,100 
102,500 
107,000 
111,800 
116,500 
Net Effect 
($86,100) 
($102,500) 
($107,000) 
($111,800) 
($116,500) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1193/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Counties and Municipalities – Permit Reporting 
 
The bill requires each county that meets the definition under the Land Use Article of a local 
jurisdiction with at least 150,000 residents (see Current Law), beginning January 1, 2027, 
and each quarter thereafter, to report to MDP the following information for each building 
or development permit, that includes a residential housing component as part of the 
development, issued by the county during the immediately preceding quarter: 
 
 
the permit number; 
 
the permit approval date; 
 
the date on which the use and occupancy permit was issued; 
 
the parcel tax identification number; 
 
the site address; 
 
the housing type authorized under the permit; 
 
the permit type; 
 
the total number of residential units authorized under the permit; 
 
a general description of the work authorized; 
 
the total cost of construction; and 
 
any other information the jurisdiction considers relevant. 
 
The bill also authorizes a municipality to report such information, for building and 
development permits (that include a residential housing component) issued by the 
municipality, in the same manner. 
 
A county must make the reports publicly available on its website unless it does not maintain 
a website, in which case the reports must be made available through any other reasonable 
method. An announcement posted to a county’s website stating that a person should contact 
the relevant local department for access to the reports does not meet this requirement. 
 
Maryland Department of Planning – Website and Reporting Requirements 
 
By July 1, 2027, and as the information becomes available thereafter, MDP must publish 
the information reported by local jurisdictions for the immediately preceding fiscal year:  
(1) on a public, interactive, and searchable website; (2) by housing type, specifically 
labeled as single family, townhouses, apartments, duplexes, triplexes, or quadplexes; (3) by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1193/ Page 3 
the total built and existing housing supply, organized by housing type, in each county in 
the State; and (4) by data source. 
 
By December 31 each year, MDP must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the building permit information collected under the bill, and the 
information currently collected by July 1 each year from local jurisdictions with at least 
150,000 residents on building or development permit applications that include a residential 
housing component (discussed below under Current Law). 
 
MDP may adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions and the existing provisions 
requiring reporting by local jurisdictions with at least 150,000 residents on building or 
development permit applications that include a residential housing component. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Local Jurisdictions – Annual Reports to the Maryland Department of Planning 
 
 
Development – Measures and Indicators 
 
A local planning commission must file an annual report with the local legislative body and 
the Secretary of Planning by July 1 of each year. Among other requirements, the report 
must (1) index and locate on a map any changes in development patterns; (2) contain 
recommendations for improving the planning and development process within the local 
jurisdiction; and (3) state which local laws or regulations have been adopted or changed to 
implement planning visions.  
 
In addition, for jurisdictions that issue 50 or more building permits for new residential units 
each year, the annual report must contain certain “measures and indicators,” including 
(1) the amount, share, and net density of growth inside and outside priority funding areas; 
(2) the creation of new lots and the issuance of residential and commercial building permits 
inside and outside priority funding areas; and (3) a development capacity analysis, updated 
every three years and whenever there is a significant change in zoning or land use patterns. 
MDP must report on the measures and indicators collected from the local jurisdictions 
each year. 
 
 
Building or Development Permit Applications 
 
Chapter 213 of 2024 requires each local jurisdiction with at least 150,000 residents to file 
an annual report with the Department of Housing and Community Development and MDP 
by July 1 each year. The report must include – for building or development permit 
applications during the immediately preceding calendar year that include a residential 
housing component – among other things, (1) the total number of complete applications 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1193/ Page 4 
received, issued, and rejected, by type; (2) the net total number of residential units 
approved; and (3) any type of expedited permit application process that the local 
jurisdiction employed to accelerate residential housing development projects. 
 
A local jurisdiction must make the report publicly available on its website unless it does 
not maintain a website, in which case the report must be made available through any other 
reasonable method. An announcement posted to a local jurisdiction’s website stating that 
a person should contact the relevant local department for access to the report does not meet 
this requirement. To the extent practicable, a local jurisdiction may submit and transmit the 
report required under the bill as part of another report required to be filed under the 
Land Use Article. 
 
 
“Local Jurisdiction” Definition 
 
Under Division I of the Land Use Article, which contains the above current law provisions, 
and to which the bill’s provisions are added, “local jurisdiction” means a county or 
municipality and the territory within which its planning and zoning authority may be 
exercised. MDP indicates that the following counties (including Baltimore City) have at 
least 150,000 residents within the area of the county in which the county exercises planning 
and zoning authority (excluding any area of a county consisting of municipalities that 
exercise planning and zoning authority):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Frederick, 
Harford, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties, and Baltimore City. No 
municipalities have at least 150,000 residents. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $86,109 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost for MDP to hire 
one geographic information systems (GIS) administrator to establish and maintain a 
building/development permit database and online dashboard, to meet the requirements of 
the bill. Despite the reporting under the bill by counties, and any municipalities that choose 
to report, beginning January 1, 2027, MDP indicates that the GIS administrator needs to 
begin working with counties, and any municipalities, in fiscal 2026 to convert their 
building permit data into a common format that will allow MDP to combine all of the data 
into one reporting structure. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time  
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$78,740 
Operating Expenses 
    7,369 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$86,109 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1193/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Any costs incurred by counties required to report permit information 
under the bill are expected to be minimal, based on information received from certain 
affected counties, the Maryland Association of Counties, and MDP (which surveyed 
counties and municipalities in 2020 regarding their building permit software systems and 
has worked with a small number of jurisdictions for the past few years under a pilot project 
to determine what building permit data is available and how easily it could be compiled 
into a common database). Any costs incurred by municipalities that choose to report 
information under the bill are assumed to be minimal or incurred at the municipalities’ 
discretion.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 944 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Harford, and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Frederick; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5