START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1191 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1191 
(Delegate McComas, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Child Custody - Determinations 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous factors in statute that courts may consider in determining 
what legal custody and physical custody is in the best interest of a child. The court must 
articulate its findings of fact on the record or in a written opinion, including the 
consideration of each factor specified in the bill and any other factor that the court 
considered. The bill also authorizes a court to modify a child custody or visitation order if 
the court determines that there has been a material change in circumstances since the 
issuance of the order, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes a new subtitle that specifies numerous factors for 
judicial consideration in cases involving custody of a child. Subject to specified statutory 
provisions regarding evidence of abuse and neglect and individuals with specified 
convictions, in determining what legal and physical custody is in the best interest of the 
child, the court may consider specified factors, including:   
 
 
stability and the foreseeable health and welfare of the child; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1191/ Page 2 
 
whether and how parents who do not live together will share the rights and 
responsibilities of raising the child; 
 
the child’s physical and emotional security and protection from exposure to conflict 
and violence; 
 
the child’s developmental needs, including physical safety, emotional security, 
positive self‐image, interpersonal skills, and intellectual and cognitive growth; 
 
the day‐to‐day needs of the child, including education, socialization, culture and 
religion, food, shelter, clothing, and mental and physical health; 
 
the parents’ relationship with each other, as specified; 
 
the child’s preference, if age‐appropriate; and 
 
any other factor that the court considers appropriate in determining how best to serve 
the physical, developmental, and emotional needs of the child. 
 
The court may modify a child custody or visitation order if the court determines that 
(1) there has been a material change in circumstances since the issuance of the order that 
relates to the needs of the child or the ability of the parents to meet those needs and 
(2) modifying the order is in the best interest of the child. A parent’s proposal to relocate 
the residence of the parent or child in a way that would cause physical custody to be 
impracticable constitutes a material change in circumstances. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Child Custody Determinations 
 
Maryland courts resolve child custody disputes based on a determination of what is in the 
child’s best interests. However, the factors to be considered by a court in making such a 
determination are not specified in statute but have instead been developed through case 
law. The criteria for judicial determination include, but are not limited to (1) the fitness of 
the parents; (2) the character and reputation of the parents; (3) the desire of the natural 
parents and any agreements between them; (4) the potential for maintaining natural family 
relations; (5) the preference of the child, when the child is of sufficient age and capacity to 
form a rational judgment; (6) material opportunities affecting the future life of the child; 
(7) the age, health, and sex of the child; (8) the residences of the parents and the opportunity 
for visitation; (9) the length of the separation of the parents; and (10) whether there was a 
prior voluntary abandonment or surrender of custody of the child. Montgomery County v. 
Sanders, 38 Md. App. 406 (1977). 
 
Traditionally, when one parent was granted custody of a minor child, the other parent 
would generally be awarded visitation rights. In 1984, the Court of Appeals (now the 
Supreme Court of Maryland) first recognized and applied the concept of “joint custody.” 
See Taylor v. Taylor, 306 Md. 290 (1986). The Taylor Court explained that, within the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1191/ Page 3 
meaning of “custody” are the concepts of “legal” and “physical” custody. “Legal custody” 
means the right and obligation to make long-range decisions involving the education, 
religious training, discipline, medical care, and other matters of major significance 
concerning the child’s life and welfare. With joint legal custody, both parents have an equal 
voice in making those decisions and neither parent’s rights are superior to the other. 
“Physical custody” means the right and obligation to provide a home for the child and to 
make the day-to-day decisions required during the time the child is actually with the parent 
having such custody. Joint physical custody is in reality, shared or divided custody with 
the child in the physical custody of each parent for periods of time that may or may not be 
on a 50/50 basis. Taylor at 296-297. 
 
In addition to the factors set forth in the Sanders decision, a court considering an award of 
joint custody must also examine a range of factors particularly relevant to a determination 
of joint custody, including (1) the capacity of the parents to communicate and reach shared 
decisions affecting the child’s welfare; (2) the willingness of the parents to share custody; 
(3) the fitness of the parents; (4) the relationship established between the child and each 
parent; (5) the preference of the child; (6) the potential disruption of the child’s social and 
school life; (7) the geographic proximity of parental homes; (8) the demands of parental 
employment; (9) the age and number of children; (10) the sincerity of the parents’ request; 
(11) the financial status of the parents; (12) any impact on State or federal assistance; 
(13) the benefit to the parents; and (14) any other factors the court considers appropriate. 
Taylor at 304-311. The Taylor Court emphasized that the single most important factor in 
the determination of whether an award of joint legal custody is appropriate is the capacity 
of the parents to communicate and to reach shared decisions affecting the child’s welfare. 
Taylor at 305. 
 
Section 1‐201 of the Family Law Article grants the circuit court continuing equitable 
jurisdiction in custody matters by generally establishing that in exercising its jurisdiction 
over custody, guardianship, visitation, or child support cases, the circuit court may set aside 
or modify its decree or order concerning the child. 
 
Custody – Evidence of Abuse or Neglect 
 
In any custody or visitation proceeding, if the court has reasonable grounds to believe that 
a child has been abused or neglected by a party to the proceeding, the court must determine 
whether abuse or neglect is likely to occur if custody or visitation rights are granted to the 
party. Unless the court specifically finds that there is no likelihood of further child abuse 
or neglect by the party, the court must deny custody or visitation rights to that party. 
However, the court is authorized to approve a supervised visitation arrangement that 
assures the safety and physiological, psychological, and emotional well-being of the child. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1191/ Page 4 
The court must consider evidence of abuse by a party against the other parent of the party’s 
child, the party’s spouse, or any child residing within the party’s household, including a 
child other than the child who is the subject of the custody or visitation proceeding. If the 
court finds that the party has committed abuse against any of these individuals, it must 
make arrangements for custody or visitation that best protect the child who is the subject 
of the proceeding and the victim of the abuse. 
 
Custody – Parents with Specified Convictions 
 
Unless good cause for the award of custody or visitation with a child is shown by clear and 
convincing evidence, a court may not award custody or visitation to a parent who has been 
found guilty of first- or second-degree murder (or similar acts in another jurisdiction) of 
specified individuals. If it is in the best interest of the child, however, a court may approve 
a supervised visitation arrangement that assures the safety and the psychological, 
physiological, and emotional well-being of the child. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 327 and HB 848 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 548 (Senator James, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4