START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1145 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1145 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Waiting Period After License Denial 
 
 
This bill establishes, in Baltimore County, that if an alcoholic beverages license application 
is denied, another license application for the same location may not be made for one year 
after the denial. If a license application for a location is denied twice, a license may not be 
issued for the same location for two years after the second denial. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, if an alcoholic beverages license application is denied, another 
application may not be considered from the same applicant or for the same location for 
six months after the denial and if a subsequent application by the same applicant or for the 
same location is denied within a two-year period immediately after the first denial, another 
application may not be considered from that applicant or for that location until the  
two-year period expires. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1145/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2