START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1236 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1236 
(Delegate Arentz, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Queen Anne's County - Municipalities - Speed Limits 
 
 
This bill authorizes a municipality located in Queen Anne’s County to decrease the 
maximum speed limit to not less than 15 miles per hour (MPH) on a highway without 
performing an engineering and traffic investigation.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase minimally due to more citations for 
speeding, assuming any municipalities in Queen Anne’s County use the authorization 
granted by the bill to decrease speed limits when they would not have done so absent the 
bill. The District Court can handle any additional caseload with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Within Queen Anne’s County, municipal expenditures decrease minimally 
to the extent that fewer engineering and traffic investigations are conducted to lower speed 
limits. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Speed Limits – Generally 
 
Unless there is a special danger that requires a lower speed, the maximum lawful speeds 
on a State highway are (1) 15 MPH in alleys in Baltimore County; (2) 30 MPH on all 
highways in a business district and on undivided highways in a residential district; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1236/ Page 2 
(3) 35 MPH on divided highways in a residential district; (4) 50 MPH on undivided 
highways in other locations; and (5) 55 MPH on divided highways in other locations. 
A maximum speed limit of more than 55 MPH may not be established on any highway in 
the State that is not an interstate highway or an expressway, and a maximum speed limit of 
more than 70 MPH may not be established on any highway in the State.  
 
If, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, a local authority determines that 
a maximum speed is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under existing conditions on 
any part of a highway in its jurisdiction, the local authority may establish a reasonable and 
safe maximum speed limit for that part of the highway, which may:   
 
 
decrease the limit at an intersection;  
 
increase the limit in an urban district to no more than 50 MPH;  
 
decrease the speed limit in an urban district; or  
 
decrease the limit outside an urban district to no less than 25 MPH.  
 
An engineering and traffic investigation is not required to conform a speed limit in effect 
on December 31, 1974, to one of the specified speed limits established by statute.  
 
Altered Speed Limits 
 
Anne Arundel and Montgomery counties and municipalities within the counties may 
decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH on a highway but only after 
performing an engineering and traffic investigation. However, a local authority may not 
implement a new speed monitoring system to enforce speed limits on any portion of a 
highway for which the speed limit has been decreased pursuant to this authorization.  
 
Calvert County is authorized to decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH 
on Lore Road and, except for Solomons Island Road, each highway south of Lore Road 
without performing an engineering and traffic investigation, regardless of whether the 
highway is inside an urban district. 
 
Altered speed limits are effective when posted on appropriate signs giving notice of the 
limit. Any alteration by a local authority (except in Baltimore City) of a maximum speed 
limit on a part (or extension) of a State highway is not effective until approved by the 
State Highway Administration.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1236/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Queen Anne’s County; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3