START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1209 
(Delegates McComas and Grammer) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Abuse and Neglect - Reports and Records - Disclosure 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that govern, in certain circumstances involving the 
fatality or near fatality of a child, the disclosure of related reports and records. The bill 
requires a local director (of a local department of social services) or the Secretary of Human 
Services to disclose, within 30 days of receiving a request, information concerning child 
abuse or neglect if the child (1) was in the custody of a local or State department or agency, 
or in the care of a foster parent; (2) is the subject of an investigation, a report, a referral, or 
a complaint received by a local/State department or agency; and (3) suffered a fatality or 
near fatality. Disclosed information under these circumstances remains limited to actions 
or omissions of the local department, the Department of Human Services (DHS), or an 
agent of DHS. On receiving a request for disclosure, the Secretary of Human Services must 
promptly notify the State’s Attorney’s office. The office must then have 30 days to redact 
from the record any portion of the record that, if made public, would seriously hinder the 
ability of the office to prosecute a criminal case arising from the incident. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1209/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, generally, reports and records 
concerning child abuse and neglect are confidential and may not be disclosed unless 
permitted by one of a number of statutory exceptions. 
 
However, under current law, the director of a local department of social services or the 
Secretary of Human Services must, on request, disclose information concerning child abuse 
or neglect if (1) the information is limited to actions or omissions of the local department, 
DHS, or an agent of DHS; (2) the child named in a report has suffered a fatality or near 
fatality; and (3) the local director or the Secretary has consulted the State’s Attorney’s 
office. Prior to disclosure under these circumstances, the local director or the Secretary 
must also be advised by the State’s Attorney that disclosure of the information would not 
jeopardize or prejudice a related investigation or prosecution. The bill repeals these 
provisions, instead requiring disclosure under the circumstances and procedures as 
specified above. 
 
Under current law, if information is not disclosed due to the advice of the State’s Attorney, 
the State’s Attorney must notify the local director or the Secretary within 10 days after the 
conclusion of the related investigation or prosecution; within 30 days after this notification, 
the local director or the Secretary must disclose the information in accordance with 
statutory provisions. The bill makes conforming changes to these provisions, instead 
requiring the State’s Attorney, if any information was redacted, to notify the local director 
or the Secretary within 10 days after conclusion of the related investigation or prosecution. 
The bill further removes a requirement that, before disclosing the information, the local 
director and the Secretary must also consult with each other (in addition to consulting the 
State’s Attorney). 
 
Statute specifies the following as information that must be disclosed by a local director or 
the Secretary:   
 
 
the name of the allegedly abused or neglected child who has suffered a fatality; 
 
the date of the report of the alleged child abuse or neglect and of any prior or 
subsequent reports; 
 
the findings made by the local department at the conclusion of its investigation and 
the related disposition based on the findings; 
 
any services provided to (and the number of referrals for professional services for) 
the alleged abuser or neglecter, the allegedly abused or neglected child, and 
household or family members; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1209/ Page 3 
 
any prior adjudication as a child in need of assistance of the allegedly abused or 
neglected child, a sibling of the child, or another child in the household, family, or 
care of the alleged abuser/neglector; 
 
the status of any case involving the child that was open at the time of the fatality or 
near fatality; 
 
a summary of the facts of the fatality or near fatality, including the date of the fatality 
or near fatality, and in the case of a fatality, the cause of death reported by the 
medical examiner; and 
 
any information concerning the circumstances of the alleged child abuse or neglect 
and the investigation of the circumstances, if the local director or the Secretary 
determines that the disclosure is consistent with the public interest. 
 
The local director and the Secretary are prohibited from disclosing certain information, 
including the identity of an individual who made a report, the name of a child who has 
suffered a near fatality, the names of other family members of the allegedly abused or 
neglected child, and medical reports other than those related to the cause of the child’s 
injury or death as a result of the alleged abuse or neglect. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 89 and HB 937 of 2024; SB 631 and HB 1019 of 2023; and HB 1246 
of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3