START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1244 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration Waiver Advisory Council - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill generally codifies the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration 
(DDA) Waiver Advisory Council in DDA, with additions to the membership compared to 
the existing council. DDA must staff the council. Members of the council may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel 
regulations. The council may provide travel arrangements for members of the council with 
disabilities. DDA must include a dedicated council webpage on the Maryland Department 
of Health website that includes specified information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill generally codifies the current DDA Waiver Council, any 
expenditures resulting from the bill can likely be absorbed with existing budgeted resources 
(such as additional travel or expense reimbursement). Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the council is to (1) advise and provide recommendations 
to DDA on system design, service delivery, and quality enhancement strategies for the 
Medicaid waiver programs operated by DDA and (2) foster meaningful engagement and 
establish a feedback loop with all stakeholders while prioritizing input from individuals 
with lived experience with a Medicaid waiver program. The council must adhere to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1244/ Page 2 
person-centered thinking, diversity, equity, and inclusion principles, and evidence-based 
and data-driven discussion and problem solving. The council must provide advice and 
make recommendations to DDA on (1) DDA-operated Medicaid waiver program system 
design, including waiver application regulations and policies; (2) service delivery and 
access to services; (3) federal waiver assurances; (4) ensuring access to Medicaid services; 
(5) quality enhancement efforts and improvement strategies; (6) communication with 
stakeholders, including a transparent feedback process; and (7) collaborative processes 
with stakeholders. 
 
The council must vote on the advice and recommendations provided to DDA and attempt 
to reach consensus. All members must be afforded an opportunity to be heard. If consensus 
cannot be reached, the council may vote with a 75% agreement threshold. A council 
member may not vote on another member’s behalf; however, a council member may 
designate a proxy. A council member’s proxy (1) may vote on behalf of a member only if 
the proxy is attending the meeting for the member and (2) may not vote on behalf of the 
proxy. 
 
Council Membership 
 
The council consists of the following voting members appointed by the Secretary of Health, 
including: 
 
 
21 individuals with lived experience participating in a DDA program, as specified; 
 
2 licensed providers of residential and day services; 
 
2 certified providers of services including employment, personal support, 
technology, and transportation; 
 
2 coordination of community services providers; 
 
1 financial management and counseling services provider; 
 
1 representative of an ethnic advocacy group in the State; 
 
1 representative of the Maryland Center for Developmental Disabilities; 
 
1 representative of the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Council; 
 
1 representative of the Self-Directed Advocacy Network of Maryland; 
 
1 representative of the Parents’ Place of Maryland;  
 
1 representative of the Maryland Association of Community Services;  
 
1 representative of The Arc Maryland; 
 
1 individual who is a support broker; 
 
1 representative of Service Coordination, Inc.; 
 
3 family members with experience with self-directed services; and 
 
3 family members with experience with traditional services. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1244/ Page 3 
The council also consists of the following nonvoting members, including: 
 
 
1 member of the Senate of Maryland; 
 
1 member of the House of Delegates; 
 
the Director of Federal Programs and Integrity in DDA; 
 
1 representative of the Department of Disabilities; 
 
1 representative of the Department of Housing and Community Development; 
 
1 representative of the Department of Human Services; 
 
1 representative of the Division of Rehabilitation Services in the Maryland State 
Department of Education; and 
 
7 members designated or appointed by the Secretary of Health. 
 
The Director of Federal Programs must serve as a nonvoting cochair, and the council must 
vote for the additional cochair. Family members appointed to the council must include at 
least one family member from each region. To the extent practical, the membership of the 
council must reflect the gender, racial, ethnic, and geographical diversity of the State. DDA 
must establish an application and review process for members who wish to serve on the 
council. 
 
Council Meetings 
 
The council must meet once every two months in a location that is made publicly available 
at least two weeks before the meeting. The council may hold additional meetings if 
determined necessary by the cochairs. Meetings of the council must (1) be open to the 
public and recorded by video; (2) follow agendas that are distributed at least one week 
before the meeting to council members by email; (3) conclude with a clear understanding 
of expectations and assignments for future steps; (4) provide accommodations for 
individuals with disabilities; and (5) include time for public comment after meeting agenda 
items have been addressed. 
 
Meetings may be held virtually if determined necessary by the cochairs. The council must 
provide notice of its meetings by email to members at least one week before the meeting 
and must include an agenda and any documents to be reviewed for the meeting. Meeting 
minutes must be distributed within two weeks after each meeting. 
 
The council may form workgroups that may meet as directed by the cochairs. The council 
must establish a code of conduct for council meetings. 
 
Current Law:  DDA provides self-directed services through three special Medicaid waiver 
programs known as the Medicaid home- and community-based services (HCBS) programs, 
including the Family Supports, Community Supports, and Community Pathways waivers. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1244/ Page 4 
Medicaid waiver programs allow states to make exceptions to specified rules and enable 
services to be provided in different settings that are tailored to individuals with different 
needs or varying income levels. For those who qualify, the waiver programs offer services 
within the community as an alternative to receiving services in an institution. Applicants 
must meet specific technical, medical, and financial criteria to receive services. 
 
A participant in self-directed DDA services works with a coordinator of community 
services to identify needs and preferences and identify an allocated budget amount. A 
participant develops a self-directed budget for services authorized in their person-centered 
plan. Participants then select staff or vendors and arrange for services and supports as 
authorized in the person-centered plan. 
 
The DDA Waiver Advisory Council first convened in October 2024 to bring together 
individuals who have used Medicaid waiver HCBS programs, as well as other interested 
groups. The goal of the council is to help improve HCBS programs. The council provides 
input on (1) how DDA-operated Medicaid waiver programs are designed; (2) how services 
are delivered and accessed by people; (3) federal rules; (4) improving access to Medicaid 
services; and (5) strategies to make sure services continue to improve. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1027 (Senator Lewis Young) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4