START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1296 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1296 
(Delegates Pruski and Lehman) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Managed Aquifer Recharge Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR) Pilot Program in the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) to authorize, regulate, and evaluate the use of 
treated reclaimed water as a source for groundwater augmentation through MAR permits. 
Except as otherwise provided in the bill, a person may not perform groundwater 
augmentation. MDE must accept applications for MAR permits from January 2, 2026, 
through January 3, 2028, but may only issue one MAR permit under the pilot program, as 
specified. A permit is effective for five years, and MDE is authorized to refuse, revoke, or 
renew a permit, as specified. The bill establishes annual reporting requirements for MDE 
and a permittee. MDE is authorized to adopt regulations to carry out the pilot program. 
The bill terminates September 30, 2036. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can implement the pilot program, review permit applications, and issue 
one MAR permit using existing budgeted resources, but general fund expenditures may 
increase minimally as early as FY 2026 to reimburse the Maryland Department of Health’s 
(MDH) Laboratories Administration for costs incurred to conduct water testing under the 
bill; MDH general fund expenditures and revenues are likewise affected. State revenues 
are otherwise not materially affected; there is no permit fee. 
 
Local Effect:  Although any participation is voluntary, the bill creates a potential novel 
source of groundwater augmentation for a participating local government. To the extent 
that a local government participates, local expenditures likely increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful effect for certain small 
businesses, as discussed below.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1296/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Key Definitions 
 
A “demonstration facility” is an advanced water treatment facility approved under an 
MAR permit to treat reclaimed water for use as a source for testing groundwater 
augmentation. “Groundwater augmentation” means the injection of reclaimed water into 
an aquifer for any purpose that is not discharge. A “managed aquifer recharge permit” is a 
permit issued by MDE for groundwater augmentation.  
 
Authorized Review, Permitting, and Regulation 
 
MDE may review, permit, and regulate groundwater augmentation through an 
MAR permit if MDE determines that the groundwater augmentation will address a 
groundwater supply or quality problem that is occurring or reasonably anticipated to occur 
in the next 25 years and the applicant/proposed facility meets several specified conditions, 
including, among other things, that (1) the proposed location of the demonstration facility 
is suitable for long-term implementation of groundwater augmentation; (2) the reclaimed 
water will be treated at the demonstration facility to meet or surpass specified requirements; 
(3) the reclaimed water will undergo testing and reporting to verify that applicable 
requirements are met; (4) the applicant has conducted an analysis to evaluate alternatives 
to groundwater augmentation; (5) the applicant has in place a detailed testing and 
monitoring plan, as specified; (6) the applicant has identified all wells that withdraw water 
from within two years of travel time for the water from the location where groundwater 
augmentation is proposed and has evaluated the potential impact to those wells; (7) the 
applicant has identified all industrial users that discharge to the sewerage system from 
which the reclaimed water is received and the pollutants in each industrial users’ discharge; 
(8) the applicant has performed a hydrogeological investigation that includes specified 
descriptions, maps, and a summary of the results from specified groundwater samples;  
(9) the applicant has submitted a specified mitigation plan to address environmental and 
safe drinking water risks; (10) the applicant submits a detailed operation and maintenance 
plan to MDE; and (11) the applicant gives MDE the right of entry on the permit site (at any 
reasonable time) to inspect or investigate any existing or potential violations of the permit.  
 
Permit Applications 
 
A successful application for an MAR permit must:   
 
 
demonstrate to the satisfaction of MDE (1) the ability to comply with the applicable 
requirements; (2) the applicant’s available funding for the construction and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1296/ Page 3 
operation of the demonstration facility and implementation of any contingency or 
emergency plan; (3) the technical and administrative capacity to comply with the 
permit; and (4) that all necessary planning and engineering design is complete; and 
 
include any additional information requested by MDE. 
 
Permit Issuance and Terms 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article, which governs public participation in the 
permitting process, governs the issuance of MAR permits. In addition to the notice required 
under that subtitle, an applicant must send written notice of the application to each owner 
of a property containing a well that is identified as having withdrawn water within 
two years of travel time for the water from the location where groundwater augmentation 
is proposed.  
 
MDE may include in a permit any term, condition, or requirement that MDE considers 
appropriate to protect public health or the environment. Permit requirements are 
supplemental to, and do not override, any other law, regulation, permit, order, or decree. 
The permit must include a requirement to (1) initiate a tracer study within three months of 
beginning injections in order to verify the reclaimed water’s retention time in the aquifer, 
as specified, and (2) submit the results of the tracer study to MDE as soon as practicable 
after the completion of the study.  
 
An MAR permit issued by MDE is effective for five years. Before a permit expires, MDE 
may renew a permit for an additional period of five years after administrative review by 
MDE and in accordance with Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article. 
 
MDE may refuse to issue an MAR permit under specified conditions. Among other things, 
MDE may refuse to issue a permit if the applicant fails to provide any requested 
information or fails to demonstrate compliance with the bill’s requirements to MDE’s 
satisfaction. 
 
MDE may revoke a permit under specified conditions. Among other things, MDE may 
revoke a permit if it finds that the application included false or inaccurate information, the 
conditions or requirements of the permit have been or are about to be violated, or the treated 
reclaimed water may threaten public health, safety, comfort, or the environment. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By September 1 each year, a permit holder must report to MDE on (1) the applied scientific 
results of any demonstration facility or groundwater augmentation activities conducted 
under the pilot program and (2) any recommendations for the pilot program based on the 
permit holder’s experience. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1296/ Page 4 
By December 31, 2028, and each December 31 thereafter, MDE must report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on (1) the status of the pilot program; (2) any scientific 
results and recommendations reported by a permit holder; (3) whether the pilot program 
should be modified, extended, or made permanent; and (4) any statutory or regulatory 
changes that MDE recommends to permanently authorize the regulated use of treated 
reclaimed water as a source for groundwater augmentation, if appropriate.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Groundwater Discharges and Maryland Water Supply Program 
 
Federal and State laws and regulations govern the activities of MDE’s Water Supply 
Program, water utilities, and water users. The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), originally 
passed in 1974 (40 Code of Federal Regulations §§ 141 and 143), is the main federal law 
that ensures the quality of drinking water in the United States. Under SDWA, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) sets standards for drinking water quality and 
oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards. 
SDWA was amended in 1986 and 1996 and requires several actions to protect drinking 
water and its sources (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, springs, and ground water wells). These 
standards generally do not apply to private drinking water wells. Rather, private well 
owners are responsible for the safety of their own wells after initial construction and 
certification is completed. MDE is responsible for primary enforcement of SDWA in the 
State. 
 
COMAR 26.08.04, 26.08.02.09, and 26.08.07 establish specific requirements for the 
discharge or disposal of water or wastewater into the underground waters of the State and 
for underground injection control (UIC). MDE notes that it currently regulates MAR 
through existing UIC permits, called Class V wells governed under these COMAR 
provisions. 
 
Federal Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. MDE 
issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by controlling industrial 
and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are regulated through 
combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater discharges are regulated 
through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1296/ Page 5 
Reclaimed Water 
 
It is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the use of “reclaimed water” in order 
to conserve water supplies and to meet other stated goals. MDE is statutorily required to 
encourage the use of reclaimed water for irrigation. “Reclaimed water” is defined as 
sewage that has been treated to a high quality suitable for various reuses and meets water 
quality standards for certain contaminants. Reclaimed water is authorized for irrigation of 
farmland, golf courses, athletic fields, turf, landscaping, and any other use that 
MDE considers appropriate. 
 
Indirect Potable Reuse Pilot Program 
 
The Indirect Potable Pilot Program was established pursuant to Chapters 122 and 123 of 
2023 to authorize the regulated use of reclaimed water as a source for drinking water 
treatment facilities. Under the program, MDE may review, permit, and regulate a process 
to use reclaimed water as a source for a drinking water treatment facility through a potable 
reuse permit under certain circumstances. Permittees must also authorize MDE to inspect 
or investigate the site to check for existing or potential violations of the potable refuse 
permit. 
 
MDE was required to accept applications for potable reuse permits between July 1, 2023, 
and June 30, 2024. A potable refuse permit is effective for five years. Before a permit 
expires, MDE may renew a permit after administrative review in accordance with 
regulations that MDE adopts and in accordance with Title 1 Subtitle 6 of the Environment 
Article. 
 
Public Notice for Certain Permit Applications 
 
Title 1, Subtitle 6 of the Environment Article establishes the general public participation 
requirements for a number of permits issued by MDE, including permits to discharge 
pollutants into waters of the State and potable reuse permits. 
 
Relevant Enforcement Provisions 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 of the Environment Article, which are 
established under provisions relating to Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article 
(Water Pollution Control), establish enforcement procedures that govern (1) the ability of 
MDE to issue complaints, conduct hearings, issue corrective orders, and obtain injunctive 
relief and (2) judicial review of final decisions. (Because the bill’s provisions are codified 
under Subtitle 3 of Title 9 of the Environment Article, these enforcement provisions are 
applicable.) 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1296/ Page 6 
Under § 9-343 of the Environment Article, a person who violates any provision of or fails 
to perform any duty imposed by Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article, or who 
violates any provision or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under that subtitle, is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a 
first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for 
a subsequent offense. The person may also be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
In addition, a person is guilty of misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum 
fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person (1) knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, 
or other document filed or required to be maintained under the subtitle or (2) falsifies, 
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required 
to be maintained under the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or 
issued under the subtitle. 
 
Pursuant to § 9-344 of the Environment Article, the Attorney General is in charge of 
prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf of the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
MDE anticipates that it can develop the MAR Pilot Program, review permit applications, 
and issue one MAR permit within existing resources. However, MDE may incur costs to 
reimburse MDH for testing water samples (discussed below).  
 
The bill does not establish a permit application fee, so no additional revenues are 
anticipated from any permit applications submitted under the bill. Although the permitted 
facility may be required to obtain other MDE-issued permits (required under current law) 
in order to operate, because there will only be one permittee, the bill is not expected to 
materially affect MDE’s fee revenues. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH’s Laboratories Administration provides analytical support services for State 
agencies and program offices throughout the State and is the primary laboratory in the State 
that conducts water testing for MDE and local health departments. The Laboratories 
Administration has a memorandum of understanding (MOU) in place with MDE to recoup 
related water testing costs. The Laboratories Administration anticipates that it is likely 
responsible for any increased water testing under the bill.  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1296/ Page 7 
Thus, general fund expenditures and revenues (from reimbursement under the MOU) for 
the Laboratories Administration may increase beginning as early as fiscal 2026 from any 
additional water testing resulting from the bill. The Laboratories Administration anticipates 
that testing costs and related revenues associated with one permitted facility are roughly 
$17,000 annually. Actual impacts on MDH finances depend on the water testing 
requirements established under MDE’s implementing regulations.  
 
Penalty Provisions 
 
The application of existing penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Although any participation in the pilot program is voluntary, a 
participating local government may benefit from the flexibility to use reclaimed water as a 
potential source for groundwater augmentation. However, to the extent that a local 
government applies for and receives an MAR permit, local expenditures likely increase, 
potentially significantly, to construct a demonstration facility, adequately treat reclaimed 
water, and comply with other permit requirements. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) notes that because MDE may issue only one MAR permit under the pilot program, 
the local government impact is limited. 
 
The application of existing penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect local incarceration costs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may provide new business and employment opportunities 
for small businesses involved in the treatment and use of reclaimed water as a source for 
groundwater augmentation. There could be opportunities for small businesses that create 
plans for using reclaimed water, that sell parts or equipment, and potentially, for those that 
provide installation or maintenance services.  
 
Additional Comments:  DLS notes that the bill requires MDE to accept applications for 
MAR permits from January 2, 2026, through January 3, 2028. However, the bill also 
prohibits MDE from issuing more than one MAR permit under the pilot program. This 
analysis assumes that MDE may issue an MAR permit to a qualified applicant during the 
application period, in part because:   
 
 
the bill specifies that the permit is valid for five years and may be renewed for 
five additional years; and 
 
the bill terminates September 30, 2036. 
 
To the extent MDE is prohibited from issuing an MAR permit until the application period 
has closed, the fiscal effects discussed above are delayed until fiscal 2028.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1296/ Page 8 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 942 and HB 1131 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 930 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Environmental 
Service; 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Charles, 
Dorchester, 
and 
Garrett counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8