START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1204 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1204 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public and Nonpublic Schools - Student Elopement - Notice and Reporting 
Requirements (Ace's Law) 
 
 
This bill requires that each time a student attempts or accomplishes an elopement (leaving 
a school campus without the permission of a responsible school staff member), the school 
must notify the student’s parent or guardian on the same day as the incident. At least 
annually, a school or a student’s individualized education program (IEP) team must review 
and address wandering or elopement behavior in updating the student’s IEP or behavioral 
intervention plan. The bill applies to public schools, the Maryland School for the Blind, 
Maryland School for the Deaf, and nonpublic schools. A school must develop policies and 
procedures to implement the bill’s provisions. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal. Reporting requirements result in additional staff time beginning 
in FY 2026, but the impact on local school system finances is assumed to be minor. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
School Attendance, Truancy, and Related Reports 
 
Apart from specified exceptions, any child between the ages of 5 and 17 must attend a 
public school regularly during the entire school year, and each person with legal custody 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1204/ Page 2 
of a child older than age 4 and younger than age 16 must ensure the child attends school or 
receives instruction as required.  
 
The principal or head teacher of each public or private school in the State must report the 
name of each child enrolled in a school who has been absent or irregular in attendance, 
without lawful excuse, or who shows maladjustment to the county superintendent, the 
supervisor of pupil personnel, or any other official designated by the county superintendent 
so that the causes may be studied and solutions worked out.  
 
On receipt of a report from the principal or head teacher that a student has been habitually 
truant without lawful excuse, the appropriate representative of the local school system 
(1) must initiate an investigation into the causes of the child’s truancy and (2) may provide 
counseling regarding the availability of social, health, and educational services. Following 
the investigation or intervention, the local school system may notify the Department of 
Juvenile Services that the student has been habitually truant. The county superintendent, 
the superintendent’s designee, or the supervisor of pupil personnel must provide to the local 
education agency information regarding the number of students identified as being 
habitually truant. 
 
Behavioral Intervention Plan and Individualized Education Program 
 
“Behavior intervention plan” means a proactive plan designed to address problem behavior 
exhibited by a student in the educational setting through the use of positive behavioral 
interventions, strategies, and supports. 
 
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that a child with 
disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student turns 
21 years old, in accordance with the Individualized Family Service Plan or IEP specific to 
the individual needs of the child. An IEP is for students with disabilities age 3 through 21. 
Local school systems are required to make a free appropriate public education available to 
students with disabilities from age 3 through 21. However, the State, under its supervisory 
authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that this obligation 
is met.  
 
An IEP is a written statement for each child with a disability that, among other things, must 
indicate the present levels of academic achievement and functional performance of a child, 
measurable academic and functional goals for the child, how the child’s progress toward 
meeting these goals will be measured, and the special education and related services that 
are to be provided for the child. The parent of a child with a disability is a member of the  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1204/ Page 3 
IEP team that is responsible for developing and reviewing a child’s IEP and for revisions 
to the IEP.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Maryland School for the Deaf; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3