START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1227 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1227 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County - School Bus Stops on Highways - Alterations  
MC 8-25 
 
 
This bill alters existing requirements related to permitted locations of school bus stops in 
Montgomery County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None; the bill only affects Montgomery County. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County expenditures may be affected, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, in Montgomery County only, a school 
bus stop may not be located on any highway with five or more undivided traffic lanes 
unless (1) a school crossing guard is posted at the school bus stop to assist students in 
crossing the highway or (2) a traffic control device that maintains a red signal while a 
student is boarding or exiting a school bus is placed at the school bus stop. However, these 
provisions only apply beginning December 31, 2026. The bill alters this provision by 
extending the start date of the requirement to December 31, 2028. In addition, the bill 
narrows the requirement to only apply to a school bus stop in Montgomery County at a 
location for which at least 400 citations were issued in the preceding fiscal year to drivers 
traveling in the opposite direction of the school bus stop. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1227/ Page 2 
Local Expenditures:  The bill’s modification of the existing requirement that school bus 
stops may not be located in certain locations (i.e., any highway with five or more undivided 
traffic lanes unless specific conditions are met) likely narrows the number of applicable 
locations and could reduce (as well as delay) county expenditures compared to the broader 
(and earlier) requirement under current law. Even so, for context, Montgomery County 
advises that to the extent school bus stops are unable to be moved, the county may need to 
hire as many as 13 crossing guards with estimated costs of more than $500,000 on an 
annual basis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Montgomery 
County; 
Comptroller’s 
Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2