START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1283 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1283 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Charles County - Off-Highway Recreational Vehicles - Regulation and 
Enforcement 
 
 
This bill authorizes Charles County to (1) regulate the operation of off-highway 
recreational vehicles (OHRVs); (2) require owners of OHRVs to register them with the 
county and pay an associated registration fee; (3) impose age restrictions on the operation 
of OHRVs; and (4) authorize impoundment of OHRVs that are the subject of alleged 
violations of §§ 6-404 or 6-405 of the Criminal Law Article or Title 21, Subtitle 9 of the 
Transportation Article.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances or operations.    
  
Local Effect:  Because the bill is authorizing in nature, it does not directly affect 
Charles County finances or operations. However, if Charles County chooses to exercise its 
authority to require owners of OHRVs to register them with the county and pay associated 
registration fees, county revenues increase minimally. Local expenditures are not 
materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “OHRV” is (1) a motor-assisted or motor-driven vehicle commonly 
known as an all-terrain vehicle or a side-by-side utility vehicle, as specified; (2) a 
motorcycle designed for off-highway operation that is not eligible for registration as a 
Class D (motorcycle) vehicle, commonly known as a dirt bike; or (3) a snowmobile. An 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1283/ Page 2 
OHRV does not include a farm vehicle, as specified; any vehicle used on residential 
property for landscaping, gardening, or lawn care; or an electric bicycle. A “vehicle” means 
any device in, on, or by which any individual or property is or might be transported or 
towed on a highway. An electronic personal assistive mobility device and a personal 
delivery device are not considered vehicles, but OHRVs and low-speed vehicles are 
specifically included under this definition.  
 
Requirements Pertaining to Off-highway Recreational Vehicles 
 
An OHRV purchased on or after October 1, 2010, must be titled with the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA), and the OHRV’s owner must pay a vehicle excise tax on its fair 
market value. The fair market value for a new or used OHRV sold by a licensed dealer is 
the total purchase price, as certified by the dealer; for a used OHRV sold by a person other 
than a licensed dealer, it is the greater of the total purchase price or $320. 
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources is required to promulgate rules and regulations 
concerning the operation of off-road vehicles (ORVs), including OHRVs, on Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR) lands. A person operating an ORV must (1) have a valid 
driver’s license; (2) hold a Maryland learner’s permit and be accompanied by a licensed 
driver; or (3) be age 12 or older and accompanied by a parent or guardian who holds a valid 
driver’s license. An ORV must be registered annually with DNR and display a registration 
sticker in accordance with specified requirements or with MVA as a licensed motor vehicle 
for on-road use. 
 
Sections 6-404 and 6-405 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Except as specified, § 6-404 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from using a 
vehicle or ORV on private property unless the person has, in their possession, the written 
permission of the owner or tenant of the private property. Under § 6-405 of the  
Criminal Law Article, a person may not use an ORV on property known by the person to 
be owned or leased by the State or a political subdivision, except as otherwise allowed by 
law. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction are subject to imprisonment 
for up to 90 days and/or a $500 maximum fine. 
 
Title 21, Subtitle 9 of the Transportation Article 
 
Title 21, Subtitle 9 of the Transportation Article prohibits a person from engaging in any 
of the following:  (1) reckless driving; (2) negligent driving; (3) aggressive driving; 
(4) driving while under the influence of alcohol or alcohol per se; (5) driving while 
impaired by alcohol, a drug, any combination of drugs, or any combination of drugs and 
alcohol, or a controlled dangerous substance; (6) driving after an arrest for a violation of 
§ 21-902 (drunk or drugged driving); (7) consuming an alcoholic beverage, or smoking or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1283/ Page 3 
consuming cannabis, in a passenger area of a motor vehicle on a highway; and (8) fleeing 
or eluding a police officer.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature. It does not require Charles County 
to impose registration requirements and fees on OHRV owners or otherwise regulate the 
operation of OHRVs. Nonetheless, if the county chooses to exercise the authority granted 
to it under the bill, county revenues increase minimally as a result of the imposition and 
collection of registration fees from OHRV owners. This estimate assumes that any costs 
associated with regulating OHRVs do not materially affect Charles County expenditures.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 912 (Charles County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3