START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1223 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1223 
(Delegate Rose, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists - Licensing - Eyelash Extensions 
 
 
This bill establishes a limited license specific to providing “eyelash extension services” 
issued by the State Board of Cosmetologists and expands the definition of “provide esthetic 
services” to also include providing eyelash extension services. The bill incorporates 
licensing requirements and regulation of the licensees into current statutory provisions that 
apply to other types of limited licenses issued by the board, including a limited license to 
provide esthetic services. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $25,000 in FY 2026 
for one-time reprogramming. Special fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2026 due to 
the issuance of additional limited licenses by the State Board of Cosmetologists. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$25,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Provide eyelash extension services” means to provide an individual, for 
compensation, the service of:   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1223/ Page 2 
 
cleaning the eye area; 
 
applying (1) eyelash primers and adhesives; (2) eyelash extensions; and (3) sealant; 
or 
 
drying the eye area for eyelash extensions. 
 
An applicant for a limited license to provide eyelash extension services must:   
 
 
be at least 17 years old; 
 
have completed successfully a ninth grade education or the equivalent; and 
 
pass a practical and written examination or have received training by (1) serving as 
a registered apprentice for at least three months, as specified or (2) successfully 
completing at least 100 hours of instruction in providing eyelash extension services 
in a cosmetology school approved by the Maryland State Department of Education 
or the Maryland Higher Education Commission in consultation with the board. 
 
As with other limited licenses, the board must adopt regulations establishing curriculum 
standards for the license; the board must also establish continuing education standards. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2027, an individual registered as an apprentice who is learning to 
practice eyelash extension services must do so (1) under the supervision of a licensed senior 
cosmetologist who has completed the relevant continuing education requirements or 
(2) under a licensed eyelash extension technician with two years’ experience. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Cosmetologists (within the Maryland Department of 
Labor) issues two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and 
four limited licenses (hairstylist, blow drying, nail technician, and esthetician). 
 
A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, 
nail, and esthetic services. (The other licenses authorize the licensee to provide just that 
service.) 
 
“Provide esthetic services” means to provide to an individual, for compensation, the service 
of:   
 
 
cleansing, exercising, exfoliating, massaging, cosmetic microneedling, stimulating, 
toning, or performing any other similar procedure on the skin or scalp by electrical, 
mechanical, or any other means; 
 
applying to the face, body, or scalp an alcohol, cream, lotion, astringent, or cosmetic 
preparation; or 
 
removing superfluous hair by the use of electrical, mechanical, or any means other 
than by the use of a laser-based device. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1223/ Page 3 
“Provide esthetic services” includes: 
 
 
applying eyelash extensions; 
 
performing superficial exfoliation treatments of the epidermis using professional 
and other commercially available products or devices; 
 
performing treatments for the relaxation, hydration, contouring, and beautification 
of the face, skin, body, eyelashes, or eyebrows; and 
 
performing nonablative skin rejuvenation. 
 
The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure as a cosmetologist must pass 
a written and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 
While registered as an apprentice cosmetologist, an individual may learn to practice 
cosmetology (or limited practices of cosmetology) in either a beauty salon or a barbershop 
that is properly licensed. Any such training must take place under the supervision of the 
appropriate type of licensee, depending on the type of license the individual is pursuing. 
Exhibit 1 shows the required supervision according to the type of license being pursued. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Type of Supervision Required for Cosmetology Apprentices 
 
Type of Apprentice 
Supervising Licensee 
Cosmetology 
Licensed senior cosmetologist 
Esthetic services* 
Licensed esthetician with two years of experience (or 
licensed senior cosmetologist) 
Hair services* 
Licensed hairstylist with two years of experience (or 
licensed senior cosmetologist) 
Nail technician services* 
Licensed nail technician with two years of experience 
(or licensed senior cosmetologist) 
 
* Indicates a limited cosmetology license that may only be used to provide the specified types of services. 
 
Note:  There is no apprenticeship pathway for hair services that are limited to blow drying. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
A licensed senior cosmetologist may directly train and supervise up to two apprentices 
learning the practice of cosmetology or any limited practice of cosmetology. Additionally, 
an individual with a specified limited license who has at least two years of experience in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1223/ Page 4 
that limited practice may directly train and supervise up to two apprentices learning the 
same limited practice. 
 
Licensed cosmetologists, estheticians, hairstylists, hairstylist-blow dry technicians, and 
nail technicians generally must perform their services at a permitted beauty salon or 
barbershop. However, subject to specified conditions, these licensees may practice at 
certain off-site locations. 
 
All licensing fees paid to the State Board of Cosmetologists are distributed to the  
State Barbers and Cosmetologists Boards’ Fund, which covers all costs associated with 
board operations. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The State Board of Cosmetologists advises that one-time 
reprogramming changes are required in fiscal 2026 to modify its licensing system to 
process the new limited licensees. Accordingly, special fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $25,000 in fiscal 2026 only. Although the board also advises additional staff 
may be needed, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill likely does not 
result in a meaningful number of additional salons requiring inspections. 
 
The board advises it may set the fee at $56 per license (renewed biennially). Although 
special fund revenues increase under the bill, the exact number of limited licenses that may 
be issued – and revenues received – cannot be determined without experience under the 
bill. The overall impact on the board is not expected to be significant, however. Assuming 
that most first-time licenses are issued in fiscal 2026, with a smaller number issued in 
fiscal 2027, revenues likely fluctuate every two years based on the biennial renewal of 
those licenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Most salons and barber shops are small businesses, and many 
engage in the activities regulated by the bill. Thus, any eyelash extension technicians 
employed by a salon or barber shop who are not otherwise licensed as cosmetologists or 
estheticians must obtain the limited license once the bill takes effect and comply with 
regulations established by the board in order to continue providing eyelash extension 
services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 180 of 2024 and SB 423 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 617 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1223/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5