START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1238 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1238 
(Delegate Otto, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Somerset County - Alcoholic Beverages - Liquor Tasting License 
 
   
This bill establishes a liquor tasting license in Somerset County and authorizes the 
Somerset County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to the holder of a 
Class A beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license. The license authorizes the holder to allow 
the consumption of liquor for tasting if (1) the license holder is authorized to sell the liquor, 
and (2) the consumer is not charged for the liquor. An individual may consume liquor at a 
liquor tasting in a quantity of up to one-half ounce from each offering of liquor, and 
five offerings in one day. In addition to the cost of the Class A BWL license, the liquor 
tasting license fees are (1) for a license that is effective for only one day in a licensing 
period, $20; (2) for a license that is effective for any 26 days in a licensing period, $200; 
(3) for a license that is effective for any 52 days in a licensing period, $300; (4) for a license 
that is effective for any 104 days in a licensing period, $400. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Somerset County revenues increase to the extent liquor tasting licenses are 
issued under the bill. The county can handle any additional enforcement activity with 
existing resources.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1238/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board is authorized to issue a Class A BWL license, and the license 
authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail to consumers at the place 
described in the license. The license may not be issued for a premises having a direct or 
indirect connection with a drug or pharmaceutical dispensing business or other business 
establishment of a type commonly known as a drugstore. The license holder must sell the 
beer, wine, and liquor in a sealed package or container, and the package or container may 
not be opened, and its contents may not be consumed on the premises where the alcohol 
was sold. The annual fee is $5,000. The holder of a Class A BWL license may sell beer, 
wine, and liquor (1) on Monday through Saturday, from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the 
following day, and (2) on Sunday, from 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day.  
         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2