START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1243 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1243 
(Delegate S. Johnson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Coverage for Specialty Drugs 
 
 
This bill prohibits certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers), including those that provide prescription 
drug coverage through a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM), from excluding coverage for 
a covered specialty drug administered or dispensed by a provider under specified 
circumstances. If this prohibition applies, the reimbursement rate for a covered specialty 
drug must be agreed to by the carrier and the covered, in-network provider and billed at a 
nonhospital level of care or place of service. The bill does not prohibit a carrier from 
refusing to authorize or approve or from denying coverage of a covered specialty drug 
administered or dispensed by a provider if administering or dispensing the drug fails to 
satisfy medical necessity criteria. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to 
all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the 
State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2026 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Any 
additional workload for MIA can be absorbed with existing budgeted resources. No impact 
on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1243/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A carrier, including one that provides prescription drug coverage through 
a PBM, may not exclude coverage for a covered specialty drug administered or dispensed 
by a provider if the carrier determines that (1) the provider is an in-network provider of 
covered oncology services and complies with State regulations for the administering and 
dispensing of specialty drugs and (2) the drug is auto-injected, an oral targeted immune 
modulator, or an oral medication that requires complex dosing based on clinical 
presentation or is used concomitantly with other infusion or radiation therapies. 
 
Unless otherwise agreed to by the carrier and the covered, in-network provider, the 
reimbursement rate for a specialty drug may not exceed the rate applicable to a designated 
specialty pharmacy for dispensing that drug. 
 
Additionally, the bill may not be construed to supersede the authority of the Health Services 
Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) to set rates for specialty drugs administered to patients 
in a setting regulated by HSCRC. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Specialty Drugs 
 
A “specialty drug” means a prescription drug that (1) is prescribed for an individual with a 
complex, chronic, or rare medical condition; (2) costs $600 or more for up to a 
30-day supply; (3) is not typically stocked at retail pharmacies; and (4) requires either a 
difficult or unusual process of delivering the drug to the patient or enhanced patient 
education, management, or support before or after administration of the drug. A specialty 
drug does not include a prescription drug prescribed to treat diabetes, HIV, or AIDS; it 
does include a prescription drug prescribed to treat multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C, 
rheumatoid arthritis, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, or multiple myeloma.  
 
Providers 
 
A “provider” means a health care practitioner or group of health care practitioners licensed, 
certified, or otherwise authorized by law to provide health care services. “Health care 
service” means a health or medical care procedure or service rendered by a health care 
provider that (1) provides testing, diagnosis, or treatment of a human disease or 
dysfunction; (2) dispenses drugs, medical devices, medical appliances, or medical goods 
for the treatment of a human disease or dysfunction; or (3) provides any other care, service, 
or treatment of disease or injury, the correction of defects, or the maintenance of physical 
or mental well-being of individuals. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1243/ Page 3 
Pharmacy Benefits Managers 
 
A PBM is a business that administers and manages prescription drug benefit plans. A PBM 
must register with MIA prior to providing pharmacy benefits management services. 
 
A PBM that provides pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may 
not require that a beneficiary use a specific pharmacy or entity to fill a prescription if the 
PBM (or a corporate affiliate) has an ownership interest in the pharmacy or entity or 
vice versa. A PBM may require a beneficiary to use a specific pharmacy or entity for a 
specialty drug. 
 
A PBM that provides pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may 
not reimburse a pharmacy or pharmacist for a pharmaceutical product or pharmacist service 
in an amount less than the PBM reimburses itself or an affiliate for providing the same 
product or service. This prohibition does not apply to reimbursement for specialty drugs, 
mail order drugs, or to a chain pharmacy with more than 15 stores or a pharmacist who is 
an employee of the chain pharmacy. 
 
Carriers 
 
A carrier may require a subscriber, member, or beneficiary to obtain a specialty drug 
through a specific pharmacy, including a pharmacy participating in the carrier’s provider 
network, if the carrier determines that the pharmacy meets its performance standards and 
accepts its network reimbursement fees.  
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission  
 
HSCRC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department of Health 
established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, provide access 
to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in the State. HSCRC 
is responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the successor to the 
Maryland All Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based 
revenues (commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 876 (third reader) of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 975 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1243/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4