START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1200 
(Delegate Valentine, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Credit for Law Enforcement Officer or Rescue Worker - 
Expansion to Judicial Officer 
 
 
This bill expands the local option property tax credit for disabled or fallen law enforcement 
officers or rescue workers by extending eligibility to correctional and judicial officers. 
Local governments are required to define for purposes of the property tax credit the public 
safety and judicial officers who are eligible to receive the property tax credit. Under the 
bill, a public safety officer includes a correctional officer, a law enforcement officer, or a 
member of a fire, rescue, or emergency medical service. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025, and applies retroactively to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2022. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2026 to the 
extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit for a 
dwelling owned by (1) a disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker; (2) a surviving 
spouse of a fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker; or (3) a cohabitant, provided 
specified conditions are met. To be eligible for the property tax credit, the dwelling must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1200/ Page 2 
have been acquired by the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker within 
10 years of the date the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker was adjudged 
to be permanently and totally disabled or by the surviving spouse or cohabitant within 
10 years of the fallen law enforcement officer’s or rescue worker’s death. 
 
Chapters 533 and 534 of 2023 require a local government to determine the definition of a 
disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker for purposes of receiving a local 
property tax credit. In addition, Chapters 533 and 534 expand eligibility for the property 
tax credit to include a disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker or surviving 
spouse or cohabitant who was domiciled in the State at any time within five years prior to 
the disabled law enforcement officer or rescue worker becoming disabled or dying. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 
to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit. The amount of the decrease depends on the number of eligible taxpayers and the 
assessed value of each residential property that is eligible for the property tax credit, neither 
of which can be reliably estimated at this time. As a point of references, there are 
approximately 700 judicial officers and over 4,750 correctional officers working in the 
State. 
 
At present, Baltimore City and the following 14 counties have authorized the property tax 
credit – Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, Harford, 
Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Wicomico. 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, over 100 individuals received the property tax credit in fiscal 2024, 
with most of these individuals residing in Baltimore and Queen Anne’s counties. In total, 
around $420,000 in property tax credits were provided in fiscal 2024. Information for 
Calvert and Carroll counties is not currently available. 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1200/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Jurisdictions Authorizing Property Tax Credit 
Fiscal 2024 
 
County 
Tax Credit Recipients 
Tax Credit Amount 
Anne Arundel 
6 
$15,782 
Baltimore City 
2 
8,090 
Baltimore 
62 
179,029 
Calvert 
n/a 
n/a 
Carroll 
n/a 
n/a 
Cecil 
0 
0 
Charles 
2 
6,993 
Frederick 
3 
12,454 
Harford 
0 
0 
Howard 
10 
44,229 
Montgomery 
6 
28,402 
Prince George’s 
5 
15,277 
Queen Anne’s 
32 
109,756 
St. Mary’s 
0 
0 
Wicomico 
0 
0 
Total 
128 
$420,012 
 
n/a:  not available 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 502 (Senator Corderman, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1200/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4