START OF PAGE 1
 
  
  HB 1292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 1292 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Provider Directory - Required Updates 
 
 
This bill replaces the term “network directory” with the term “provider directory” to 
conform with the federal No Suprises Act (NSA). The bill alters the time period by which 
a carrier must update the online provider directory after notification from a participating 
provider of a change in the applicable information from within 15 working days to within 
2 working days. A dental carrier must update such information within 15 working days. A 
provider directory must include a statement that advises enrollees and prospective enrollees 
to confirm the provider’s or health care facility’s participation in the carrier’s network and 
the enrollee’s health benefit plan. A printed provider directory must include a statement 
that the information is accurate as of the date of publication and that the individual should 
consult the online provider directory or contact the carrier to obtain the most current 
information. By January 1, 2026, the Insurance Commissioner must report to the 
General Assembly on any changes to regulations related to the accuracy of provider 
directories. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill generally pertains exclusively to private-sector activities and 
conforms with federal law requirements. The Maryland Insurance Commission can submit 
the required report using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1292/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Provider Directories 
 
“Network directory” means a list of a carrier’s participating providers and participating 
health care facilities. A carrier must make the carrier’s network directory available on the 
Internet and in printed form on request. The carrier’s network directory on the Internet 
must be available through a clear link or tab and in a searchable format. The network 
directory must include specified information about each provider on the carrier’s provider 
panel and each health care facility in the carrier’s network, as well as a statement that 
advises enrollees and prospective enrollees to contact a provider or health care facility 
before seeking treatment or services to confirm the provider’s or health care facility’s 
participation in the carrier’s network. 
 
A carrier must notify each enrollee at the time of initial enrollment and renewal about how 
to access or obtain the carrier’s network directory. Information provided in printed form 
must be accurate on the date of publication and must be updated at least once a year. 
Information provided online must be accurate on the date of initial posting and any update. 
A carrier must update the information posted online at least once every 15 days. 
 
A carrier must periodically review at least a reasonable sample size of its network directory 
for accuracy and demonstrate the accuracy on request of the Commissioner. Before 
imposing a penalty against a carrier for inaccurate network directory information, the 
Commissioner must take specified factors into account. 
 
A carrier must update the online network directory information within 15 working days 
after receipt of electronic information or notification by first-class mail tracking method 
from the participating provider of a change in the applicable information. Notification is 
presumed to have been received by a carrier 3 working days after the date the participating 
provider placed the notification in the U.S. mail, if the participating provider maintains the 
stamped certificate of mailing for the notice or on the date recorded by the courier if the 
notification was delivered by courier. 
 
Federal No Suprises Act 
 
NSA requires health plans to cover surprise bills for emergency services, as well as 
out-of-network provider bills rendered at in-network hospitals and facilities. Balance 
billing is prohibited, with specified exceptions, and out-of-network providers may not send 
patients bills for excess charges. Under NSA, carriers must maintain an accurate provider 
database website and verify the accuracy of the information at least every 90 days (although 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1292/ Page 3 
Maryland law currently requires updates on online information every 15 days). When a 
carrier receives new or revised information from a provider, it must update the public 
directory within 2 business days. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3