START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1281 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1281 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Limited Special Event Permit 
 
 
This bill establishes a limited special event permit in Anne Arundel County and authorizes 
the Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners to issue the permit to a 
Class B, Class C, or Class D license holder, or a Class H or Class BLX license holder that 
is at least 1,000 feet away from a place of worship or school. The permit authorizes the 
holder to provide music, dancing, and other legal forms of entertainment. Before issuing 
the permit, the board may require a license holder to provide information on the event for 
which the permit is requested. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, in Anne Arundel County, except for piped-in background music 
or one television screen, the holder of any class of alcoholic beverages license may not 
permit playing music, live music, a karaoke machine, a disc jockey, dancing, floor shows, 
or any other similar type of entertainment on the licensed premises or on an adjacent 
property in which the licensee has ownership or control. However, a Class B, Class BLX, 
Class D, or Class H license may obtain specified special entertainment licenses to allow 
entertainment activities such as dancing, karaoke, or watching television. Those 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1281/ Page 2 
special licenses include music, entertainment, dancing, outdoor, and outdoor entertainment 
permits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2