START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1293 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1293 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City - Office of the Sheriff - Neighborhood Services Unit 
 
 
This bill establishes the Neighborhood Services Unit within the Office of the Sheriff of 
Baltimore City and requires the unit to (1) work in partnership with the Board of License 
Commissioners for Baltimore City to enforce the alcoholic beverages laws of 
Baltimore City and (2) perform any other duties as directed by the Sheriff. The unit and 
board must enter into a memorandum of understanding that specifies the respective roles 
and responsibilities of the parties in connection with the partnership and the funding source 
for the unit, as specified. In addition, the bill expands the authorized uses of revenue 
generated from a certain surcharge on filing fees collected by the District Court in 
Baltimore City to include the work of the unit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in Baltimore City expenditures to implement 
the bill’s requirements, as discussed below. Baltimore City revenues are not materially 
affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City 
 
The board or the board’s designee governs, administers, and enforces laws relating to 
alcoholic beverages in Baltimore City, including: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1293/ Page 2 
 
supervising the activities and investigations of the inspectors and other employees 
of the board; 
 
examining the location and general character of license holders in Baltimore City; 
 
reviewing the zoning of applicants and license holders during the license 
application, license transfer, and license renewal processes; and 
 
adopting regulations concerning zoning of license holders and methods of 
enforcement to carry out the purposes and enforcement relating to the sale, storage, 
and distribution of alcoholic beverages in Baltimore City. 
 
The Mayor and the Baltimore City Council must (1) pay from the Baltimore City general 
fund, which includes revenue from the board, the salaries and expenses of the board and 
its employees and (2) devote the balance of the revenue from the board to the general 
purposes of Baltimore City.  
 
Sheriff of Baltimore City 
 
The Office of the Sheriff of Baltimore City is responsible for, among other tasks, serving 
and enforcing all court orders within the city. The deputies working in the office are sworn 
law enforcement officers who must meet and maintain the same training and background 
requirements as any other police officer or sheriff deputy in the State. They have the power 
to enforce the law and to arrest and detain individuals who violate the law. 
 
Surcharges for Landlord-tenant and Civil Cases 
 
In Baltimore City, in addition to other surcharges authorized under statute, a surcharge of 
up to $10 per case is applied to the following District Court cases:  summary ejectment, 
tenant holding over, breach of lease, and warrant of restitution. The revenue generated must 
be remitted quarterly to the Baltimore City Director of Finance and used to fund the 
enhancement of sheriff benefits and the increase in sheriff personnel to enhance the service 
of domestic violence orders. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not affect the overall revenue generated from the 
surcharge on filing fees collected by the District Court in Baltimore City. Although the bill 
authorizes surcharge fee revenues to be used to support the work of the newly established 
unit, Baltimore City did not provide information on the extent to which revenues from this 
source may be sufficient to support the unit without decreasing funding otherwise needed 
for authorized purposes under current law. Because, however, Baltimore City further 
advises that the Office of the Sheriff ended fiscal 2024 with a $4.6 million deficit driven 
by overtime costs and unbudgeted purchasing activity, this analysis assumes additional 
funding is needed to implement the bill. 
 
Baltimore City advises that the board currently includes a staff of 10 Inspectors 
(1 Chief Inspector and 9 Inspector positions). While the bill does not establish required 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1293/ Page 3 
staffing levels for the new unit, Baltimore City estimates expenditures of approximately 
$1.1 million annually, which reflects costs associated with hiring 10 additional positions 
within the Office of the Sheriff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 28, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3