START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1228 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Commerce - Montgomery County Agricultural Reserve Study  
MC 15-25 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Commerce, in coordination with specified State, local, 
and nonprofit entities, to study economic development in and the tourist and visitor 
economy of the Montgomery County Agricultural Reserve to develop (1) a deeper 
understanding of the tourist and visitor impact on the reserve and (2) policies and 
recommendations to help the reserve thrive. Commerce must conduct the study in 
coordination with the Montgomery County Planning Board, the Montgomery County 
Office of Agricultural Services, the University of Maryland Extension for  
Montgomery County, and Visit Montgomery, subject to specified requirements. By  
June 30, 2026, Commerce must report its findings and recommendations to the members 
of the Montgomery County Delegation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Commerce can coordinate with other State, local, and nonprofit entities and 
complete the required report with existing budgeted resources. The University System of 
Maryland, specifically the University of Maryland Extension for Montgomery County, can 
coordinate with Commerce on the study with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1228/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, Commerce, the Montgomery County Planning 
Board, the Montgomery County Office of Agricultural Services, the University of 
Maryland Extension for Montgomery County, and Visit Montgomery must: 
 
 
examine how tourists and visitors view the Montgomery County Agricultural 
Reserve, including why they visit, where they come from, and what attractions they 
find most compelling and why; 
 
identify the small businesses, recreation sites, and historic sites that are located in 
the reserve and analyze how tourism and visitors contribute to these operations and 
their success; 
 
assess and evaluate the barriers that may deter visitors from coming to the reserve; 
 
develop an overall assessment of economic development and the economic impact 
of tourism in the reserve; and 
 
make recommendations regarding policies and programs that can help promote and 
preserve the reserve and better support the small businesses, recreation sites, and 
historic sites that depend on the visitor and tourist economy. 
 
Commerce and the other specified entities must, if data is available or the action required 
is necessary: 
 
 
work with relevant local organizations to gather information on visitor volume at 
the reserve and other key attractions in the area and how those visitors interact with 
other parts of the regional economy; 
 
engage with visitors, including by surveying visitors, to gather information about 
visitor behavior and attitudes; 
 
consider whether in-depth interviews with residents, businesses, and other 
stakeholders are necessary; and 
 
review existing data models to gather information on the upstream and downstream 
impacts of visitation to the region. 
 
Commerce must coordinate the preparation of, synthesize, and analyze the data made 
available for the study and may consult with government agencies, academic institutions, 
and stakeholders to complete the study. 
 
Current Law:  Commerce’s mission, generally, is to strengthen the Maryland economy. 
The department develops and implements programs that aim to generate new jobs or retain 
existing jobs, attract business investment in new or expanding companies, and promote the 
State’s strategic assets. Business assistance is provided through a combination of 
investments, loans, conditional loans, grants, and tax credits. Among other general powers 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1228/ Page 3 
and duties, the department’s Division of Tourism, Film, and the Arts must stimulate 
development of tourism business in the State. 
 
Additional Comments:  The 93,000-acre Montgomery County Agricultural Reserve was 
established by the county in 1980. A detailed map published online by the 
Montgomery Countryside Alliance shows the area and some of the related businesses, 
recreation sites, and historic sites. 
 
Visit Montgomery is a 501(c)(6) nonprofit and the destination marketing organization for 
Montgomery County, Maryland. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; University System of Maryland; 
Montgomery County; Visit Montgomery; Montgomery Countryside Alliance; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3