START OF PAGE 1
 
  
  HB 1294 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1294 
(Delegates Wilson and Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Commercial Law - Credit Regulation - Earned Wage Access and Credit 
Modernization 
 
 
This bill subjects “earned wage access” products to the Maryland Consumer Loan Law 
(MCLL) and other related statutory provisions that regulate entities that provide consumer 
credit. The bill explicitly treats certain earned wage access products as loans and 
establishes new rules for the acceptance of “tips” in connection with the provision of earned 
wage access products and other credit under MCLL. The bill requires licensing of entities 
offering earned wage access products. Finally, the bill establishes restrictions and 
notification requirements regarding the costs and fees associated with obtaining an earned 
wage access product and modifies the State’s credit licensing structure to account for new 
products, services, and fees. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill generally codifies existing practice and is not anticipated to 
materially affect State finances or operations. The Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) 
can handle enforcement with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines “earned wage” as salary, wages, compensation, or other 
income earned (1) on an hourly, project-based, piecework, or other basis or (2) through 
services rendered as an independent contractor. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1294/ Page 2 
“Earned 
wage 
access” 
means 
“consumer-directed 
earned 
wage 
access” 
or 
“employer-integrated earned wage access.” A provider of earned wage access may not, 
among other things, charge a consumer specified fees, receive interest from a consumer, or 
obtain a consumer’s credit report as a method of qualifying the consumer for earned wage 
access. 
 
“Consumer-directed earned wage access” means delivery to a consumer of access to unpaid 
but earned wages based on employment, income, or attendance data obtained directly from 
the consumer by a third party with no relationship to the consumer’s employer where the 
consumer does not pay the provider interest. 
 
“Employer-integrated earned wage access” means delivery of unpaid but earned wages that 
are (1) provided to a consumer directly by a person the employer has contracted to provide 
the service; (2) determined based on employment, income, or attendance data obtained 
directly or indirectly from the consumer’s employer, including a payroll service provider; 
and (3) where the consumer does not pay the provider interest. 
 
“Fee” means a fee imposed by a provider for delivery or expedited delivery of earned wage 
access to a consumer or a subscription or membership fee imposed by a provider for a 
group of services that includes earned wage access. 
 
“Tip” means a voluntary payment by a consumer to a lender or third party who provides 
(or arranges) a loan:   
 
 
made at the time of the transaction in recognition of the lender’s or third party’s 
provision or arrangement of the loan; 
 
made at the sole discretion of the consumer; and 
 
that does not affect the willingness of the lender or third party to provide (or arrange) 
the loan (or any future loan) or affect the terms of any loan. 
 
“Tip” does not include any payment made by a consumer for expedited processing or 
disbursement or for a membership, registration, or subscription fee. 
 
The bill prohibits consumer lenders from suggesting to consumers that a tip will influence 
(1) the lender’s willingness to provide a loan or (2) the terms of the loan. It further requires 
them to disclose to whom a tip is allocated and that any tip paid by the consumer does not 
inure to the direct benefit of any specific employee or any other individual.  
 
Regulatory Exemptions  
 
A licensed earned wage access provider is exempted from other provisions of State law 
relating to lending, credit, or debt including the interest, consumer loan, and revolving and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1294/ Page 3 
closed end credit provisions of the Commercial Law Article. Furthermore, licensed earned 
wage access services are not considered money transmission, and such services are not 
considered to be in violation of State law regarding deductions from payroll, salary wages, 
compensation, or other income or the purchase, sale, assignment, or order for unpaid but 
earned wages. 
 
Obligations to Consumers 
 
Among other requirements, earned wage access providers must offer consumers a no cost 
option to receive earned wage access services. Additionally, earned wage access providers 
must explain to consumers their rights, and inform consumers of any material changes to 
the service’s terms and conditions, before entering into an agreement or implementing any 
changes. 
 
Current Law:  OFR has determined that earned wage access products are extensions of 
credit that are subject to MCLL. 
 
Maryland Consumer Loan Law 
 
MCLL (Title 12, Subtitle 3 of the Commercial Law Article) applies to a loan or advance 
of money of $25,000 or less for personal, family, or household purposes – regardless of 
whether the loan or advance is (or purports to be) another type of product. In addition, a 
person may not lend $25,000 or less if interest on a loan exceeds the amount authorized by 
Maryland law, the transaction violates the federal Military Lending Act, or the person is 
not licensed (or exempt). Loans made under MCLL generally cap interest at 33% with a 
balance of $2,000 or less and 24% with a balance of more than $2,000. 
 
MCLL does not apply to (1) a plan or loan for which a written election has been made 
under other provisions of law relating to interest and usury, secondary mortgage loans, 
revolving credit, and closed end credit transactions; (2) a loan made by an individual who 
makes three or fewer loans per year and is not engaged in the business of making loans; or 
(3) a loan between an employer and an employee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 246, HB 1425, and SB 998 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1294/ Page 4 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
db/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1294/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Commercial Law - Credit Regulation - Earned Wage Access and Credit 
Modernization 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 1294 
 
PREPARED BY:  Amy Hennen 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
         WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 

END OF PAGE 5