START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 751

Chapter 751

(House Bill 1251)

AN ACT concerning

~~Health~~ ~~Care~~ ~~Facilities~~ Hospitals and Medical Professional Liability Insurers –
Obstetric Services Policies
(Doula and Birth Policy Transparency Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring certain ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~facilities~~ hospitals to adopt and provide
evidence to the Maryland Department of Health that the ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~facility~~ hospital
has ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~policy~~ certain policies relating to obstetric services; requiring the
Maryland Department of Health to provide certain policies to the public on request;
requiring insurers that issue or deliver medical professional liability insurance
policies in the State, on request, to provide the Maryland Department of Health with
information regarding the insurer’s policy regarding coverage of obstetric services;
and generally relating to obstetric services.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 19–2601 and 19–2602 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 26. ~~Health~~ ~~Care~~
~~Facility~~ Hospital Obstetric Services Policy”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 19–104.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 26. ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~FACILITY~~ HOSPITAL OBSTETRIC SERVICES POLICY.

19–2601.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “FREESTANDING AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 19–3B–01 OF THIS TITLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 751 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) “HEALTH CARE FACILITY” MEANS A HOSPITAL OR FREESTANDING
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY THAT PROVIDES OBSTETRIC CARE.

(D) “HOSPITAL” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–301 OF THIS TITLE.

(B) “DOULA” MEANS A NONMEDICAL PROFESSIONAL WHO PROVIDES
CONTINUOUS PHYSICAL, EMOTIONAL, AND INFORMATIONAL SUPPORT TO THE
BIRTHING PARENT THROUGHOUT THE PRENATAL, LABOR, AND POSTPARTUM
PERIODS.

(C) “HOSPITAL” MEANS A HOSPITAL, AS DEFINED IN § 19–301 OF THIS
TITLE, THAT PROVIDES OBSTETRIC CARE.

(D) “SIGNIFICANT MEDICAL INTERVENTION” MEANS A CESAREAN SECTION,
INDUCTION OF LABOR, AUGMENTATION OF LABOR, OPERATIVE VAGINAL DELIVERY,
OR EPISIOTOMY.

19–2602.

(A) A HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL SHALL ADOPT AND PROVIDE
EVIDENCE TO THE DEPARTMENT THAT THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL HAS
A POLICY THAT:

(1) A DOULA POLICY THAT ALLOWS EVERY BIRTHING PARENT TO
HAVE AT LEAST ONE DOULA PRESENT DURING BIRTH IN ADDITION TO AUTHORIZED
GUESTS;

(2) AN INFORMED CONSENT POLICY FOR SIGNIFICANT MEDICAL
INTERVENTION FOR THE BIRTHING PARENT; AND

(3) A TRANSFER ACCEPTANCE POLICY THAT INCLUDES THE
HOSPITAL’S PROCESS FOR RECEIVING:

(I) A PATIENT FROM A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER
REGULATED UNDER TITLE 8 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE WHO HAD
PROVIDED SERVICES TO A BIRTHING PARENT IN A HOME BIRTH SETTING;

(II) A BIRTHING PARENT’S OR NEWBORN’S MEDICAL
INFORMATION FROM THE HOME BIRTH PROVIDER; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 751

(III) A TRANSFER FROM A LICENSED DIRECT–ENTRY MIDWIFE
THAT IS CONSISTENT WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF § 8–6C–08 OF THE HEALTH
OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.

(1) ALLOWS EVERY BIRTHING PARENT TO HAVE A CERTIFIED DOULA,
AS DEFINED IN § 15–141.4 OF THIS ARTICLE, PRESENT DURING BIRTH, IN ADDITION
TO ANY AUTHORIZED GUESTS;

(2) PRIORITIZES NEWBORN BONDING WITH THE FAMILY OF THE
~~NEWBORN;~~

(3) PROHIBITS THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY FROM USING
~~SIGNIFICANT~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~INTERVENTION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BIRTHING~~ ~~PROCESS~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~THE~~
INFORMED CONSENT OF THE BIRTHING PARENT, INCLUDING:

(I) THE ADMINISTRATION OF A MEDICATION THAT WILL
INDUCE LABOR;

(II) A CESAREAN SECTION; AND

(III) USE OF FORCEPS;

(4) DETAILS THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY’S PROCESS FOR RECEIVING
A BIRTHING PARENT’S MEDICAL INFORMATION FROM A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
REGULATED UNDER TITLE 8 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE WHO HAS
PROVIDED SERVICES TO THE BIRTHING PERSON; AND

(5) ESTABLISHES A PROCESS TO TRANSFER AND RECEIVE PREGNANT
PERSONS ACROSS THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY’S LEVELS OF CARE WITHIN THE
FACILITY’S CAPACITY AND CAPABILITY.

(B) THE PROCESS DETAILED IN THE POLICY REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
(A)(4) OF THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A PROCESS FOR TRANSFERRING MEDICAL
~~RECORDS~~ ~~WHEN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BIRTHING~~ ~~PARENT~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~RECEIVING~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IN A HOME BIRTH SETTING.

(C) (B) A HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL SHALL PROVIDE EVIDENCE
TO THE DEPARTMENT THAT THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL HAS ADOPTED
A POLICY UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION:

(1) (I) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 751 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IF THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL IS ESTABLISHED
AFTER JANUARY 1, 2026, ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HEALTH CARE FACILITY
HOSPITAL; AND

(2) WHENEVER THE POLICY IS UPDATED.

(D) (C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT
THIS SECTION, INCLUDING REGULATIONS THAT ESTABLISH THE FORM AND MANNER
IN WHICH A HEALTH CARE FACILITY HOSPITAL MAY PROVE TO THE DEPARTMENT
THAT THE ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~FACILITY~~ HOSPITAL HAS ADOPTED A POLICY IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE THE POLICIES PROVIDED BY A
HOSPITAL UNDER THIS SECTION AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC ON REQUEST AND IN A
MANNER DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(E) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT A HOSPITAL FROM SETTING A
POLICY THAT RESTRICTS THE NUMBER OF DOULAS OR AUTHORIZED GUESTS.

Article – Insurance

19–104.1.

ON REQUEST, AN INSURER THAT ISSUES OR DELIVERS MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE POLICIES IN THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE THE
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH WITH INFORMATION REGARDING THE
INSURER’S POLICY RELATED TO COVERAGE OF OBSTETRIC SERVICES, INCLUDING
COVERAGE FOR A VAGINAL BIRTH AFTER CESAREAN.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4