START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1251 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1251 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals and Medical Professional Liability Insurers - Obstetric Services 
Policies (Doula and Birth Policy Transparency Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a hospital that provides obstetric care to adopt a “doula” policy, an 
informed consent policy for “significant medical intervention” for the birthing parent, and 
a transfer acceptance policy, as specified. Each hospital must provide evidence to the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) that the hospital has adopted a policy by 
January 1, 2026 (and whenever the policies are updated). MDH must adopt regulations to 
carry out the bill, including establishing the form and manner in which a hospital may prove 
the adoption of a compliant policy. MDH must make the policies provided by a hospital 
available to the public on request in a manner determined by the department. The bill does 
not prohibit a hospital from setting a policy that restricts the number of doulas or authorized 
guests. On request, an insurer that issues or delivers medical professional liability insurance 
policies in the State must provide MDH with information regarding the insurer’s policy 
related to coverage of obstetric services, including coverage for a vaginal birth after 
cesarean.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $90,800 in FY 2026 for staff, 
as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing operating costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
90,800 
108,400 
113,200 
118,200 
123,300 
Net Effect 
($90,800) 
($108,400) 
($113,200) 
($118,200) 
($123,300) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1251/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Doula” means a nonmedical professional who provides continuous 
physical, emotional, and informational support to the birthing parent throughout the 
prenatal, labor, and postpartum periods. 
 
“Significant medical intervention” means a cesarean section, induction of labor, 
augmentation of labor, operative vaginal delivery, or episiotomy. 
 
A hospital must adopt and provide evidence to MDH that the hospital has:  
 
 
a doula policy that allows every birthing parent to have at least one doula present 
during birth, in addition to authorized guests; 
 
an informed consent policy for significant medical intervention for the birthing 
parent; and 
 
a transfer acceptance policy that includes the hospital’s process for receiving (1) a 
patient from a health care practitioner who had provided services to a birthing parent 
in a home birth setting; (2) a birthing parent’s or newborn’s medical information 
from the home birth provider; and (3) a transfer from a licensed direct-entry midwife 
that is consistent with specified requirements.  
 
If a hospital is established after January 1, 2026, on establishment, the hospital must 
provide evidence to MDH that the policies have been adopted.  
 
Current Law:  The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) within MDH oversees and 
licenses health care facilities in the State. To ensure compliance with these rules and 
regulations, OHCQ inspects each health care facility, including freestanding ambulatory 
care facilities and hospitals. In general, OHCQ inspects facilities for which a license is 
sought and periodically after a license has been issued. MDH submits an annual report to 
the General Assembly regarding the inspections conducted during the immediately 
preceding year. 
 
“Hospital” means an institution that (1) has a group of at least five physicians who are 
organized as medical staff for the institution; (2) maintains facilities to provide, under the 
supervision of medical staff, diagnostic and treatment services for two or more unrelated 
individuals; and (3) admits or retains the individuals for overnight care. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1251/ Page 3 
Medicaid Doula Services 
 
“Certified doula” means a trained nonmedical professional who provides continuous 
physical, emotional, and informational support to the birthing parent throughout the 
prenatal, labor, and postpartum periods who has received a certification to perform doula 
services approved by Medicaid. A doula must be certified by specified organizations and 
present proof to MDH of completion of the associated certification before providing doula 
services. To participate, a provider must (1) meet specified regulatory requirements to 
participate in Medicaid; (2) maintain up-to-date certification; and (3) hold adequate 
liability insurance. 
 
Doula services are subject to the following limitations:  (1) one licensed health care 
professional (an obstetrician-gynecologist, a family medicine practitioner, or a certified 
nurse midwife) must be present while doula services are provided during labor and 
delivery; (2) doula services provided during labor and delivery may not be delivered via 
telehealth; (3) payment for doula services must be limited to direct services provided and 
expenses may not be reimbursed for items related to other specified expenses; and 
(4) multiple visits are not allowed in the same day, with the exception of a prenatal visit 
that occurs before a labor and delivery visit in the same day, or a labor and delivery visit 
that occurs before a postpartum doula visit in the same day. 
 
Licensed Direct-entry Midwife Transfer 
 
In general, an individual must be licensed as a certified nurse-midwife by the State Board 
of Nursing (MBON) to practice nurse midwifery in the State or licensed as a direct-entry 
midwife by MBON to practice direct-entry midwifery in the State. Direct-entry midwifery 
refers to an educational path that does not require prior nursing training to enter the 
profession.  
 
A licensed direct-entry midwife must arrange immediate emergency transfer to a hospital 
if the patient or newborn is determined to have specified conditions during labor, delivery, 
or the immediate postpartum period, including if the newborn has obvious congenital 
anomalies. A licensed direct-entry midwife must develop a general written plan for their 
practice for (1) emergency transfer of a patient, newborn, or both; (2) transport of a 
newborn to a newborn nursery or neonatal intensive care nursery; and (3) transport of a 
patient to an appropriate hospital with a labor and delivery unit. The plan must be provided 
to any hospital identified in the plan. On arrival at the hospital, the midwife must provide 
(1) to the staff of the hospital, a specified standard transfer form and the complete medical 
records of the patient and (2) to the accepting health care practitioner, a verbal summary of 
the care provided to the patient by the licensed direct-entry midwife. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1251/ Page 4 
Medical Professional Liability Insurance  
 
Medical professional liability insurance (also known as medical malpractice insurance) 
provides coverage against damages due to medical injury arising out of the performance of 
professional services rendered or which should have been rendered by a health care 
professional. 
 
Chapter 770 of 2017, among other things, required licensed physicians to (1) provide 
written notification regarding professional liability insurance to patients; (2) maintain a 
signed written notification in the patient’s records; and (3) conspicuously post information 
regarding professional liability insurance. Chapters 869 and 870 of 2024 required each 
advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) practicing in the State to notify a patient in 
writing if (1) they do not maintain professional liability insurance coverage or (2) their 
professional liability insurance coverage has lapsed for any period of time and has not been 
renewed. Each APRN who does not maintain professional liability insurance coverage 
must post such information in a conspicuous location in their place of practice. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that the department currently receives complaints 
regarding hospitals that prevent doulas from being present during labor and provide 
medications that induce labor without patient consent. Under the bill, MDH anticipates an 
increase in patient complaints, as hospitals must adopt a doula policy, an informed consent 
policy, and a transfer acceptance policy by January 1, 2026. 
 
Thus, OHCQ general fund expenditures increase by $90,756 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one health facilities nurse surveyor to (1) promulgate regulations and develop a process for 
hospitals to submit the adopted policies to MDH; (2) ensure hospitals have provided 
appropriate evidence of the adopted policies to MDH; and (3) complete investigations into 
complaints that specified hospitals are not adhering to the adopted policies. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$83,387 
Operating Expenses 
    7,369 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$90,756 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1251/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Care 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5