START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1259 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1259 
(Delegate Howard) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - License and Permit Distance 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class B beer and wine (on-sale) license or a Class B beer, wine, and liquor (on-sale) license 
for an establishment located within 1,000 feet of a school located at the Annapolis Mall. 
The bill also authorizes the board to issue a dancing permit to the holder of a Class H 
license if the licensed premises is located within 1,000 feet in a straight line from entry to 
entry from a school located at the Annapolis Mall. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Anne Arundel County finances and 
operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: Class B and Class H licenses are issued to restaurants and generally only 
authorize the on-premises consumption of alcohol. In Anne Arundel County, restaurants 
must operate a kitchen and serve hot meals at least twice each day to qualify for a Class B 
or Class H license.  
 
The board may issue a dancing permit to a holder of a Class B, Class C, or Class D license. 
The board may also issue permits to holders of Class BLX and Class H licenses, so long 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1259/ Page 2 
as the premises for which the license has been issued is more than 1,000 feet in a straight 
line from entry to entry away from a place of worship or school. A dancing permit 
authorizes its holder to provide music, dancing, and other legal forms of entertainment at 
the licensed establishment.  
 
The annual fee for a dancing permit is $200 for the holder of a beer and wine license; 
$400 for the holder of a beer, wine, and liquor license; and no charge for the holder of a 
Class C license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 888 (Senator Henson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2