START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1301 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1301 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program, Maryland Children’s Health Program, 
and Health Insurance – Transfers to Special Pediatric Hospitals – Prior 
Authorizations 
 
This bill prohibits certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers), as well as Medicaid and the Maryland 
Children’s Health Program (MCHP), from requiring prior authorization for a transfer to a 
“special pediatric hospital.” The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all 
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State 
on or after that date. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2026 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional workload can be absorbed by MIA within existing budgeted resources. Medicaid 
expenditures (general and federal funds) may increase by an indeterminate but likely 
minimal amount beginning in FY 2026 to the extent the bill increases the number of 
nonmedically necessary days; federal fund revenues increase accordingly. No impact on 
the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Special pediatric hospital” means a facility in the State that provides 
nonacute medical, rehabilitation, therapy, and palliative services to individuals (1) younger 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1301/ Page 2 
than age 22 or (2) who are at least 2 years old and younger than age 23 and have 
co-occurring physical and behavioral health conditions. 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, 
elderly or disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for 
Medicaid, applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Medicaid covers medically 
necessary inpatient hospital services and medically necessary services performed in an 
acute rehabilitation hospital under specified conditions. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Medicaid and MCHP are prohibited from requiring 
prior authorization for a transfer to a special pediatric hospital. As of January 2025, at least 
six of the nine Medicaid managed care organizations no longer require prior authorization 
for transfers to Mount Washington Pediatric Hospital, the predominant special pediatric 
hospital in Maryland.  
 
The Maryland Department of Health advises that the bill may result in increased costs for 
days that are not medically necessary. However, utilization management through current 
and retrospective review would continue to be permitted after transfer, which would help 
mitigate any potential fiscal impact.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2