START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1322 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1322 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Vessels - Carbon Monoxide Warning Labels (Matthew's 
Law) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from operating a gasoline-powered vessel manufactured after 
July 31, 2007, that has accommodation spaces, swim platforms, or aft (rear) lounging areas 
on the waters of the State unless the vessel has carbon monoxide warning labels affixed in 
conspicuous locations in the vicinity of both the transom (rear) and the helm (steering area) 
of the vessel. The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) may not impose a penalty on a 
person that violates the bill’s prohibition. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Vessel,” as it applies to the State Boat Act (to which the bill’s prohibition 
is added), means any description of watercraft, including an ice boat but not including a 
seaplane, that is used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water or ice. 
It includes the motors, spars, sails, and accessories of a vessel. 
 
“Waters of the State” means any water within the jurisdiction of the State, the marginal sea 
adjacent to the State, and the high seas when navigated as part of a ride or journey to or 
from the shore of the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1322/ Page 2 
Under the State Boat Act, DNR must, among other things, promote the safety of life and 
property through an educational program directed to boat owners, boat operators, and 
others concerning the inherent hazards to vessels and people on the waters, including 
precautions to be observed, and emergency action. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1028 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Prince George’s, St. Mary’s, and 
Worcester counties; Baltimore City; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2025 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2