START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1347 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1347 
(Delegate Adams) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Security Guards and Security Guard Employers - Registration, Certification, 
and Regulation 
 
 
This bill exempts a cannabis agent employed to provide security services for a cannabis 
licensee or registrant as a “security guard” or by a “security guard agency” (as defined 
under the Business Occupations and Professions Article), from the requirement to obtain a 
criminal history records check (CHRC) as a prerequisite for registration with the Maryland 
Cannabis Administration (MCA) if the cannabis agent is authorized to provide security 
guard services under Title 19, Subtitle 4 of the Business Occupations and Professions 
Article. The bill also alters the definition of “security guard employer,” as defined under 
the Business Occupations and Professions Article, to not include a video lottery operator, 
a sports wagering facility licensee, or a health care facility, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in FY 2026 for one-time 
information technology (IT) costs; general fund revenues, special fund revenues, and 
special fund expenditures decrease annually beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$75,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Net Effect 
($75,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1347/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Cannabis Agents 
 
A “cannabis agent” is an employee, a volunteer, or any authorized person who acts for or 
at the direction of a cannabis licensee or registrant. 
 
Before an agent may volunteer or work for a cannabis business licensee or registrant, the 
agent must register with MCA. An agent registration is valid for two years. To register as 
a cannabis agent, an individual must (1) be at least age 21 and (2) if the records are legally 
accessible, obtain a CHRC in accordance with specified procedures (which generally 
involve submitting fingerprints and specified fees, but may involve an alternate method as 
permitted by the Director of the Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
(CJIS-CR) and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)). MCA may not 
register as a cannabis agent an individual who fails to meet these criteria and may disqualify 
an individual from registering as a cannabis agent if the individual has been convicted of 
or pleaded nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude. MCA may not deny a 
cannabis agent registration based on any cannabis-related offenses that occurred before 
July 1, 2023. 
 
Security Guards, Security Guard Agencies, and Security Guard Employers 
 
Under the Business Occupations and Professions Article, a “security guard employer” is a 
person who employs security guards only to provide security guard services to the person. 
A “security guard agency” is a person who conducts a business that provides security guard 
services; the term does not include (1) a person that is primarily engaged in the business of 
owning, maintaining, or otherwise managing property or (2) a security guard employer. A 
“security guard” is an individual who, regardless of whether the individual is described as 
a security guard, watchman, or private patrolman or by other title, (1) is an employee of a 
security guard agency and provides security guard services to another person on behalf of 
the security guard agency or (2) is an employee of a security guard employer and provides 
security guard services to the security guard employer. 
 
Under Title 19, Subtitle 3 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article, security 
guard agencies must be licensed by the Secretary of State Police and an individual must, 
in order to qualify for certification as a security guard, among other things, be an employee 
of, or an applicant for employment with, a licensed security guard agency or a security 
guard employer. As part of the application process, the Department of State Police (DSP) 
must apply to CJIS-CR for a State and national CHRC for each applicant. As part of the 
application for a CHRC, DSP must submit to CJIS-CR (1) two complete sets of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1347/ Page 3 
applicant’s fingerprints, as specified; (2) the fee for access to Maryland criminal history 
records; and (3) the mandatory processing fee required by the FBI for a national CHRC.  
 
Under Title 19, Subtitle 4 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article, subject to 
specified exceptions, a licensed security guard agency may provide an individual for hire 
as a security guard only if the individual is certified by the Secretary of State Police as a 
security guard. However, a licensed security guard agency may provide an uncertified 
individual for hire as a security guard if, among other things, the agency has submitted to 
the Secretary the application of the individual for certification, fingerprint cards, and 
CHRC fees, as specified. On receipt from an applicant for certification as a security guard, 
a licensed security guard agency or security guard employer must forward to the Secretary 
the applicant’s application, fingerprint cards, and CHRC fees. The initial application fee is 
$15 for a security guard certification, which is valid for three years, and the renewal 
application fee is $10. Application fees are paid to the general fund. 
 
Criminal History Records Checks and the Central Repository 
 
CJIS-CR within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) 
collects, manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history record information for 
criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. Each 
individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a CHRC is required to pay $50.00 for a State and 
national CHRC, including a $20 fingerprinting fee, a $12.00 FBI fee, and an $18 fee to 
CJIS-CR. 
 
Sports Wagering Facility and Video Lottery Operation Employment Licenses 
 
Generally, unless an individual holds a valid sports wagering facility employee license, 
video lottery employee license, or a temporary employee license issued by the State Lottery 
and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC), the individual may not be employed by a 
sports wagering facility or video lottery operation as an employee. An applicant must 
provide sufficient information, documentation, and assurances that SLGCC may require 
before the issuance of a license. Among other things, SLGCC must deny a license to an 
applicant who is disqualified due to the applicant’s failure to prove the applicant’s good 
character, honesty, and integrity. However, current law does not include specific provisions 
regarding the issuance of a license to an employee who provides security guard services 
for either a sports wagering facility or video lottery operation.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DSP advises that it must update its online application portal so that 
individuals providing security guard services for video lottery operators, sports wagering 
facilities, or health care facilities are not eligible for certification. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by $75,000 in fiscal 2026 for one-time IT costs for DSP to update its 
online application portal. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1347/ Page 4 
General fund revenues decrease annually beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent DSP no 
longer collects application fees and renewal application fees from individuals providing 
security guard services for video lottery operators, sports wagering facilities, or health care 
facilities. Special fund revenues for DPSCS also decrease annually beginning in fiscal 2026 
as cannabis agents employed to provide security services for cannabis licensees or 
registrants do not pay fees to receive a CHRC through CJIS-CR. Special fund revenues for 
DPSCS further decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 as individuals providing security guard 
services for video lottery operators, sports wagering facilities, or health care facilities also 
do not pay fees to receive a CHRC through CJIS-CR as they are not required to be certified 
as a security guard by DSP. Special fund expenditures decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 
as DPSCS no longer forwards the portion of CJIS fees otherwise paid to the FBI. However, 
as it is unknown how many affected individuals will not receive a CHRC or no longer be 
certified as security guards by DSP, the actual amount of any revenue and expenditure 
decreases cannot be reliably estimated; nevertheless, it is likely not significant. 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 299 (Senators Carozza and Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland 
Cannabis Administration; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
and Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4