START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1387 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1387 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class D Licenses - Delivery 
 
 
This bill authorizes the holder of a Class D license or an employee of the license holder to 
deliver alcoholic beverages within Howard County in the same manner as the holder of a 
Class A license. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Howard County finances and operations are not materially affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. Small businesses with a Class D license that are able 
to deliver alcoholic beverages under the bill are likely to experience increased sales and 
revenues.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Class D alcoholic beverages licenses generally authorize the sale of 
alcoholic beverages for consumption on- and off-premises consumption only.  
 
Chapter 662 of 2021 authorized the holder of a Class A license or an employee of the 
license holder to deliver alcoholic beverages within Howard County. An employee making 
a delivery must be at least 18 years old. The deliverer and recipient must both sign a form 
indicating that (1) the recipient claimed to be 21 years old and presented documentation to 
that effect; (2) the recipient knows it is a criminal offense for alcoholic beverages to be 
given to an individual under 21 years old; and (3) the deliverer examined the recipient’s 
identification. A delivery may not be made unless the purchaser or another individual at 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1387/ Page 2 
least 21 years old designated by the purchaser is physically present to receive the beverages 
at place and time of delivery and pays for the purchase at the time of the order.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 971 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1036 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2