START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1334 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1334 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Garrett County - Bids and Contracts - Advertisement Exceptions 
 
 
This bill exempts specified indeterminate amount contracts and vehicle purchases by 
Garrett County from an existing requirement to advertise for bids if a contract exceeds 
$50,000. Specifically, it authorizes the Garrett County Commissioners, or any employee 
of Garrett County, to enter into a purchase or work project contract for an indeterminate 
amount of goods or services procured on an as-needed basis over a period of time without 
advertising for bids, regardless of contract value. It also allows the County Commissioners, 
or any employee of Garrett County, to enter into a contract for the purchase of one or more 
vehicles for up to $100,000 without advertising for bids.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to Garrett County.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill may result in cost savings from reduced advertising requirements 
and improved operational efficiency, but any such effects are expected to be minimal.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Garrett County Commissioners and employees cannot enter into a 
contract of sale or purchase of more than $50,000 without advertising for bids in one or 
more newspapers circulated in the county, with the exception of professional services 
required to be licensed in the State and used personal property that meets specified 
appraisal standards. Professional services that are required under State law to be licensed 
can be solicited by written bids. The advertisement for bids must appear in a newspaper at 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1334/ Page 2 
least one week prior to the date on which bids for a contract are due. Any contract of sale 
must be awarded to the highest responsible bidder, and any contract of purchase must be 
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. However, the county commissioners maintain 
the right to reject any and all bids. These provisions do not apply to necessary repairs made 
in case of emergency, and any contract entered into in violation of these provisions is 
considered null and void. If any of the county commissioners violates any of these 
provisions, they are liable to indictment, and, upon conviction, must forfeit their office.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 639 (Senator McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2