START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1343 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Anne Arundel County - Property Tax - Day Care Centers and Child Care 
Centers 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for a specified personal property tax exemption in 
Anne Arundel County to include specified large child care homes in the county. The bill 
also alters certain criteria for local property tax credits in the county for specified day care 
providers and family child care homes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues in Anne Arundel County 
decrease beginning in FY 2026 due to the personal property tax exemption and to the extent 
that local governments grant additional property tax credits under the bill. Local 
government expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Operators of large child care homes, child 
care centers, and day care centers in Anne Arundel County may benefit from reduced real 
property taxes to the extent they are eligible. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill authorizes county and municipal governments in 
Anne Arundel County to grant two county specific property tax credits. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1343/ Page 2 
Property Tax Credit for Family Child Care Homes 
 
Under current law, Baltimore City, counties, and municipalities are authorized to grant a 
property tax credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on that portion of 
the real property on which an improvement is substantially completed after July 1, 1988, 
if the property is owned by a business having at least 25 employees and the improvement 
contains an area set aside and dedicated exclusively for a child care center that is 
(1) registered as a specified family child care home or (2) licensed as a specified child care 
center. 
 
Under the bill, Anne Arundel County or a municipality in the county are authorized to grant 
a property tax credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on that portion 
of the real property on which an improvement is substantially completed, regardless of 
when the improvement is made, if the property is owned by a business having at least 
25 employees and the improvement contains an area set aside and dedicated exclusively 
for a child care center that is (1) registered as a specified family child care home or large 
family child care home or (2) licensed as a specified child care center. The bill limits the 
amount of the annual property tax credit to the lesser of $10,000 or the amount of property 
tax attributable to the improvement. 
 
Property Tax Credit for Day Care Providers 
 
Under current law, Baltimore City, counties, and municipalities may grant a property tax 
credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on that portion of real property, 
including any improvement, that is substantially completed after July 1, 1987, if that 
portion of the improved property contains an area set aside and dedicated exclusively for a 
day care center that is (1) registered as a specified family child care home; (2) licensed as 
a specified child care center; (3) licensed as a specified day care center for the elderly; or 
(4) licensed as a specified day care center for adults. The amount of the property tax credit 
may not exceed $3,000 or the amount of county or municipal tax attributable to the 
improvement, whichever is less. 
 
Under the bill, Anne Arundel County or a municipality in the county may grant a property 
tax credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on that portion of real 
property, including any improvement, regardless of when the improvement is made, that 
contains an area set aside and dedicated exclusively for a day care center that is 
(1) registered as a specified family child care home or large family child care home; 
(2) licensed as a specified child care center; (3) licensed as a specified day care center for 
the elderly; or (4) licensed as a specified day care center for adults. The bill increases the 
amount of the annual property tax credit to the lesser of $10,000 or the amount of property 
tax attributable to the improvement. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1343/ Page 3 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
In Maryland, there is a tax on business-owned personal property that is imposed and 
collected by local governments. Personal property generally includes business property 
including furniture, fixtures, office and industrial equipment, machinery, tools, supplies, 
inventory, and any other property not classified as real property. To provide for uniform 
assessments, the State Department of Assessments and Taxation is responsible for 
assessing all personal property. Each county or municipal government is responsible for 
issuing the tax bills and collecting the tax. The tax year begins on July 1 and ends on 
June 30. The personal property tax has been a local tax exclusively since 1984 when the 
State tax rate on personal property was set at zero. 
 
Except for personal property used in connection with a business, personal property owned 
by an individual is not subject to valuation or taxation. Personal property used in 
connection with a business is also exempt if it is owned by an individual and is located at 
the individual’s residence and either (1) is used in connection with a licensed family day 
care home or (2) had a total original cost (excluding vehicles) of less than $10,000. If all 
of a person’s personal property statewide had a total original cost of less than $20,000, the 
personal property is exempt from personal property valuation and taxation. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues in Anne Arundel County 
may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the expansion of the personal property tax 
exemption and to the extent that the county or municipalities in the county grant property 
tax credits under the bill. 
 
As a point of reference, the Maryland State Department of Education reports that as of 
January 2025, there is 1 licensed large family child care home in Anne Arundel County. In 
addition, there are 217 licensed child care centers and 310 registered family child care 
facilities located in the county. 
 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
Expanding the personal property tax exemption to large family child care homes will 
reduce county and municipal revenues in Anne Arundel County beginning in fiscal 2026. 
However, since there is only one such facility in the county, the potential decrease in local 
revenues is assumed to be minimal. 
 
Property Tax Credits for Day Care Centers and Family Child Care Homes 
 
Anne Arundel County and municipal revenues in the county decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to the extent additional property tax credits are granted under the bill. The 
amount of the revenue decrease depends on the amount of credits granted. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1343/ Page 4 
As a point of reference, four counties have authorized real property tax credits for day care 
centers 
– 
Frederick, 
Harford, 
Howard, 
and 
Montgomery. 
In 
fiscal 
2024, 
Montgomery County provided five property tax credits totaling $11,122. The other 
counties that have authorized the property tax credit did not provide any tax credits in 
fiscal 2024. 
 
Howard County is the only jurisdiction to authorize the property tax credit for family child 
care homes. In fiscal 2024, Howard County provided one entity a property tax credit of 
$3,000. 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal 
League; Maryland State Department of Education; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4