START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1315 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1315 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Vaccinations by Pharmacists and Health Insurance Coverage for Immunizations 
 
 
This bill specifies that the recommendations of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) that govern the 
administration of vaccinations by pharmacists refer to federal statutes, rules, and guidance 
in effect either on December 31, 2024, or at a later date to account for any new vaccines 
recommended by ACIP after that date. Specified insurance policies and nonprofit health 
service plans must include – in their minimum package of child wellness services required 
under current law – all visits for and costs of childhood and adolescent immunizations 
recommended by ACIP as of December 31, 2024. The Insurance Commissioner may adopt 
regulations necessary to carry out this requirement, consistent with federal statutes, rules, 
and guidance in effect either on December 31, 2024, or at a later date to account for any 
new vaccine’s recommended by ACIP after that date. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, 
and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or 
renewed in the State on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2026 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of forms 
can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1315/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Vaccinations by Pharmacists 
 
Under current law, a pharmacist may order and administer a vaccination to an individual 
who is at least age three if the vaccine is (1) an influenza vaccine; (2) a COVID-19 vaccine; 
or (3) used in response to a public health emergency. A pharmacist must have completed 
specified training, hold current cardiopulmonary resuscitation certification, complete 
specified continuing education as part of license renewal, comply with recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements, and inform child vaccination patients and their caregivers of the 
importance of well-child visits and refer them to a pediatric primary care provider when 
appropriate. 
 
A pharmacist who has met the above noted requirements may administer to an individual 
who is at least age seven a vaccination that is (1) recommended by ACIP or (2) approved 
or authorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. For adults, a pharmacist may 
administer a vaccination that is recommended in the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s Health Information for International Travel. 
 
Any vaccine administered by a pharmacist must be administered under a written protocol 
that (1) is vaccine specific and (2) meets criteria established in regulation by the 
Maryland Department of Health, in consultation with the boards of pharmacy, physicians, 
and nursing. 
 
Insurance Coverage for Child Wellness Services 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
certain carriers must provide to their enrollees, including coverage for child wellness 
services. Specifically, certain insurance policies and nonprofit health service plans must 
include under the family member coverage a minimum package of child wellness services 
that are consistent with public health policy, professional standards, and scientific evidence 
of effectiveness. The minimum package of child wellness services must cover at least:  
 
 
all visits for and costs of childhood and adolescent immunizations recommended by 
ACIP of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;  
 
visits for the collection of adequate samples for hereditary and metabolic newborn 
screening and follow-up; 
 
universal hearing screening of newborns provided by a hospital before discharge;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1315/ Page 3 
 
all visits for and costs of age-appropriate screening tests for tuberculosis, anemia, 
lead toxicity, hearing, and vision as determined by the American Academy of 
Pediatrics (AAP); 
 
all visits for obesity evaluation and management;  
 
all visits for and costs of developmental screening as recommended by AAP; 
 
a physical examination, developmental assessment, and parental anticipatory 
guidance services at specified visits; and  
 
any laboratory tests considered necessary by the physician as indicated by the 
specified services provided.  
 
A policy or plan may not impose a deductible on this coverage. Each policy and certificate 
must contain a notice of the prohibition on a deductible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3