START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1344 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1344 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of General Services - Assessment of State-Owned Facilities - Child 
Care Centers 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of General Services (DGS) to conduct an assessment of 
all facilities owned by the State and operated by the agencies supported by DGS to evaluate 
whether a facility or a portion of a facility is suitable to lease to a child care center. By 
December 1, 2026, DGS must report to the General Assembly on the results of the 
assessment, including (1) an inventory of all applicable facilities and (2) a description of 
whether each facility is suitable and available to lease to a child care center. DGS must also 
publish the report on its website. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $96,000 in FY 2026 and $35,500 in 
FY 2027 for staffing; out-year expenditures reflect the bill’s termination in FY 2027. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
96,000 
35,500 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($96,000) 
($35,500) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1344/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “child care center” means any agency, institution, or establishment that 
provides child care services to children from different families, either part-time, full-time, 
or on a 24-hour basis, at least twice a week on a regular schedule. “Child care center” 
includes nonpublic nursery schools in which an instructional program is offered or 
provided for children who are between the ages of 2 and 5 and child care centers operated 
by a State or local governmental agency.  
 
In addition to complying with all applicable State and local building codes, child care 
centers must be (1) maintained in good repair; (2) free from health and safety hazards; and 
(3) clean and free from infestation of insects and rodents. A center must have an outdoor 
activity area on the premises of, adjacent to, or near and safely accessible to the center that 
provides adequate usable play space for the approved capacity of the center. The activity 
area must be free from potential hazards to child health or safety and all outdoor activity 
equipment must be safe, in good repair, clean, and nontoxic. Furthermore, the centers must 
be accessible to emergency vehicles, be free of or safe from lead exposure, and meet 
requirements and standards for floor space, running water, temperature and ventilation, 
toilets and sanitary facilities, lighting, and disposal of refuse. 
 
State Expenditures:  Through its Building Assessment Unit, DGS has data for 
approximately 1,400 State-owned facilities representing about 25 million square feet of 
space that serve the 16 agencies that DGS supports. That data can be used as a starting 
point to determine if a State-owned facility may be suitable to lease as a child care center, 
and DGS’s Office of Real Estate can determine if there is availability for a facility to be 
leased. For those facilities for which DGS already has data, it must still conduct site visits 
to verify data and ensure that the facility or space meets all applicable standards for a 
child care center. Furthermore, DGS must collaborate extensively with the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE), which licenses child care centers, to fully understand 
and apply the physical plant standards for child care centers when it conducts site visits. 
For these added responsibilities, DGS requires additional staff. As the added 
responsibilities are not permanent, they can be carried out by contractual staff.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $96,043 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring a full-time contractual program manager to (1) collect and review data 
on 1,400 State-owned facilities for which DGS has data; (2) collaborate with MSDE and 
conduct site visits; and (3) determine if each of the 1,400 facilities is suitable for leasing to 
a child care center based on MSDE standards. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1344/ Page 3 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$88,398 
Operating Expenses 
7,645 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$96,043 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and the termination of the 
contractual employee on December 1, 2026, the due date for the report. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of General 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3