START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1367 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1367 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Lead Testing and Inspections - Falsifying Information - Penalty 
 
 
This bill establishes a civil penalty of up to $50,000 for the falsification of information 
submitted in a verified report of the result of lead-contaminated dust testing or visual 
inspection provided to the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) pursuant to 
Title 6, Subtitle 8 of the Environment Article (Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in special fund revenues beginning in FY 2026 
due to any civil penalties assessed under the bill. While the bill may deter the falsification 
of verified reports and, therefore, encourage compliance with the Reduction of Lead Risk 
in Housing requirements, the bill is not anticipated to have a direct, material effect on 
State expenditures. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a direct, material effect on local 
government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None, assuming accredited lead paint inspectors do not falsify 
information on verified reports. To the extent any such entities do so, however, they are 
subject to the bill’s civil penalty. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Overview of Maryland’s Lead Poisoning Prevention Program 
 
Chapter 114 of 1994 established the Lead Poisoning Prevention Program within MDE. The 
program serves as the coordinating agency of statewide efforts to eliminate childhood lead 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1367/ Page 2 
poisoning. Under Title 6, Subtitle 8 of the Environment Article (Reduction of Lead Risk 
in Housing), MDE assures compliance with mandatory requirements for lead risk reduction 
in rental units built before 1978; maintains a statewide listing of registered and inspected 
units; and provides blood lead surveillance through a registry of test results of all children 
tested in Maryland. The Lead Poisoning Prevention Program also oversees case 
management follow-up by local health departments for children with elevated blood lead 
levels; certifies and enforces performance standards for inspectors and contractors working 
in lead hazard reduction; and performs environmental investigations for lead poisoned 
children. Finally, the program provides oversight for community education to parents, 
tenants, rental property owners, homeowners, and health care providers to enhance their 
role in lead poisoning prevention. 
 
Registration of Affected Properties  
 
Owners of “affected property” in the State are required to register their properties with 
MDE. An “affected property” means (1) a property constructed before 1978 that contains 
at least one rental unit or (2) any residential rental property for which the owner elects to 
comply with the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing subtitle. “Affected property” includes 
an individual rental dwelling unit within a multifamily rental dwelling. “Affected property” 
does not include (1) affected property owned or operated by a unit of federal, State, or local 
government, or any public, quasi-public, or municipality, if the affected property is subject 
to lead standards that are equal to, or more stringent than, the risk reduction standard 
established in the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing subtitle or (2) affected property 
which is certified to be lead-free, in accordance with specified conditions.  
 
Risk Reduction Standard 
 
The owner of an affected property must satisfy the risk reduction standard at the initial and 
each subsequent change of occupancy by passing the test for lead-contaminated dust. At 
each change in occupancy, an owner of affected property must have the property inspected 
to verify that the risk reduction standard has been satisfied. An accredited lead paint visual 
inspector or lead paint risk assessor must conduct the inspection and issue a certificate, 
either passing or failing, for every inspection performed. 
 
Accredited Lead Paint Inspectors and Verified Reports 
 
Any person performing lead-contaminated dust testing or conducting other inspections 
required pursuant to the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing subtitle must (1) be accredited 
by MDE; (2) not be related to the property owner; and (3) submit a verified report of the 
results of a lead-contaminated dust testing or visual inspection to MDE, the property owner, 
and the tenant (if any) of the affected property. 
 
A verified report submitted to MDE that certifies compliance for an affected property with 
the risk reduction standard must be conclusive proof that the owner is in compliance with 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1367/ Page 3 
the risk reduction standard for the affected property during the effective period of the 
certification unless there is (1) proof of actual fraud as to the affected property; (2) proof 
that the work performed in the affected property was not performed by or under the 
supervision of properly accredited personnel; or (3) proof that the owner failed to respond 
to a complain regarding the affected property, as specified. 
 
Enforcement of the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing Subtitle 
 
In addition to any other remedies provided, and in addition to being subject to an injunctive 
action, a person who violates any provision of the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing 
subtitle is subject to a civil penalty of up to $25,000. Each day a violation occurs is a 
separate violation. In addition to any other remedies available, MDE is also authorized to 
impose an administrative penalty of up to $500 per day (not exceeding $100,000 total) for 
any violation of the subtitle. Each day a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
Additional penalties apply for specified violations of the Reduction of Lead Risk in 
Housing subtitle. Among other things, if an accredited supervisor falsely verifies that work 
was performed on an affected property, the owner of the affected property who employs 
the supervisor and who has actual knowledge of the false verification is subject to a civil 
penalty of up to $30,000. 
 
All penalties imposed under the Reduction of Lead Risk in Housing subtitle are paid into 
the Lead Poisoning Prevention Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore 
City; 
Prince 
George’s 
County; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3