START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1375 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Equipment - Portable Variable Messaging Signs - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a tow truck to display a portable variable message sign mounted on the 
truck while at the scene of a crash or a disabled vehicle. The portable variable messaging 
sign must conform to the standards established in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control 
Devices adopted by the State Highway Administration (SHA) and display only those 
messages approved for use by SHA. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the bill is authorizing in nature, it does not directly affect State 
expenditures. However, to the extent applicable agencies choose to purchase and deploy 
tow trucks with portable variable messaging signs, State expenditures increase, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures are not directly affected. While not required under the 
bill, local expenditures increase if local government agencies choose to purchase tow trucks 
with portable variable messaging signs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a person may not drive or move on any highway any vehicle or 
equipment that is equipped with or displays any light or signal device designed to emit an 
oscillating, rotating, blinking, or other type of emission of light, except as authorized or 
required under the Maryland Vehicle Law. A violation is a misdemeanor subject to a 
maximum fine of $500. The prepayment penalty assessed by the District Court is $60. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1375/ Page 2 
Service vehicles, waste or recycling collection vehicles, rural letter carrier vehicles, 
slow-moving farm vehicles, and tow trucks are authorized to be equipped with or display 
yellow or amber lights or signal devices. Under specified circumstances, highway 
maintenance and service equipment, or vehicles owned by the State or a local jurisdiction, 
may simultaneously be equipped with and display green flashing lights. These lights or 
signal devices may be flashed or oscillated or otherwise used only in the course of official 
duties to indicate to the public that the vehicle is slow moving or otherwise is impeding 
traffic. 
 
One or more amber flashing lights may be displayed by a tow truck while at the scene of 
an accident or a disabled vehicle or while towing a vehicle and by snow removal and other 
highway maintenance and service equipment and escort vehicles. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill is authorizing in nature and does not require State agencies 
to purchase and operate tow trucks with mounted variable messaging signs. Thus, the bill 
does not directly affect State finances. However, State expenditures increase if a State 
agency chooses to purchase and deploy such vehicles. For illustrative purposes only, the 
Maryland Transportation Authority advises that the costs associated with purchasing a 
sufficient fleet of tow trucks is $3.0 million (20 trucks at $150,000 per truck). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2