START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1355 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1355 
(Delegate Reilly, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Required Coverage - Hearing Aids 
 
 
This bill alters the current health insurance mandate regarding coverage of hearing aids for 
adults to require coverage if the hearing aids are ordered, fitted, and dispensed by a licensed 
hearing aid dispenser. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or 
after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration from the $125 rate and form filing fee in FY 2026 only; any additional 
workload can be handled with existing budgeted resources. No impact on the 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Certain carriers must provide coverage for all medically appropriate and 
necessary hearing aids for an adult and hearing aids for a minor child covered under a 
policy or contract if the hearing aids are prescribed, fitted, and dispensed by a licensed 
audiologist. Carriers may limit the benefits to $1,400 per hearing aid for each 
hearing-impaired ear every 36 months. An insured or enrollee may choose a hearing aid 
that is priced higher than the benefit limit and pay the difference in cost without financial 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1355/ Page 2 
or contractual penalty to the hearing aid provider. A carrier may provide coverage that is 
greater or more favorable. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care.  
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. The Maryland benchmark plan includes hearing aids as an EHB. Although the 
original service covered was “hearing aids for a minor child,” the age restriction was 
removed due to prohibitions on age discrimination in the ACA. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Hearing aids ordered, fitted, and dispensed by small business 
licensed hearing aid dispensers are subject to the current health insurance mandate for 
coverage of hearing aids for adults. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 641 (Senator Gallion) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2