START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1351 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1351 
(Delegate Ghrist, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Provider Panels - Credentialing for Behavioral Health Care 
Professionals 
 
 
This bill specifies the actions a carrier must take if it provides notice to certain behavioral 
health providers of its intent to continue to process the provider’s application to obtain 
necessary credentialing information. Within 60 days after the date a carrier receives a 
completed application, the carrier must (1) accept or reject the provider for participation 
on the carrier’s provider panel and (2) send written notice of the acceptance or rejection at 
the address listed in the application. A carrier that fails to send the written notice is subject 
to existing sanctions – specifically, suspension or revocation of a certificate of authority 
and/or a penalty of at least $100 and as much as $125,000 per violation as well as being 
issued a cease-and-desist order. The bill also removes a licensed graduate social worker 
(LGSW) from the list of providers of community-based health services that a carrier is 
prohibited from rejecting for participation on the carrier’s panel. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances and operations are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The requirement applies to applications from a licensed master social 
worker (LMSW), licensed graduate alcohol and drug counselor, licensed graduate marriage 
and family therapist, licensed graduate professional art therapist, licensed graduate 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1351/ Page 2 
professional counselor, or registered psychology associate who provides community-based 
health services for an accredited behavioral health program. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Provider Panel Procedures 
 
A provider seeking to participate on a carrier’s provider panel must submit an application 
to the carrier. Within 30 days after receipt of a completed application, a carrier must send 
the provider a written notice of the carrier’s intent to continue to process the provider’s 
application or the carrier’s rejection of the provider for participation on the carrier’s 
provider panel. A carrier that fails to provide this required notice is subject to suspension 
or revocation of a certificate of authority and/or a penalty of at least $100 and as much as 
$125,000 per violation. 
 
If a carrier provides notice to the provider of its intent to continue to process the provider’s 
application, the carrier must, within 120 days after the date the notice is provided, accept 
or reject the provider for participation and send written notice of the acceptance or rejection 
to the provider. A carrier that fails to send this notice is subject to suspension or revocation 
of a certificate of authority and/or a penalty of at least $100 and as much as  
$125,000 per violation as well as being issued a cease-and-desist order. 
 
A carrier must notify the provider when an application is complete either through the online 
credentialing system or by mail within 10 days after a complete application is received. A 
carrier must return an incomplete application to the provider by mail within 10 days of 
receipt and notify the provider what information is needed to complete the application. 
 
A carrier may not deny an application for participation or terminate participation on its 
provider panel on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, race, age, religion, 
national origin, or a protected category under the Americans with Disabilities Act; the type 
or number of complaints, appeals, or grievances the provider files; or solely because of the 
license, certification, or other authorization of the provider to provide health care services 
if the carrier provides health care services within the provider’s lawful scope of practice. 
A carrier may reject an application for participation or terminate participation based on the 
participation of a sufficient number of similarly qualified providers. 
 
A carrier may not reject a provider who provides community-based health services for an 
accredited behavioral health program for participation on the carrier’s provider panel 
because the provider practices within the scope of the provider’s license and is an LGSW, 
LMSW, licensed graduate alcohol and drug counselor, licensed graduate marriage and 
family therapist, licensed graduate professional art therapist, licensed graduate professional 
counselor, or registered psychology associate. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1351/ Page 3 
Provider Licenses 
 
An LGSW is an individual licensed by the State Board of Social Work Examiners 
(SBSWE), on or before June 30, 2018, to practice “graduate social work” under specified 
supervision. 
 
An LMSW is an individual licensed by SBSWE, on or after July 1, 2018, to practice 
“master social work” under specified supervision. Chapters 548 and 549 of 2017 
established the LMSW credential, which replaced the LGSW license. A person who was 
an LGSW on June 30, 2018, must be considered, in all respects, licensed as an LMSW by 
SBSWE. 
 
A licensed graduate alcohol and drug counselor is an individual approved by the State 
Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists (SBPCT) to practice “graduate alcohol 
and drug counseling,” which is clinical alcohol and drug counseling performed under the 
supervision of a licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor or another licensed health 
care provider while fulfilling the requirements for supervised experience required for 
licensure as a clinical alcohol and drug counselor. 
 
A licensed graduate marriage and family therapist is an individual approved by SBPCT to 
practice “graduate marriage and family therapy,” which is clinical marriage and family 
therapy performed under the supervision of a licensed clinical marriage and family 
therapist or another licensed health care provider while fulfilling the requirements for 
supervised experience required for licensure as a clinical marriage and family therapist. 
 
A licensed graduate professional art therapist is an individual approved by SBPCT to 
practice “graduate professional art therapy,” which is clinical professional art therapy 
performed under the supervision of a licensed professional art therapist or another licensed 
health care provider while fulfilling the requirements for supervised experience required 
for licensure as a clinical professional art therapist. 
 
A licensed graduate professional counselor is an individual approved by SBPCT to practice 
“graduate professional counseling,” which is clinical professional counseling performed 
under the supervision of a licensed clinical professional counselor or another licensed 
health care provider approved by the board while obtaining the two years of postgraduate 
supervised experience required for licensure as a clinical professional counselor. 
 
A registered psychology associate is an individual registered by the State Board of 
Examiners of Psychologists to practice psychology in the State and may practice only if 
supervised by a licensed psychologist. To qualify as a registered psychology associate, an 
applicant must meet specified educational requirements (a minimum of a master’s degree 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1351/ Page 4 
in specified fields of study), successfully pass the State law examination, and submit to a 
criminal history records check. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business community-based health care providers may be 
able to increase the number of their providers participating on carrier provider panels and 
subsequently submit for additional insurance reimbursement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4