START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1310 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1310 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Prescription Drug Repository Program - Revisions 
 
 
This bill alters the Prescription Drug Repository Program, including by authorizing an 
entity located in another state to participate in the program, and expanding the purpose of 
the program to include accepting over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. The bill also (1) defines 
“eligible patient”; (2) expands and alters immunity provisions; (3) clarifies which drugs 
may be accepted for dispensing and which provisions apply to drop-off sites and 
repositories located in the State; (4) specifies requirements for a repository located in 
another state; (5) specifies that a person donating, transferring, or receiving drugs and 
medical supplies under the program (or facilitating their donation, transfer, or receipt) is 
not required to hold a wholesale distribution license; (6) permits transfers of donated drugs 
and supplies by entities located in another state; (7) alters the required contents of Maryland 
Board of Pharmacy regulations; (8) clarifies that the board must determine compliance for 
drop-off sites and repositories located in the State; and (9) makes conforming changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Board special fund expenditures increase by $53,800 in FY 2026 for 
one full-time licensing specialist to register out-of-state entities that seek to participate in 
the program. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
53,800 
61,300 
64,100 
67,000 
69,800 
Net Effect 
($53,800) 
($61,300) 
($64,100) 
($67,000) 
($69,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1310/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
For purposes of the program, “dispense” is defined as to provide (1) a prescription drug or 
medical supply in accordance with a prescription or (2) an OTC drug or medical supply. 
 
The definition of “drop-off site” is altered to mean a pharmacy, other health care facility, 
or other entity participating in a drug donation or repository program and designated by 
the board that (1) has voluntarily agreed to accept donated prescription drugs, OTC drugs, 
or medical supplies; (2) is located within the State or in another state; and (3) does not 
have a final disciplinary order issued against it by a health occupations board. 
 
“Eligible patient” is defined as an individual who, through self-attestation, is indigent, 
uninsured, underinsured, or enrolled in a public health benefits program. 
 
The definition of “repository” is altered to mean a licensed pharmacy that (1) if the licensed 
pharmacy is located in the State, does not have a final disciplinary order issued against it 
by the board; (2) has voluntarily agreed to participate in the program; (3) is located in the 
State or in another state; and (4) has been approved by the board to accept from a 
designated drop-off site, dispense to eligible patients, or dispose of prescription drugs, OTC 
drugs, or medical supplies. 
 
Dispensing 
 
For the purpose of dispensing only, the bill specifies that the program may accept 
prescription and OTC drugs in their original unopened, sealed, and tamper-evident 
packaging, including drugs that have been packaged by a manufacturer or repackaged by 
an entity authorized to repackage drugs in the State in which the entity is located. 
 
If a donated prescription or OTC drug is in high demand, the program may accept drugs 
with an expiration date that is less than 90 days from the date of donation. However, such 
drugs may not be dispensed if the expiration date occurs during the period for which the 
drug is prescribed. 
 
Drop-off Sites 
 
The bill specifies which provisions governing drop-off sites pertain to drop-off sites 
located in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1310/ Page 3 
Consistent with approval by the board, an entity located in another state (1) may participate 
in the program as a drop-off site and (2) may accept donated prescription drugs, OTC drugs, 
and medical supplies from a person, unless otherwise prohibited by federal law or the laws 
of the state in which the entity is located. 
 
Repositories 
 
The bill clarifies which provisions governing a repository pertain to a repository located in 
the State. A repository located in the State must maintain written or electronic records of 
donated drugs and supplies and may charge a fee of up to $10 for each OTC drug dispensed 
(in addition to each prescription drug or medical supply under current law). The 
requirement that a repository inform a patient that a delay may be entailed if a donated drug 
or supply is dispensed via mail is repealed. 
 
A repository located in the State may transfer donated drugs or supplies to (1) another 
repository located in the State or (2) a drop-off site, repository, or other entity located in 
another state that participates in a drug donation or repository program in accordance with 
the laws of that state, only if there is no need for the donations for use by eligible patients 
in Maryland as determined by the transferring repository. 
 
Consistent with approval by the board, an entity located in another state may participate in 
the program as a repository. Such an entity must dispense donated drugs and medical 
supplies to residents of the State only in accordance with (1) federal law; (2) laws of the 
state in which the entity is located pertaining to storage and distribution of drugs and 
medical supplies; and (3) State laws pertaining to nonresident pharmacies. 
 
A repository located in another state operating primarily for the purpose of participating in 
the program may not be required to possess a comprehensive or minimum supply of drugs 
or medical supplies. 
 
Transfers of Donated Drugs and Supplies by Entities Located in Another State 
 
Unless otherwise prohibited by federal law or the laws of the state in which it is located, a 
drop-off site or repository located in another state may perform and receive 
(1) intracompany transfers of donated drugs and medical supplies and (2) transfers of 
donated drugs and supplies from drop-off sites, repositories, and other entities located in 
another state participating in a drug donation or repository program in accordance with the 
laws of the state in which the entity is located. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1310/ Page 4 
Program Eligibility 
 
To be eligible to receive donated drugs or medical supplies from a repository located in 
the State, an individual must be a resident of the State and an eligible patient. To receive 
donated drugs or supplies from a repository located in another state, an individual must be 
an eligible patient. 
 
Immunity 
 
The bill expands the applicability of the program’s current civil and criminal immunity 
provisions to include pharmacy technicians, staff employed by or volunteering for an entity 
participating in the program, and a person that donates OTC drugs. The bill specifies that 
the immunity provisions also apply to matters related to transferring drugs (including OTC 
drugs) and medical supplies under the program, or facilitating the donation, acceptance, 
transfer, disposition of, or dispensing of such drugs or medical supplies. 
 
Compliance 
 
The bill clarifies that, to determine compliance with program requirements, the board must 
inspect designated drop-off sites and repositories located in the State and inspect records 
of donated drugs and supplies maintained by repositories located in the State. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 287 of 2006 established the Prescription Drug Repository Program 
regulated by the Maryland Board of Pharmacy. The program accepts donated prescription 
drugs or medical supplies to be dispensed to needy patients in the State. However, 
prescription drugs can only be donated if they are in unopened, sealed, and tamper-evident 
unit dose packaging and have an expiration date at least 90 days from the date the drug is 
donated. Chapter 547 of 2011 expanded the purpose of the program to include acceptance 
of prescription drugs and medical supplies returned to a pharmacy for proper disposal. Each 
pharmacy for which a pharmacy permit has been issued must dispose of prescription drugs 
or medical supplies in accordance with program policies. 
 
To participate, a pharmacy may not have any final disciplinary orders issued against it and 
must be approved by the board to accept donated drugs or medical supplies from a 
designated drop-off site, dispense the drugs or medical supplies to needy individuals, or 
dispose of prescription drugs or medical supplies not accepted for dispensing to needy 
individuals. A participating repository must:   
 
 
accept only donated drugs and medical supplies forwarded by designated drop-off 
sites;  
 
inspect all donated drugs and medical supplies;  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1310/ Page 5 
 
accept only those donated drugs and medical supplies that meet specified 
requirements;  
 
dispose of donated prescription drugs and medical supplies not accepted for 
dispensing to needy individuals in accordance with State and federal law;  
 
maintain a separate inventory of donated drugs and medical supplies;  
 
store donated drugs and medical supplies in a secure and exclusive location;  
 
maintain separate prescription files for patients receiving donated drugs and medical 
supplies; and  
 
obliterate any patient-specific information from the labels of any donated drugs and 
medical supplies.  
 
Pharmacies participate in the program on a voluntary basis, and there is no fee to be 
approved as a repository. For matters related to donating, accepting, or dispensing drugs 
under the program, program participants that act in good faith are exempt from criminal 
prosecution or liability in tort or other civil action.  
 
State Expenditures:  The board does not have regulatory authority over pharmacies or 
other entities that it does not license (including out-of-state pharmacies licensed by another 
state). To approve such entities to participate in the program, the board advises that it would 
need to establish a registration process for entities located in another state in order for the 
board to have some regulatory authority over them. The board would also need the ability 
to inspect pharmacies located in another state that elect to participate as a repository in the 
program. 
 
Thus, board special fund expenditures increase by $53,844 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one full-time licensing specialist to register any out-of-state entities that wish to participate 
in the program. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$46,475 
Operating Expenses 
   7,369 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$53,844 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1310/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6