START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1371 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1371 
(Delegate Terrasa) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Driver's Licenses - Electronic Credentials (Maryland Mobile ID 
Enhancement Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to enter into an agreement 
to facilitate the issuance, use, and verification of electronic credentials through a national 
association of motor vehicle agencies. The bill also authorizes an individual who will 
operate a rented vehicle to use an electronic credential showing a representation of a valid 
driver’s license (instead of a physical driver’s license) to rent the vehicle. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material impact on Transportation Trust Fund revenues or expenditures. 
To the extent MVA chooses to enter into the authorized agreements, it can likely do so 
with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 142 of 2019 authorizes MVA to issue an “electronic credential” 
(i.e., an electronic representation of a license, an identification card, or a data field) to an 
individual in addition to (and not instead of) a license or an identification card if MVA has 
already issued either physical credential to the individual. MVA may enter into agreements 
with a Maryland State agency, another state agency, or the United States to facilitate the 
issuance, use, and verification of electronic credentials issued by MVA (or another state). 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1371/ Page 2 
MVA may create an electronic credential that (1) is capable of producing both a full profile 
and a limited profile and (2) satisfies the purpose for which the profile is being presented. 
MVA must design the electronic credential in a manner that allows the credential holder to 
maintain physical possession of the device on which the credential is accessed during 
verification. 
 
Renting Vehicles (in General) 
 
A person may not rent a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to any other person unless the 
individual who will operate the rented vehicle: 
 
 
holds a driver’s license issued under Title 16 of the Transportation Article 
authorizing the individual to drive or tow vehicles of the class rented; 
 
is a nonresident who (1) has a license to drive issued by the state or country of the 
person’s residence authorizing the person to drive or tow vehicles of the class rented 
and (2) is at least the same age as that required of a resident to drive or tow the 
rented vehicle; or 
 
otherwise is specifically authorized to drive or tow vehicles of the class rented. 
 
In addition, a person may not rent a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to any other person 
unless the lessor or the lessor’s agent: 
 
 
has inspected the license of the individual who will operate the rented vehicle; 
 
has compared and verified (1) the signature on the license with the signature of the 
individual, as written in the presence of the lessor or agent and (2) the physical 
description on the license with the physical appearance of the individual; and 
 
has verified that the license is not expired. 
 
An inspection of a license may be through electronic or digital means. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1371/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3