START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 746

Chapter 746

(House Bill 1351)

AN ACT concerning

Health Insurance – Provider Panels – Credentialing for Behavioral Health Care
Professionals

FOR the purpose of altering the providers of certain community–based health services that
a carrier is prohibited from rejecting for participation on the carrier’s provider panel;
altering the period of time in which certain carriers are required to accept or deny
certain social workers, counselors, ~~therapists,~~ and psychology associates for
participation on the carrier’s provider panel; and generally relating to and the
credentialing of behavioral health care professionals for health insurance provider
panels.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–112(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

15–112.

(g) (1) A provider that seeks to participate on a provider panel of a carrier shall
submit an application to the carrier.

(2) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph and paragraph (3)
of this subsection, the carrier, after reviewing the application, shall accept or reject the
provider for participation on the carrier’s provider panel.

(ii) A carrier may not reject a provider who provides
community–based health services for a program accredited under COMAR 10.63.02 for
participation on the carrier’s provider panel because the provider practices within the scope
of the provider’s license and is:

1. a ~~licensed~~ ~~graduate~~ ~~social~~ ~~worker~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ licensed master
social worker, as ~~those~~ ~~terms~~ ~~are~~ defined in § 19–101 of the Health Occupations Article;

2. a licensed graduate alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed
graduate marriage and family therapist, a licensed graduate professional art therapist, or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 746 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

a licensed graduate professional counselor, as those terms are defined in § 17–101 of the
Health Occupations Article; or

3. a registered psychology associate, as defined in § 18–101
of the Health Occupations Article.

(iii) If the carrier rejects the provider for participation on the carrier’s
provider panel, the carrier shall send to the provider at the address listed in the application
written notice of the rejection.

(3) (i) [Subject] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (IV) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH AND SUBJECT to paragraph (4) of this subsection, within 30 days after
the date a carrier receives a completed application, the carrier shall send to the provider at
the address listed in the application written notice of:

1. the carrier’s intent to continue to process the provider’s
application to obtain necessary credentialing information; or

2. the carrier’s rejection of the provider for participation on
the carrier’s provider panel.

(ii) The failure of a carrier to provide the notice required under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph is a violation of this article and the carrier is subject to
the penalties provided by § 4–113(d) of this article.

(iii) Except as provided in subsection (v) of this section AND
SUBPARAGRAPH (IV) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, if, under subparagraph (i)1 of this
paragraph, a carrier provides notice to the provider of its intent to continue to process the
provider’s application to obtain necessary credentialing information, the carrier, within 120
days after the date the notice is provided, shall:

1. accept or reject the provider for participation on the
carrier’s provider panel; and

2. send written notice of the acceptance or rejection to the
provider at the address listed in the application.

(IV) FOR A PROVIDER DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (2)(II) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A LICENSED CERTIFIED SOCIAL WORKER–CLINICAL, OR A LICENSED
CLINICAL PROFESSIONAL COUNSELOR IF, UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)1 OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A CARRIER PROVIDES NOTICE TO THE PROVIDER OF ITS INTENT TO
CONTINUE TO PROCESS THE PROVIDER’S APPLICATION TO OBTAIN NECESSARY
CREDENTIALING INFORMATION, WITHIN 30 60 DAYS AFTER THE DATE A CARRIER
RECEIVES A COMPLETED APPLICATION, THE CARRIER SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 746

1. ACCEPT OR REJECT THE PROVIDER FOR
PARTICIPATION ON THE CARRIER’S PROVIDER PANEL; AND

2. SEND WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE ACCEPTANCE OR
REJECTION TO THE PROVIDER AT THE ADDRESS LISTED IN THE APPLICATION.

[(iv)] (V) The failure of a carrier to provide the notice required
under subparagraph (iii)2 OR (IV) of this paragraph is a violation of this article and the
carrier is subject to the provisions of and penalties provided by §§ 4–113 and 4–114 of this
article.

(4) (i) 1. Except as provided in subsubparagraph 4 of this
subparagraph, a carrier that receives a complete application shall notify the provider that
the application is complete.

2. If a carrier does not accept applications through the online
credentialing system, notice shall be given to the provider at the address listed in the
application within 10 days after the date the application is received.

3. If a carrier accepts applications through the online
credentialing system, the notice from the online credentialing system to the provider that
the carrier has received the provider’s application shall be considered notice that the
application is complete.

4. This subparagraph does not apply to a carrier that
arranges a dental provider panel until the Commissioner certifies that the online
credentialing system is capable of accepting the uniform credentialing form designated by
the Commissioner for dental provider panels.

(ii) 1. A carrier that receives an incomplete application shall
return the application to the provider at the address listed in the application within 10 days
after the date the application is received.

2. The carrier shall indicate to the provider what information
is needed to make the application complete.

3. The provider may return the completed application to the
carrier.

4. After the carrier receives the completed application, the
carrier is subject to the time periods established in paragraph (3) of this subsection.

(5) A carrier may charge a reasonable fee for an application submitted to
the carrier under this section.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 746 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 20, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4