START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1378 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1378 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Civil Actions - Child Sexual Abuse 
 
 
This bill (1) prospectively reduces, as specified, the liability limits for previously 
time-barred child sexual abuse claims under the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA), the 
Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA), and specified provisions pertaining to local 
boards of education; (2) prospectively reduces, as specified, the limit on noneconomic 
damages in other previously time-barred child sexual abuse actions; (3) replaces references 
to incidents or occurrences with references to claims in certain provisions relating to the 
application of liability limits and noneconomic damages caps and makes similar changes 
to related statutory provisions; (4) makes corresponding changes to provisions relating to 
the defense of sovereign immunity by a local board of education to claims of child sexual 
abuse and provisions relating to minimum liability insurance coverage requirements for 
local boards of education to reflect the provisions described above; (5) prospectively limits 
counsel fees in applicable cases; (6) authorizes the Supreme Court of Maryland to adopt 
rules to implement the bill’s provisions; and (7) requires the Maryland Judiciary to report 
specified information regarding applicable awards and claims. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent the bill reduces payments in applicable claims against the State, 
State expenditures decrease, perhaps significantly. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill reduces payments in applicable claims against local 
governments and local boards of education, local expenditures decrease, perhaps 
significantly. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1378/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Statute of Limitations, Liability Limits, and Damages Caps 
 
Statute of Limitations:  Under current law, subject to a specified exception and 
notwithstanding any time limitation under a statute of limitations, a statute of repose, 
MTCA, LGTCA, or any other law, an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident 
or incidents of “sexual abuse,” as defined in § 5‐117 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article, that occurred while the victim was a minor may be filed at any time. Under the 
bill, this provision applies to an action for damages arising out of a claim or claims of 
sexual abuse that occurred when the victim was a minor. 
 
Noneconomic Damages Cap:  Under current law and as discussed in further detail below, 
previously time-barred actions for injuries arising from an incident or occurrence of child 
sexual abuse that are not subject to MTCA, LGTCA, or specified provisions pertaining to 
local boards of education are subject to a $1.5 million cap on noneconomic damages. The 
bill reduces, from $1.5 million to $700,000, the total amount of noneconomic damages that 
may be awarded to a single claimant in an action against a single defendant for injuries 
arising from a claim or claims of child sexual abuse if the action is filed on or after 
June 1, 2025, and would have been barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act:  The bill specifies under MTCA that if the liability of the State 
or its units arises under one or more claims of sexual abuse that occurred when the claimant 
was a minor, the liability of the State or its units may not exceed $890,000 to a  
single claimant for injuries arising from the claim or claims. However, for an action filed 
on or after June 1, 2025, that would have been barred by a time limitation before 
October 1, 2023, the liability of the State or its units may not exceed $400,000 to a 
single claimant for injuries arising from the claim or claims. 
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act:  The bill makes similar changes to the provisions of 
LGTCA. Under the bill, for an action filed on or after June 1, 2025, that would have been 
barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023, the liability of a local government may 
not exceed $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising from the claim or claims. 
 
Local Boards of Education:  The bill makes similar changes to statutory provisions 
pertaining to local boards of education. The bill also alters the minimum comprehensive 
liability coverage local boards of education must carry under statute to $400,000 to a 
single claimant for injuries arising from the claim or claims for an action filed on or after 
June 1, 2025, that would have been barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023. 
Consistent with existing statute, a local board of education may raise the defense of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1378/ Page 3 
sovereign immunity to any amount above the limit of its insurance policy. If a local board 
of education is self-insured or a member of a public entity self-insurance pool, if the 
liability of the board arises from one or more claims of sexual abuse that occurred when 
the defendant was a minor, the board may raise the defense of sovereign immunity to 
(1) any amount above $890,000 to a single claimant for the claim or claims and (2) any 
amount above $400,000 to a single claimant for the claim or claims for an action filed on 
or after June 1, 2025, that would have been barred by a time limitation before 
October 1, 2023. Furthermore, if the liability of a local board of education arises under 
one or more claims of sexual abuse that occurred when the claimant was a minor, the 
board’s liability may not exceed (1) $890,000 to a single claimant for the claim or claims 
and (2) $400,000 to a single claimant for the claim or claims for an action filed on or after 
June 1, 2025, that would have been barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023. 
 
Attorney’s Fees 
 
In any action for damages filed on or after June 1, 2025, arising out of a claim or claims of 
sexual abuse that occurred while the claimant was a minor, counsel may not charge or 
receive fees that exceed 20% of the settlement or 25% of the judgment. (MTCA currently 
prohibits attorneys from charging or receiving a fee that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 
25% of a judgment, regardless of the type of claim/case.) 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
The bill requires the Maryland Judiciary to report the following information to the 
General Assembly by January 31, 2027, and by each January 31 thereafter (1) the amount 
of each award made to a claimant under the bill and (2) a summary of the sexual abuse 
claims underlying the award made to each claimant. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Civil Statutes of Limitation – In General 
 
In general, the statute of limitations for a civil action requires that a civil action must be 
filed within three years from the date it accrues unless another statutory provision permits 
a different period of time within which an action can be commenced. The “discovery rule” 
is applicable generally in all actions, and the cause of action accrues when the claimant in 
fact knew or reasonably should have known of the wrong. Poffenberger v. Risser, 
290 Md. 631 (1981). 
 
If a cause of action accrues to a minor, the general three-year statute of limitations is tolled 
until the child reaches the age of majority. Thus, unless otherwise specified, on becoming 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1378/ Page 4 
an adult at age 18, a child victim of a tort is required to file the suit before the victim reaches 
age 21. 
 
Chapter 360 of 2003 – The First Extension of the Statute of Limitations for Civil Actions 
for Child Sexual Abuse 
 
Chapter 360 of 2003 established that an action for damages arising out of an alleged 
incident(s) of sexual abuse, as defined in § 5-701 of the Family Law Article, that occurred 
while the victim was a minor must be filed within seven years of the date that the victim 
attains the age of majority (age 25). The law was not to be construed to apply retroactively 
to revive any action that was barred by application of the period of limitations applicable 
before October 1, 2003. 
 
Chapters 12 and 656 of 2017 (Repealed by Chapter 5 of 2023 as Discussed Below) 
 
In general, Chapters 12 and 656 of 2017 established that an action for damages arising out 
of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse, as defined in § 5-701 of the Family Law 
Article, that occurred while the victim was a minor must be filed: 
 
 
at any time before the victim reaches the age of majority; or 
 
within the later of 20 years after the date on which the victim reaches the age of 
majority (age 38) or 3 years after the date that the defendant is convicted of a crime 
relating to the alleged incident or incidents under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law 
Article (sexual abuse of a minor) or the laws of another state or the United States 
that would be a crime under § 3-602 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
However, in an action brought more than seven years after the victim reaches the age of 
majority, damages may be awarded against a person or governmental entity that is not the 
alleged perpetrator of the sexual abuse only if (1) the person or governmental entity owed 
a duty of care to the victim; (2) the person or governmental entity employed or exercised 
some degree of responsibility or control over the alleged perpetrator; and (3) there is a 
finding of gross negligence on the part of the person or governmental entity. 
“Alleged perpetrator” means the individual alleged to have committed the specific incident 
or incidents of sexual abuse that serve as the basis of an action arising from alleged sexual 
abuse under § 5-117 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. 
 
Chapters 12 and 656 also included a “statute of repose,” which prohibits a person from 
filing an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse 
that occurred while the victim was a minor against a person or governmental entity that is 
not the alleged perpetrator more than 20 years after the date on which the victim reaches 
the age of majority. In February 2025, the Supreme Court of Maryland held that 
Chapter 5 of 2023 (discussed below) is constitutional and despite the terminology used, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1378/ Page 5 
General Assembly extended the statute of limitations in the 2017 law, rather than establish 
a statute of repose. 
 
Causes of action filed under these provisions are exempt from the notice of claim 
requirement under LGTCA and the submission of a written claim requirement, denial of 
claim requirement, and the statute of limitations under MTCA. 
 
Chapters 12 and 656 may not be construed to apply retroactively to revive any action that 
was barred by the statutory period of limitations applicable before October 1, 2017. The 
statute of repose created by Chapters 12 and 656 must be construed to apply both 
prospectively and retroactively to provide repose to defendants regarding actions that were 
barred by the statutory period of limitations applicable before October 1, 2017. 
 
Chapters 5 and 6 of 2023 (Child Victims Act) – The Current Statute of Limitations 
 
Repeal of the Statute of Limitations and Revival of Claims:  Notwithstanding any time 
limitation under a statute of limitations, a statute of repose, MTCA, LGTCA, or any other 
law, an action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse, 
as defined under the Acts, that occurred while the victim was a minor may be filed at any 
time. However, no action for damages that would have been barred by a time limitation 
before October 1, 2023, may be brought if the alleged victim of abuse is deceased at the 
commencement of the action. 
 
The Child Victims Act of 2023 (CVA) repealed existing provisions addressing the filing 
of actions for damages arising out of incidents of child sexual abuse under § 5-117 of the 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article and also repealed provisions from Chapters 12 and 
656 establishing that the “statute of repose” in existing statute must be construed to apply 
both prospectively and retroactively to provide repose to defendants regarding actions that 
were barred by the application of the period of limitations applicable before  
October 1, 2017. The CVA’s provisions are severable and must be construed to apply 
retroactively to revive any action that was barred by the statutory period of limitations 
applicable before October 1, 2023. 
 
“Sexual abuse” means any act that involves: 
 
 
an adult allowing or encouraging a child to engage in obscene photography, films, 
poses, or similar activity; pornographic photography, films, poses, or similar 
activity; or prostitution; 
 
incest; 
 
rape; 
 
sexual offense in any degree; or 
 
any other sexual conduct that is a crime. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1378/ Page 6 
Interlocutory Appeals:  A party may appeal from an interlocutory order entered by a 
circuit court in a civil case denying a motion to dismiss a claim filed under the CVA (i.e., an 
action for damages arising out of an alleged incident or incidents of sexual abuse that 
occurred while the victim was a minor) if the motion is based on a defense that the 
applicable statute of limitations or statute of repose bars the claim and any legislative action 
reviving the claim is unconstitutional. 
 
Noneconomic Damages Cap, Limits on Liability, Liability Coverage, Etc.:  Except as 
provided under MTCA, LGTCA, and specified provisions pertaining to local boards of 
education, the total amount of noneconomic damages that may be awarded to a single 
claimant in an action against a single defendant for injuries arising from an incident or 
occurrence that would have been barred by a time limitation before October 1, 2023, may 
not exceed $1.5 million. If the liability of a local government, a county board of education, 
the State, or the State’s units arises under a claim of sexual abuse, the liability may not 
exceed $890,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising from an incident or occurrence. 
 
The CVA increased the minimum comprehensive liability coverage local boards of 
education must carry under statute to reflect this $890,000 liability limit with respect to 
sexual abuse claims. Consistent with existing statute, a local board of education may raise 
the defense of sovereign immunity to any amount above the limit of its insurance policy. 
If a local board of education is self-insured or a member of a public entity self-insurance 
pool, the board may raise the defense of sovereign immunity to any amount above 
$890,000 to a single claimant for claims arising from each incident or occurrence if the 
liability of the board arises from a claim of sexual abuse. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent the bill’s provisions decrease payments for claims filed 
against the State in the future and decrease what may have eventually been paid through 
settlements or litigation for existing (filed) claims for damages against the State arising out 
of child sexual abuse, State expenditures decrease, perhaps significantly. The extent to 
which this occurs and the combined value of the associated claims cannot be reliably 
determined in advance. While there may be plaintiffs who are unaware of the CVA, the 
legal community has been extensively advertising the availability of this cause of action. 
 
As noted above, the CVA currently caps the State’s liability at $890,000 to a 
single claimant for injuries arising from an incident or occurrence of child sexual abuse. 
According to information provided by the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) on 
March 12, 2025, there are about 4,000 claimants seeking damages under the CVA, and the 
potential liability under current law could range from $3.5 billion to as high as $34.0 billion 
if each claimant received the maximum of $890,000 for each alleged incident of abuse. 
State courts have yet to define “occurrence” with respect to application of the caps under 
the CVA. Information provided by OAG on April 23, 2025, indicates that 45 CVA 
complaints involving 1,586 plaintiffs have been filed against the State in the circuit courts 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1378/ Page 7 
as of mid-to-late April 2025. OAG advises that it cannot determine how many additional 
previously time-barred claims may be filed in the future. 
 
The bill establishes a lower liability limit for previously time-barred child sexual abuse 
actions filed against the State on or after June 1, 2025. The bill also applies the liability 
limits for child sexual abuse claims already filed and claims filed in the future against the 
State to a single claimant for injuries arising from the claim or claims. The State is engaged 
with plaintiffs’ counsel in an alternative dispute resolution process; no funds are included 
in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly, and no funds are dedicated 
in the out-years to settlement payments. The State has not paid any claims under the CVA 
and has not assigned a funding source for existing claims; it is unclear if a funding source 
will be specified for future claims. 
 
In general, MTCA claims are paid from the State Insurance Trust Fund (SITF), which is 
administered by the State Treasurer’s Office (STO). STO advises that for purposes of tort 
liability under MTCA, the underlying alleged acts of child sexual abuse would be 
considered outside the performance of the State employees’ duties, not within their scope 
of employment, and with malice. Therefore, MTCA or SITF would not be applicable. 
However, the State may still face MTCA claims and litigation for negligent hiring and 
retention arising from the child sexual abuse claims. These tort claims would be within 
MTCA and SITF. Should these tort claims not be filed as a result of the bill, special fund 
expenditures that may have otherwise occurred are avoided (as are general fund 
expenditures for State agencies for corresponding SITF assessments). As noted above, the 
bill’s attorney’s fees provisions are substantially similar to existing provisions under 
MTCA. Attorney’s fees are still subject to the overall cap under MTCA (i.e., they come 
out of the award and are not awarded separately). This estimate assumes that those 
provisions do not materially affect State expenditures. 
 
Local Expenditures:  To the extent that the bill decreases overall payments in claims for 
damages against local governments or local boards of education arising out of child sexual 
abuse, local expenditures decrease, perhaps significantly. The extent to which this occurs 
and the combined value of the associated claims cannot be reliably determined in advance. 
 
The Maryland Association of Boards of Education (MABE) administers the MABE Group 
Insurance Pool, a self-insurance pool for local school districts in Maryland that is funded 
entirely by its 19 members and is not backed by a third-party insurer or reinsurance. Five of 
the State’s largest school districts are not members of the pool. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, MABE advises that the pool has 18 pending CVA claims; 
based on information it has received, MABE expects 50 to 70 additional claims in the 
coming months. If these previously time-barred additional claims are filed on or after 
June 1, 2025, the $400,000 liability cap under the bill significantly reduces the maximum 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1378/ Page 8 
liability for these claims. This does not include the bill’s potential effect on MABE’s 
litigation costs, which have ranged from $75,000 to $200,000 per claim recently and are 
paid directly through the pool. Should the bill’s caps on attorney’s fees incentivize faster 
settlements, those costs may decrease. 
 
The Maryland Association of Counties (MACo) advises that the bill has the potential to 
decrease liability in previously time-barred cases and decrease defense costs. MACo does 
not currently have any knowledge of any time-barred cases that have been brought in the 
last two years against a local government entity. MACo notes that the exposure of local 
governments for child sexual abuse claims is generally low and mainly limited to parks 
and recreation divisions and local detention centers that have housed juvenile offenders at 
various times. 
 
Unlike MTCA, LGTCA and liability provisions for local boards of education do not 
address or limit attorney’s fees. MACo advises that attorney’s fees in LGTCA cases are 
subject to the liability limit under that statute. Information is not readily available as to how 
attorney’s fees are treated in cases against local boards of education and if the overall 
liability limit under that statue still applies even if attorney’s fees are awarded in claims 
subject to that statute. Regardless, those provisions in the bill are likely to reduce local 
government expenditures in applicable cases. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill, including provisions regarding attorney’s fees, may have 
a meaningful effect on plaintiffs’ attorneys in civil cases arising from child sexual abuse. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Treasurer’s 
Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Association of Boards of 
Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1378/ Page 9 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 24, 2025 
Third Reader - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2025 
Enrolled - May 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 8, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9