START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1380 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1380 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Care Facilities - Hospitals and Freestanding Birthing Centers - Perinatal 
Care Standards 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in coordination with the 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) to adopt 
regulations establishing minimum perinatal care standards that meet or exceed the 
Maryland Perinatal System Standards for (1) each hospital that provides obstetrical 
services and (2) freestanding birthing centers. MDH must adopt the regulations by 
October 1, 2026. Each hospital that provides obstetrical services and freestanding birthing 
centers must meet the standards as a condition of licensure. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can promulgate regulations and ensure compliance using existing 
budgeted resources. MIEMSS can coordinate with MDH on the regulations using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) within MDH oversees and 
licenses health care facilities in the State. To ensure compliance with these rules and 
regulations, OHCQ inspects each health care facility, including birthing centers and 
hospitals. In general, OHCQ inspects facilities for which a license is sought and 
periodically after a license has been issued. MDH submits an annual report to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1380/ Page 2 
General Assembly regarding the inspections conducted during the immediately preceding 
year. 
 
“Hospital” means an institution that (1) has a group of at least five physicians who are 
organized as medical staff for the institution; (2) maintains facilities to provide, under the 
supervision of medical staff, diagnostic and treatment services for two or more unrelated 
individuals; and (3) admits or retains the individuals for overnight care. 
 
“Freestanding birthing center” means a facility that provides nurse midwife services. 
“Freestanding birthing center” does not include a hospital or a private residence of the 
mother. 
 
Perinatal Care System Standards 
 
“Perinatal care” means the provision of care during pregnancy, labor, delivery, and 
postpartum and neonatal periods. 
 
The Maryland Perinatal System Standards are the hospital perinatal program standards 
established by the MDH Perinatal Clinical Advisory Committee. Originally established in 
1997, the standards are incorporated by reference into the Code of Maryland Regulations 
(COMAR 10.11.06.03) for designation of perinatal referral centers by MIEMMS, as well 
as the Maryland Health Care Commission’s regulations for obstetrical units and neonatal 
intensive care units. 
 
In response to the publication of guidelines and policies by national professional 
organizations, the Perinatal Clinical Advisory Committee was reconvened in 2018 to revise 
the standards to be consistent with the Guidelines for Perinatal Care, issued in 2017 jointly 
by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. MDH recently convened an ad hoc committee to review and revise the 
standards. 
 
Additional Comments:  As of February 26, 2025, there are no licensed freestanding 
birthing centers in the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 676 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1380/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3