START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1335 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1335 
(Caroline County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Caroline County - Alcoholic Beverages - Special Event Venue License and 
Multiple Event Licenses 
 
 
This bill establishes a special event venue beer, wine, and liquor license in Caroline County 
and authorizes the Caroline County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license 
to owners of special event venues. The license holder is authorized to sell beer, wine, and 
liquor for on-premises consumption. The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor 
from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the day of a special event. The license fee is (1) $250 for 
up to 10 events per year; (2) $500 for up to 20 events per year; (3) $750 for up to 30 events 
per year; and (4) $1,000 for up to 40 events per year. A license holder must purchase all 
alcoholic beverages from a licensed wholesaler, and the license may not be transferred to 
another location. The bill also repeals current law provisions that authorize volunteer fire 
companies to store alcoholic beverages on licensed premises between individual licensed 
events and replaces with a broader provision that extends this authorization to all holders 
of multiple event licenses, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Caroline County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2026, to the extent that 
special event venue beer, wine, and liquor licenses are issued under the bill. 
Caroline County can handle any additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1335/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Caroline County offers various temporary licenses including a tasting 
license, per diem licenses, and multiple event licenses. A multiple event license generally 
may only be issued for one premises to a single applicant for all events for which the license 
is issued. The number of days for which a multiple event license may be used by a single 
applicant may not exceed 40 per calendar year. The license fee is (1) $250 for up to 
10 events per year; (2) $500 for up to 20 events per year; (3) $750 for up to 30 events 
per year; and (4) $1,000 for up to 40 events per year. The board may not issue a refund if 
the license holder holds fewer events during the calendar year than they are entitled to hold 
under their license, and a server who has completed an alcohol awareness program must 
be on the premises for which a multiple event license is issued when alcoholic beverages 
are served. 
 
Volunteer fire companies can store alcoholic beverages to be sold at licensed events if the 
beverages are stored in a specially identified locked and secured location and are not sold 
or consumed except during licensed event hours. The fire companies must keep complete 
and accurate records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold on the licensed 
premises, as specified. License holders that violate this section are subject to a fine of $100 
for the first offense and for subsequent offenses, a fine up to $500 and denial of future 
requests for a license for events. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 910 (Caroline County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2