START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 393

Chapter 393

(House Bill 1481)

AN ACT concerning

Disability Services – Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program to provide
adapted vehicles to individuals who require a ~~wheelchair~~ ~~for~~ ~~mobility~~ mobility aid;
requiring the Department of Disabilities to implement and administer the Program,
~~solicit~~ request, apply for, and facilitate certain donations for the Program, study the
impacts of the Program, and report on the Program on or before a certain date; and
generally relating to the Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 7–1201 and 7–1202 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 12. Adapted
Vehicle Access Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

SUBTITLE 12. ADAPTED VEHICLE ACCESS PILOT PROGRAM.

7–1201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADAPTED VEHICLE” MEANS A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT HAS BEEN
MODIFIED TO BE OPERATED BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO REQUIRES A ~~WHEELCHAIR~~ ~~FOR~~
MOBILITY MOBILITY AID.

(C) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF DISABILITIES.

(D) “DONATION” MEANS THE VOLUNTARY TRANSFER OF PROPERTY,
SERVICES, OR FUNDS TO THE PROGRAM OR AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL.

(D) (E) “ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 393 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) REQUIRES A WHEELCHAIR FOR MOBILITY MOBILITY AID;

(2) IS A LICENSED DRIVER; AND

(3) IS QUALIFIED TO DRIVE AN ADAPTED VEHICLE.

(E) (F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE ADAPTED VEHICLE ACCESS PILOT
PROGRAM.

7–1202.

(A) THERE IS AN ADAPTED VEHICLE ACCESS PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE ADAPTED VEHICLES TO
ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS WHO DO NOT QUALIFY FOR OTHER PROGRAMS OFFERED BY
THE DEPARTMENT THAT PROVIDE ACCESS TO ADAPTED VEHICLES.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE
PROGRAM.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SELECT ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM AND SHALL PRIORITIZE INDIVIDUALS WHO RESIDE
IN AREAS WITH LIMITED ACCESS TO PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION.

(E) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SOLICIT REQUEST, APPLY FOR, AND
FACILITATE DONATIONS OF VEHICLES, VEHICLE MODIFICATION AND ADAPTATION
SERVICES, AND FUNDS FROM INDIVIDUALS OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CORPORATIONS
TO IMPLEMENT THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY APPLY FOR, RECEIVE, AND SPEND
FEDERAL FUNDS AND GRANTS AVAILABLE FOR USE IN CARRYING OUT THE
PROGRAM.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL STUDY THE IMPACTS OF THE PROGRAM ON
THE RECIPIENTS’ INDEPENDENCE, MOBILITY, JOB OPPORTUNITIES, AND
DEPENDENCY ON PUBLIC SUBSIDIES.

(G) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE PILOT PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 393

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE NUMBER OF RECIPIENTS OF VEHICLES UNDER THE
PROGRAM;

(II) INFORMATION REGARDING HOW THE PROGRAM HAS
AFFECTED THE RECIPIENTS’ INDEPENDENCE, MOBILITY, JOB OPPORTUNITIES, AND
DEPENDENCY ON PUBLIC SUBSIDIES;

(III) INFORMATION REGARDING THE AVAILABILITY OF
VEHICLES, MODIFICATION AND ADAPTATION SERVICES, AND FUNDS; AND

(IV) A RECOMMENDATION ON WHETHER THE PROGRAM SHOULD
BE EXTENDED OR EXPANDED.

(3) IN REPORTING THE DATA REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(II)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS TO
ANONYMIZE THE DATA TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF RECIPIENTS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of September
30, 2030, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3