START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1494 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1494 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Howard County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class MT (Movie Theater) License 
 
 
This bill establishes the Class MT (movie theater) beer, wine, and liquor license in 
Howard County. The bill authorizes the Howard County Board of License Commissioners 
to issue the license to the owner of a movie theater that holds a crowd control training 
certification. The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place 
described in the license for on-premises consumption by a patron who has purchased a 
ticket to a current or future showing of a movie on the licensed premises. The board may 
set (1) the hours and days of sale for the license, (2) the annual license fee, and (3) any 
other limitations on and requirements for the license that the board considers necessary. 
The board must adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s requirements. The bill establishes 
that the holder of an alcoholic beverages license for a movie theater in the county may 
renew the license only as a Class MT (movie theater) beer, wine, and liquor license. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Howard County license revenues increase to the extent Class MT 
(movie theater) beer, wine, and liquor licenses are issued under the bill. Howard County 
can monitor any additional enforcement activity with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for a movie theater that 
is able to obtain a license under the bill and experiences additional sales. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1494/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local boards of license commissioners are authorized to issue special 
alcoholic beverages licenses for specific types of venues. The Howard County Board of 
License Commissioners may issue licenses for conference centers, continuing care 
retirement facilities, country clubs, golf courses, marketplaces, police officers’ local 
affiliates, racetracks, shopping malls, and veterans’ clubs. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Howard County revenues increase to the extent the board issues 
Class MT (movie theater) beer, wine, and liquor licenses. The number of individuals that 
will obtain a license under the bill is unknown, and the board has not yet established an 
annual fee by regulation; therefore, any potential increase in Howard County license fee 
revenues under the bill cannot be reliably estimated. Howard County can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1019 (Howard County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2