START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1466 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1466 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Land Use and Real Property - Accessory Dwelling Units - Requirements and 
Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill establishes a State policy to promote and encourage the creation of accessory 
dwelling units (ADUs) on land with a single-family detached dwelling unit as the primary 
dwelling unit, to meet housing needs. The bill also (1) requires adoption of specified local 
laws authorizing ADUs; (2) prohibits a restriction on use of a property from unreasonably 
limiting the ability of an owner to develop or offer for rent an ADU; and (3) authorizes 
homeowners associations (HOAs) to treat an ADU as a separate lot for purposes of voting 
and assessments. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government finances may be affected, as discussed below. This bill 
may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Policy of the State – and – Effect on Local Zoning Authority 
 
The bill establishes that it is the policy of the State to promote and encourage the creation 
of ADUs on land with a single-family detached dwelling unit as the primary dwelling unit 
in order to meet the housing needs of the citizens of Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1466/ Page 2 
The bill defines an ADU as a secondary dwelling unit that is (1) on the same lot, parcel, or 
tract as a primary single-family detached dwelling unit and (2) not greater than 75% of the 
size of and subordinate in use to the primary single-family detached dwelling unit. An 
ADU includes a structure that is separate from, or attached as an addition to, the primary 
single-family detached dwelling unit. 
 
Except as provided in the bill, the bill does not alter or abrogate any zoning power or related 
authority granted to a local jurisdiction under Title 4 (“Zoning”) of the Land Use Article; 
however, local jurisdictions must establish policies that further the intent of the bill. 
 
Adoption of Local Law Authorizing Accessory Dwelling Units 
 
The bill requires each legislative body of a local jurisdiction (county or municipality) to 
adopt – by October 1, 2026 – a local law authorizing the development of ADUs in 
accordance with the bill. A local law adopted under the bill must:   
 
 
provide for construction of ADUs that meet public health, safety, and welfare 
standards, including relevant building codes and adequate public facilities 
provisions;  
 
exclude the development of an ADU from the calculation of density and application 
of any residential growth limitation measures; and  
 
not establish setback requirements that exceed the existing accessory structure 
setback requirements from the side and rear lot lines.  
 
A local law adopted under the bill may:   
 
 
establish standards for ADU safety;  
 
prohibit the full or partial conversion of an accessory structure as an ADU if the 
only vehicular access to the accessory structure is from an alley; and 
 
establish additional off-street parking requirements (provided a parking study is 
completed and a waiver process is established) that consider, among other things, 
the cost to construct off-street parking, and whether sufficient curb area exists along 
the front line of the property to accommodate on-street parking. 
 
Restrictions on Use 
 
Except for historic property listed in or eligible for the Maryland Register of Historic 
Properties, the bill establishes that if a property owner has the exclusive right to use the 
property and abides by all applicable laws and regulations, a restriction on use (e.g., a 
covenant, restriction, or condition in a deed, a contract, a security instrument, or HOA 
bylaws or rules) regarding land use may not impose or act to impose an unreasonable 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1466/ Page 3 
limitation on the ability of the property owner to develop or offer for rent an ADU. An 
unreasonable limitation (1) includes a limitation that prohibits, either explicitly or by effect 
of the restrictions, the development of an ADU and (2) does not include a limitation on the 
short-term rental of an ADU. 
 
Homeowners Association Voting and Assessments 
 
The bill authorizes the governing body of an HOA to treat an ADU as a separate lot for 
purposes of voting on HOA matters and levying assessments. 
 
Current Law:  There are no statewide requirements governing ADUs. State law specifies 
that it is the policy of the State that (1) the orderly development and use of land and 
structures requires comprehensive regulation through implementation of planning and 
zoning controls and (2) planning and zoning controls must be implemented by local 
government. State law includes various provisions authorizing local governments to 
regulate the location, size, and use of structures through zoning regulations. 
 
Chapters 798 and 799 of 2023 established an Accessory Dwelling Unit Policy Task Force 
staffed by the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) that was required to report its 
findings and recommendations by June 1, 2024. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures and revenues may be affected by the 
bill, as a result of (1) local jurisdictions’ development and adoption of local laws, pursuant 
to the bill, including any costs of a parking study (required under the bill if parking 
requirements are established) and (2) any increased expenditures and fee revenues 
associated with review and approval of ADU development that does not occur in the 
absence of the bill.  
 
The net direct impact of the bill on local government finances, however, cannot be reliably 
estimated, and local jurisdictions indirectly benefit from increased housing for jurisdiction 
residents resulting from ADU development. 
 
MDP notes that, as part of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Policy Task Force’s work, the 
department conducted an inventory of ADU ordinances, and of the 155 counties and 
municipalities inventoried, 81 jurisdictions (52%) had some form of ADU provisions in 
their zoning regulations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses engaged in construction, and small business 
owners of single-family residential properties, may meaningfully benefit from increased 
development of ADUs resulting from the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1466/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 871 and HB 1259 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 891 (Senator M. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Kent, 
Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Secretary of State; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow and 
Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4