START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1481 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1481 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Disability Services - Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program - Established 
 
This bill establishes the Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program in the Maryland 
Department of Disabilities (MDOD) to provide “adapted vehicles” to “eligible individuals” 
who do not qualify for other programs offered by MDOD that provide access to adapted 
vehicles. MDOD must (1) prioritize individuals who reside in areas with limited access to 
public transportation and (2) request, apply for, and facilitate donations of vehicles, vehicle 
modification and adaptive services, and funds from individuals or public or private 
corporations to implement the program. MDOD may apply for, receive, and spend 
federal funds and grants for the program. By December 1, 2028, MDOD must report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on (1) the number of recipients of vehicles under the 
program; (2) how the program has affected recipients’ independence, mobility, job 
opportunities, and dependency on public subsidies; (3) the availability of vehicles, 
modification and adaptation services, and funds; and (4) a recommendation on whether the 
program should be extended or expanded. MDOD must make reasonable efforts to 
anonymize the data to protect the privacy of recipients. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2030. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. To the extent MDOD applies for and receives federal funds 
and grants for the pilot program or funds from individuals or public or private corporations, 
federal and special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning as early as FY 2026 through 2030. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations of finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1481/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Adapted vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has been modified to be 
operated by an individual who requires a mobility aid. “Eligible individual” means an 
individual who requires a mobility aid, is a licensed driver, and is qualified to drive an 
adapted vehicle. “Donation” means the voluntary transfer of property, services, or funds to 
the program or an eligible individual. 
 
Current Law:  MDOD must oversee and administer constituent services and ombudsmen 
programs, the Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program, the Office of Personal 
Assistance Services (including the Attendant Care Program), Telecommunications Access 
of Maryland, and Telecommunications Devices and Distribution of Accessible Information 
for Disabled Individuals. 
 
Maryland Technology Assistance Program 
 
The Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act (Tech Act) of 
1988 authorized grants to states to fund and establish a national network of state programs 
for assistive technology. The Assistive Technology Act of 1998 (AT Act) further expanded 
access to assistive technology and increased the availability of technology that enabled 
individuals with disabilities to live, work, and more independently participate in their 
communities. The AT Act provided grants to state programs that helped individuals with 
disabilities access assistive technology. The AT Act has not been reauthorized since 2004. 
 
Enacted in December 2022, the 21st Century Assistive Technology Act is a modernization 
of the AT Act and aims to increase the quality of life and expand work opportunities for 
individuals with disabilities through increased access to technology, equipment, and 
services. Each state is granted flexibility to determine how federal funds are allocated 
among four key pillars:  device demonstration; device loans; device reutilization; and state 
financing. 
 
The Maryland Technology Assistance Program (MDTAP) was established by MDOD in 
1989 to implement federal grant funds authorized under the Tech Act. Grant funds were 
most recently reauthorized in 2022 under the 21st Century Assistive Technology Act. Since 
its inception, MDTAP has been fully funded through federal grants. 
 
Through the Maryland Assistive Technology Reuse Center, MDTAP solicits assistive 
technology donations and connects donors directly to recipients in need. MDOD advises 
that the reuse center has facilitated the donation of an adapted vehicle in the past. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1481/ Page 3 
Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program 
 
MDTAP operates the Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program to provide eligible 
individuals with disabilities and their families low-interest loans to buy assistive 
technology equipment (including vehicles and vehicle modifications) to help the individual 
live, work, and learn more independently. An applicant must demonstrate (1) that the loan 
or subsidy of loan interest will be used to buy assistive technology; (2) the ability to repay 
the loan; (3) creditworthiness; and (4) the inability to qualify for a loan from a lending 
institution without a loan guarantee or interest subsidy. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDOD advises that the Adapted Vehicle Access Pilot Program can 
generally be incorporated into Assistive Technology Guaranteed Loan Program operations 
using existing budgeted resources, as the pilot program is generally an extension of 
activities already performed by MDTAP under the loan program. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes approximately 
$1.3 million in federal fund revenues and expenditures for MDTAP, which includes 
personnel and program expenses. MDOD advises that MDTAP currently searches and 
applies for private and public funds and grants, including federal grants, to supplement 
federal Tech Act grants included in the fiscal 2026 budget. To the extent that MDTAP 
receives additional funds for the pilot program from the federal government or from 
individuals or public or private corporations, federal and special fund revenues and 
expenditures increase as early as fiscal 2026 through 2030 (to reflect the bill’s 
September 30, 2030 termination date). This analysis assumes any monetary donations 
would be treated as special funds and restricted to use by the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1481/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4