START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1467 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1467 
(Delegates Howard and Behler) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Local Finance - Special Taxing Districts - Anne Arundel County Erosion 
Prevention Projects and Erosion Control Projects 
 
 
This emergency bill modifies existing law governing special taxing districts for financing 
erosion prevention or control projects by establishing that (1) an existing requirement that 
construction of an erosion prevention or control project be requested by a petition signed 
by at least 75% of real property owners in the district does not apply to construction of a 
project and related activities in a district in Anne Arundel County and (2) requirements of 
notice and a hearing prior to a decision to proceed with a project do not apply to 
Anne Arundel County. In addition, under provisions that are generally applicable and not 
limited to Anne Arundel County, the bill establishes that (1) the entity administering a 
shore erosion control district may use tax funds for the maintenance, repair, or restoration 
of an existing project after conducting a public hearing and without a petition, regardless 
of the initial source of funding for the project and (2) any interest earnings on money 
deposited for a special taxing district established to finance erosion prevention or control 
projects must be credited to the district. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may affect the amount and/or timing of expenditures and revenues 
of special taxing districts established to finance erosion prevention or control projects (or 
shore erosion control districts), as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1467/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Anne Arundel County Provisions 
 
The bill establishes that an existing requirement – that at least 75% of real property owners 
in a special taxing district established to finance erosion prevention or control projects sign 
a petition requesting construction of a project before the district council may construct 
it – does not, for a district in Anne Arundel County, apply to (1) the development and 
completion of plans and specifications for the construction of a project; (2) the permitting 
activities associated with the project; (3) the preparation of a cost estimate for the project; 
or (4) the construction of a project. The petition requirement may not be construed as 
limiting or restricting a district from accessing any money kept for the benefit of the district 
to pay for those activities. 
 
The bill also exempts Anne Arundel County from existing provisions that require notice to 
be given to each owner of real property in the district, and a hearing to be held, before the 
district council decides whether to proceed with a project. 
 
Special Taxing Districts for Erosion Prevention or Control, Generally 
 
Under the existing provisions governing special taxing districts for financing erosion 
prevention or control projects, the bill authorizes the entity administering a shore erosion 
control district (discussed below under Current Law) to use tax funds for the maintenance, 
repair, or restoration of an existing project after conducting a public hearing and without a 
petition. This authorization applies to any existing shoreline erosion control project within 
a district, regardless of the initial source of funding. 
 
Additionally, the bill requires that any interest earnings on money deposited for a special 
taxing district established to finance erosion prevention or control projects be credited to 
the district. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Special Taxing Districts for Erosion Prevention or Control 
 
State law establishes that (1) each recorded subdivision that abuts a body of water in the 
State is a special taxing district for financing erosion prevention or control projects and 
(2) each district established must be named for the subdivision from which the district is 
created. The governing body of a county is the district council for each district in the 
county. A district council must (1) keep a separate record of its proceedings for each district 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1467/ Page 3 
and (2) deposit all money received for each district to the credit of that district. The district 
council must require the depository of money received for a district to give the same 
security for the repayment of money deposited and pay the same interest on the money as 
is required for the deposit of county funds. 
 
The district council may construct a project in a district if requested by a petition signed by 
at least 75% of the real property owners in the district. When the plans and specifications 
for the construction of a project in a district are complete, the district council must notify 
each owner of real property in the district (1) that the plans and specifications are complete 
and available for inspection; (2) of the probable cost of the project; and (3) the date and 
place of a hearing on the petition. After holding a hearing, the district council must decide 
whether to proceed with the project. 
 
The district council may borrow money, on the full faith and credit of the district, through 
issuance of bonds, notes, or other evidence of indebtedness to finance a project. The district 
must impose a benefit charge on real property in the district that benefits from a project, 
and a tax on all assessable property in a district that has been improved by a project, that 
together (1) meet the interest and principal payments due on bonds, notes, or other evidence 
of indebtedness issued to finance projects; (2) pay the costs of repairing and maintaining 
projects; and (3) pay the necessary expenses of the district. 
 
Shore Erosion Control Districts 
 
Separate from State law governing special taxing districts for financing erosion prevention 
or control projects (discussed above), State law also authorizes the establishment of shore 
erosion control districts by the governing body of a county (1) at the request of property 
owners (through a petition presented to the governing body of each affected county by 
owners of 75% of the real property in a proposed district or 75% of the owners of 
real property in the proposed district) and (2) after review by, and recommendation of, the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The governing body of a county may act as the 
district council for a shore erosion control district and may finance and construct an erosion 
control project in a shore erosion control district in accordance with the State law 
provisions, discussed above, governing special taxing districts for financing erosion 
prevention or control projects.  
 
The County Council of Anne Arundel County is also authorized to impose a direct tax on 
property in a shore erosion control district to (1) repay a specified loan from DNR to the 
county for the construction of a shore erosion control project for the benefit of a shore 
erosion control district and (2) pay for maintenance, repair, or reconstruction of erosion 
control projects. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1467/ Page 4 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill may affect the amount and/or timing of expenditures and 
revenues of special taxing districts established to finance erosion prevention or control 
projects (or shore erosion control districts) in Anne Arundel County. Under the bill, in the 
county, a district can move forward with a project without (1) receiving the prior approval 
of property owners within the district through a petition, or (2) providing notice to property 
owners and holding a hearing. To the extent the petition and/or notice/hearing requirements 
otherwise delay or prevent, or have delayed or prevented, the start of any erosion 
prevention or control projects in districts in Anne Arundel County, district expenditures 
and revenues accelerate and/or increase because of the bill. 
 
Shore erosion control districts in Anne Arundel County or other jurisdictions may also 
benefit from the bill’s provisions allowing maintenance, repair, or restoration of an existing 
project, using tax funds, after a hearing and without a petition, regardless of the initial 
source of funding for the project, to the extent those provisions allow greater use of district 
tax funds than under current law. 
 
The bill’s provision regarding crediting of interest earnings is not expected to materially 
affect district finances, in Anne Arundel County or other jurisdictions. Under current law, 
the depository of money deposited to the credit of the district must pay interest on the 
money as is required for the deposit of county funds. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in the planning or construction of 
erosion prevention or control projects, or in the maintenance, repair, or restoration of 
projects, may meaningfully benefit from the bill to the extent it allows for construction of 
projects, or maintenance, repair, or restoration of existing projects, to go forward, that is 
otherwise delayed or not undertaken in the absence of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Planning; 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Montgomery, 
Prince 
George’s, 
and 
Queen Anne’s counties; Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1467/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5