START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1459 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1459 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Finance 
 
Economic Development - Western Maryland Economic Future Investment Board 
and Senator George C. Edwards Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the Western Maryland Economic Future Investment Program by 
(1) modifying the membership of the Western Maryland Economic Future Investment 
Board; (2) altering the purpose and eligible uses of money in the Senator George C. 
Edwards Fund; and (3) altering project evaluation criteria. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not alter State funding for the program and, therefore, does not 
materially affect State finances or operations. Any funding provided after FY 2026 remains 
discretionary. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
General Administrative Structure 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 62 and 63 of 2022 established the Western Maryland Economic 
Future Investment Program and board and the Senator George C. Edwards Fund. The 
Tri-County Council for Western Maryland must staff the board and administer the fund. A 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1459/ Page 2 
(council) member county or local entity within a member county may apply for funding, 
as specified. 
 
The Bill:  The board membership is reduced, as specified. A member of the 
General Assembly may not serve as a member of the board. The general administrative 
structure of the program is otherwise unchanged. 
 
Fund Purpose and Eligible Uses 
 
Current Law:  The purpose of the Senator George C. Edwards Fund is to provide grants 
and loans for capital infrastructure projects and business development projects that improve 
economic conditions in the (Western Maryland) region; it may only be used for that 
purpose and administrative expenses. 
 
The Bill:  The purpose of the fund is to create jobs and significant economic development 
opportunities in the region. Money in the fund may only be used to award grants and 
provide loans for that purpose and administrative expenses. 
 
Project Eligibility and Evaluation Criteria 
 
Current Law:  A member county or local entity within a member county may submit a 
proposal for funding under the program. To qualify, a project must be: 
 
 
a capital infrastructure project that (1) is linked to economic development in the 
region, as approved by the board and (2) receives 20% matching funds from the 
member county where the project is located, another local entity, a private business, 
or a combination thereof; 
 
a business development project that (1) encourages and promotes downtown 
neighborhood revitalization, small business tourism, or other areas as approved by 
the board and (2) receives 10% matching funds from the member county where the 
project is located, another local entity, a private business, or a combination thereof; 
or 
 
any other project that the board determines is appropriate to promote economic 
development in the region. 
 
The board must develop criteria to review, evaluate, and rate project proposals for funding 
under the program and must distribute funding in accordance with those criteria; however, 
the criteria must ensure that the project creates or retains jobs, creates or retains businesses, 
increases wages, or creates new State or local tax revenue. 
 
The board or its Executive Director must monitor and track the progress of each project 
that receives funding. If the board determines that sufficient progress is not being made 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1459/ Page 3 
toward achieving program requirements, the board may reclaim the awarded funds. The 
funding provided under the program must be used to supplement, and not supplant, any 
funds that would otherwise be provided to the board or the member counties. 
 
The Bill:  The bill does not make a direct change to the basic project eligibility criteria or 
ongoing project monitoring requirements. However, the board evaluation criteria are 
modified so that the board must ensure that the project (1) creates or retains at least 25 jobs, 
or at least 10 jobs that pay more than 120% of the State minimum wage or (2) creates 
significant population growth in the county or municipality in which the project is located, 
as certified to the board by the applicable county commissioners or municipal government. 
 
Funding 
 
Current Law:  From fiscal 2024 through 2026, the Governor must annually include an 
appropriation of at least $10.0 million to the fund in the State operating or capital budget. 
 
The Bill:  No change to the existing mandated appropriation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 861 (Senator Corderman) - Budget and Taxation and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and 
Management; Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3