START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1465 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1465 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Transportation-Related Tolls - Installment Payment Plans 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) to establish an 
installment payment plan program for the payment of certain video tolls and civil penalties. 
A person is eligible to apply to participate in the program if the person accumulates at least 
$300 in unpaid video tolls and civil penalties. If a person enters into an installment payment 
plan but fails to pay the outstanding video tolls and civil penalties in accordance with the 
plan, MDTA may refer the amount of the unpaid tolls and penalties to the Central 
Collection Unit (CCU) within the Department of Budget and Management. MDTA must 
adopt related regulations to implement the program. The bill also expands MDTA’s 
authority to recall a delinquent account from CCU; under the bill, MDTA may recall a 
delinquent account if one of the three existing requirements under current law is met, 
instead of all three.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDTA is in the process of implementing an installment payment plan 
program that is similar to the program required by the bill; accordingly, implementing the 
program required by the bill is not anticipated to materially affect MDTA’s operations or 
finances. The bill’s expansion of MDTA’s authority to recall a delinquent account from 
CCU is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances; MDTA advises 
that it does not plan to modify its current debt recall practices regardless of the expanded 
authority.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1465/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDTA must adopt regulations to establish: 
 
 
eligibility and verification requirements for the program; 
 
the number and type of installment payment options available under the program; 
 
an application process for participation in the program; 
 
a process for reporting a person who fails to make the required installment payments 
in a timely manner in accordance with the person’s payment plan; and 
 
any other regulations necessary to administer the program. 
 
The bill also makes conforming changes to other provisions that govern MDTA’s 
imposition and collection of video tolls and civil penalties. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority and Video Tolling 
 
Since 1971, MDTA has been responsible for constructing, managing, operating, and 
improving the State’s toll facilities (for example, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the 
Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial/Senator Thomas “Mac” Middleton Bridge) and for 
financing new revenue-producing transportation projects. MDTA is a nonbudgeted 
State agency, meaning that its budget is not subject to the General Assembly’s 
appropriation process. 
 
MDTA must send the registered owner of a motor vehicle that uses one of MDTA’s toll 
facilities without paying the toll in some other manner a notice of toll due to inform the 
owner that they are liable for a video toll. Generally, a person who receives a notice of toll 
due has 30 days to pay the video toll. If a person does not pay the video toll by the date 
stated on the notice, the person is subject to a civil citation and civil penalty for a toll 
violation. The civil penalty must be set by MDTA through regulation and is currently $25. 
 
A person that receives a citation for a toll violation may either pay the video toll and the 
civil penalty directly to MDTA or elect to stand trial for the alleged violation. If a person 
fails to pay the toll and penalty, fails to elect to stand trial, is adjudicated to be liable after 
trial, or fails to appear at trial after having elected to stand trial, MDTA or its duly 
authorized agent may (1) collect the video toll and the civil penalty by any means of 
collection authorized by law and (2) notify the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) of 
the failure to pay the toll and penalty. Once notified by MDTA, MVA must refuse or 
suspend the registration of the motor vehicle. No additional hearing or proceeding is 
required before MVA takes such action. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1465/ Page 3 
MDTA may refer a delinquent account for unpaid video tolls and associated civil penalties 
to CCU for collection. MDTA may recall a delinquent account from CCU if (1) the 
delinquent account exceeds $300 in unpaid video tolls and associated civil penalties; 
(2) the tolls in question were assessed within a 30-day period; and (3) mitigating factors 
exist with respect to the assessment of the unpaid tolls and penalties, as determined by 
MDTA. Until MDTA refers the debt to CCU or after MDTA has recalled a delinquent 
account from CCU, MDTA may waive any portion of the video toll due or civil penalty 
assessed. 
 
Installment Payment Plans for Unpaid Video Tolls and Civil Penalties 
 
MDTA is in the process of establishing an installment payment plan program similar to the 
program required by the bill. While MDTA has already adopted regulations to establish its 
installment payment plan program, the program has not yet been implemented. 
 
Under the regulations, MDTA may offer any person alleged to be liable for payment of 
unpaid video tolls and associated civil penalties that total at least $300 the option to make 
monthly installment payments until the total amount is paid. MDTA may waive any portion 
of the associated outstanding civil penalties. If liquidation by installment payments requires 
more than three years, then the debt may be referred as a delinquent account to CCU. Also, 
if a person fails to make payment or defaults on the terms of an installment plan, MDTA 
may terminate the installment plan, resulting in a final toll violation. MDTA is not required 
to offer alternative payment plans if a person defaults on the installment payments. MDTA 
may use any legal action available to collect. 
 
Central Collection Unit 
 
CCU is responsible for collecting any delinquent accounts or debts owed to the State. CCU 
is authorized to use any actions available to it under State law to collect debts or claims. 
CCU is authorized to charge an administrative fee of up to 20% of the outstanding principal 
and interest on the debt referred to it for collection; the current fee is 17%. Debt payments 
are credited to the agency that refers the debt. The administrative fees are credited to the 
Central Collection Fund, which is the special fund used to pay for CCU’s operating 
expenses. 
 
CCU uses a variety of methods and resources to facilitate the collection of delinquent 
accounts, including automated and manual efforts, as well as a private collection agency. 
Under certain conditions, CCU also allows a person to pay their debt over an extended 
period of time by entering into a Payment Plan Agreement. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1465/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 941 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4