START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1473 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1473 
(Delegate Acevero, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - Equal Access to Public Services for Individuals With Limited 
English Proficiency and Individuals With Disabilities 
 
 
This bill expands existing requirements for specified State departments, agencies, and 
programs regarding efforts to provide equal access to public services for individuals with 
limited English proficiency (LEP). Among other requirements, the entities must develop a 
language access plan and take reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services 
for individuals who need language assistance (based on LEP or a disability), as specified. 
To facilitate implementation, the bill establishes the Maryland Language Advisory Group 
(MLAG), jointly staffed by the Governor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs (GOIA) and the 
Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD). By September 30 each year, each State 
entity identified by the bill must submit a report to MLAG that contains certain information 
for the previous fiscal year. By June 1 each year, MLAG must submit a report to the 
General Assembly that includes a description of its work and any recommendations.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for GOIA increase by $56,000 in FY 2026 to 
provide staff for MLAG; future years reflect annualization and inflation. State expenditures 
(mostly general funds) also increase, likely significantly, for affected State agencies, as 
discussed below; these expenditures are primarily assumed to begin in FY 2027 and are 
anticipated to exceed $1.5 million on an annual basis. Potential increase in matching federal 
fund revenues for the Department of Human Services (DHS). 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1473/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, “equal access” means to be informed of, participate in, and benefit from 
public services offered by a State department, agency, or program, at a level equal to 
English proficient individuals. Under the bill, equal access includes the ability to receive 
language assistance that (1) ensures accurate, timely, and effective communication at no 
cost to the individual and (2) is not significantly restricted, delayed, or of lower quality 
compared to programs or activities available to English-proficient individuals. 
 
“Limited English proficiency” under existing statue means the inability to adequately 
understand or express oneself in the spoken or written English language. The bill repeals 
this definition. Under the bill, “limited English proficiency” means a limited ability to read, 
write, speak, or understand English in a manner that allows effective communication with 
a State department, agency, or program to have access to and participate in services, 
activities, programs, or other benefits administered by the State. 
 
Under the bill, “language access plan” means a written document that standardizes the 
language access compliance policy, standard operating procedure, reporting, and complaint 
process for each State department, agency, or program. 
 
Under current law, “oral language services” includes various methods to provide verbal 
information and interpretation such as staff interpreters, bilingual staff, telephone 
interpreter programs, and private interpreter programs. The bill renames this term to 
“language assistance services,” and includes additional verbal and interpretation methods, 
as specified (e.g., sign languages, large print, plain language, etc.). 
 
Under current law, “vital documents” means all applications or informational materials, 
notices, and complaint forms offered by State departments, agencies, and programs; the 
definition does not include applications and examinations related to certain licensure, 
certification, or registration, as specified. The bill alters the definition of vital documents 
to mean all applications or informational materials, notices, and complaint forms that are 
critical for accessing a State department, agency, or program. Under the bill, “vital 
documents” specifically include (1) emergency preparedness and risk communications; 
(2) online and paper applications; (3) consent forms; (4) complaint forms; (5) all categories 
of letters or notices pertaining to the eligibility for State benefits; (6) written tests 
evaluating competency for a license, job, or skill for which English proficiency is not 
required; (7) documents that are required by law; and (8) notices at no cost regarding the 
availability of language assistance services for individuals with LEP.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1473/ Page 3 
State Department, Agency, or Program’s Translation Obligations 
 
Under § 10-1103 of the State Government Article, specified State departments, agencies, 
or programs must take reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services for 
individuals with LEP. Reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services include:   
 
 
the provision of oral language services for individuals with LEP, which must be 
through face-to-face, in-house oral language services if contact between the agency 
and individuals with LEP is on a weekly or more frequent basis; 
 
the translation of vital documents ordinarily provided to the public into any 
language spoken by any LEP population that constitutes 3% of the overall 
population within the geographic area served by a local office of a State program, 
as specified (and the provision of vital documents to any local office as necessary); 
and 
 
any additional methods or means necessary to achieve equal access to public 
services. 
 
The bill repeals the first and third provision listed above, and further requires that specified 
State departments, agencies, or programs must also (1) develop a language access plan and 
(2) take reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services for individuals with 
LEP who need language assistance, including any oral, written, and sign language services. 
 
In developing the language access plan, each State department, agency, or program must 
(1) determine the number or percentage of individuals with LEP who are eligible to be 
served by, or likely to have an encounter with, the State department, agency, or program; 
(2) estimate the frequency with which individuals with LEP will come into contact with 
the State department, agency, or program; and (3) determine the language assistance 
resources available to the State department, agency, or program. 
 
Each State department, agency, or program must update the language access plan every 
two years and include:   
 
 
the types and descriptions of language assistance services that the State department, 
agency, or program will provide; 
 
a list of the languages, including dialects, or forms of communication for which a 
State department, agency, or program will provide language assistance services and 
the rationale for selecting the languages, dialects, or forms of communication; 
 
an evaluation and assessment of the adequacy of the language assistance services to 
be provided; 
 
a description and frequency of training for public contact staff on the language 
access plan; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1473/ Page 4 
 
the process for filing a complaint related to a language assistance service; and 
 
a description of the funding and budgetary sources to implement the language access 
plan. 
 
Implementation Schedule 
 
Chapter 141 of 2002, which originally established the current law requirements, also 
included an implementation schedule within § 10-1103, setting forth the date by which 
designated State entities must fully implement the requirements. State departments, 
agencies, or programs that are not specified in § 10-1103 must monitor their operations to 
determine if they should take reasonable steps under statute to achieve equal access to 
public services for LEP individuals. The bill repeals the implementation schedule. 
 
The bill requires full implementation on or before July 1, 2028, by the (1) Workers’ 
Compensation Commission (WCC); (2) Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR); 
(3) Department of State Police (DSP); (4) Comptroller’s Office; (5) Maryland Transit 
Administration (MTA); (6) Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE); (7) Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG); (8) five independent agencies, boards, or commissions, to 
be determined by the Secretary of Human Services, in collaboration with OAG; and 
(9) each principal department, as specified in § 8-201 of the State Government Article. 
 
Under current law, if a principal department is created on or after October 1, 2024, the 
principal department must comply with the requirements beginning one year after the date 
on which the principal department is created. The bill replaces the reference to the 
year 2024 with 2028. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By September 30 each year, each State department, agency, or program identified by the 
bill, as specified above, must submit a report to MLAG that contains the following 
information for the previous fiscal year:  (1) a summary of all activities performed, 
including a self-assessment and explanation of any unmet objectives and (2) any other 
performance measures required by MLAG. 
 
Maryland Language Advisory Group – Establishment 
 
By January 1, 2026, GOIA and MDOD must convene MLAG to make findings and 
recommendations on oversight, monitoring, investigation, and enforcement of the bill’s 
requirements. Annually by July 1, in consultation with the appropriate State and local 
agencies and community organizations, MLAG must (1) review any language access plans 
developed by State departments, agencies, and programs, to develop a template language 
access plan; (2) review laws and best practices of local jurisdictions and other states 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1473/ Page 5 
relating to language access; (3) develop a template language access plan for State 
departments, agencies, or programs; (4) develop a template language access policy and 
template language access standard operating procedure for State departments, agencies, or 
programs; (5) recommend at least one State department, agency, or program to perform 
oversight, monitoring, investigation, and enforcement; (6) establish a framework to assess 
if State departments, agencies, and programs are in compliance; and (7) solicit input from 
stakeholders, as specified.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Staffing Costs for the Maryland Language Advisory Group 
 
General fund expenditures increase by approximately $56,000 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part‐time director to support the work of MLAG. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one‐time start‐up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$49,036 
Operating Expenses 
6,955 
FY 2026 State Expenditures – GOIA staff 
$55,991 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. MDOD anticipates using 
existing resources to meet its staffing responsibilities under the bill.  
 
Provision of Equal Access to Public Services 
 
State expenditures (primarily general funds) further increase, likely significantly, on an 
annual basis beginning in fiscal 2027. Under the bill, the affected entities (other than GOIA 
and MDOD, who are tasked with staffing MLAG) have until July 1, 2028, to come into 
full compliance with the bill. Accordingly, while the expenditures in the initial years 
depend on implementation decisions made by each entity, this analysis generally assumes 
that any significant expenditures are not incurred by agencies until fiscal 2027 at the 
earliest. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) further notes that the impact likely varies 
widely among State entities, depending on the extent to which they interact with members 
of the public who may require translation services, as well as the eventual guidance 
developed by MLAG for language access plans. Additionally, the extent to which any 
agencies are selected by MLAG to oversee compliance with the bill and incur additional 
unknown costs cannot be accounted for at this time (under the bill, MLAG must annually 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1473/ Page 6 
recommend at least one entity to assume these responsibilities). While some agencies 
provided a preliminary estimate of potential implementation costs, other agencies indicate 
an indeterminate impact that cannot be reliably predicted in advance. Many other affected 
agencies did not respond to a request for information on the fiscal and operational impact 
of the bill, and DLS is unable to independently verify the estimates provided by the 
agencies without experience under the bill. Therefore, the information below is provided 
only for context to illustrate potential costs.  
 
 
Maryland State Department of Education:  General fund expenditures for MSDE 
may increase by as much as $125,000 on an annual basis to preemptively provide 
additional translation services for individuals with disabilities. While MSDE 
already provides translation services for individuals with disabilities as specified by 
the bill, it currently does so only by request. MSDE notes generally that it already 
provides a multitude of services to 24 local education agencies, 7,000 childcare 
providers, and numerous constituents statewide, including those who are LEP 
and/or persons with disabilities. For context, MSDE advises that under current 
practice, it expended approximately $226,000 in communication services for 
individuals with disabilities, and an additional $175,000 for individuals with LEP 
within an 18‐month period. 
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights:  MCCR did not provide a specific estimate 
for associated translation services, but advises the cost is potentially significant. 
 
Department of State Police:  DSP estimates the potential need for at least 
five administrative staff to manage and operate the language access plan, as well as 
significant additional expenditures on an annual basis for in-person translation 
services and updating the website, documents, and applications.  
 
Maryland Department of Transportation:  MTA anticipates contractual costs to 
comply with the bill’s reporting and assessment requirements, in addition to 
indeterminate costs to hire specialists for in‐office communication translations. 
Such costs are supported by the Transportation Trust Fund. In addition, the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA) likely requires additional upgrades to its language 
access plan, however, these costs are anticipated to be absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. MVA notes that it has been actively engaged in efforts to 
expand customer service for Marylanders with LEP, including offering the 
noncommercial driver’s license test in 17 languages (and plain language) and 
offering the commercial driver’s license test in both English and Spanish. 
 
Office of the Attorney General:  OAG anticipates expenditures for translation 
services at a cost of at least $25,000 annually. 
 
Department of Human Services:  To fulfill its responsibilities under the bill, DHS 
anticipates one-time system updates and/or notice translations for its various 
programs. Such costs may exceed $250,000; however, federal funds are assumed to 
support a portion of the costs (with corresponding federal fund revenues).  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1473/ Page 7 
 
Department of Aging:  The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) may incur 
additional contractual costs over a two-year period to develop, implement, and 
update a language access plan. Additional ongoing expenditures include increased 
translation costs and printing supplies to provide translated vital documents as 
needed.  
 
Department of Commerce:  The Department of Commerce anticipates procuring 
translation services at a cost of $14,000 on an annual basis, as well as $28,000 in 
fiscal 2028 only for necessary supplies (computers, printers, etc.). 
 
Department of Natural Resources:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
may require an additional staff member to oversee compliance with the bill. DNR 
also anticipates the need to procure additional translation services, the cost of which 
cannot be reliably determined without experience under the bill. For context, DNR 
notes it currently provides translation services for Spanish only.  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment:  The Maryland Department of the 
Environment anticipates potentially needing one administrative staff person to 
oversee compliance, as well as additional expenditures for translation services. 
 
Department of Information Technology:  The Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) anticipates procuring translation services at a cost of $50,000 
on an annual basis. 
 
Department of Planning:  The Department of Planning (MDP) may need additional 
staff to assist in translating vital documents and providing interpretive services at 
in-person public meetings. For context, MDP largely depends on translation 
services provided by DoIT’s Google Translate integration services as well as 
automated translation captions for virtual meetings.  
 
Comptroller’s Office and Worker’s Compensation Commission:  The Comptroller’s 
Office and WCC advise that, without actual experience under the bill, any specific 
impact cannot be reliably predicted at this time. 
 
MDOD advises it can implement the bill using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide language translation services may 
receive increased business opportunities as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 987 of 2024 and HB 1144 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1473/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Office of the Attorney 
General; Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Disabilities; 
Department of Human Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Worker’s Compensation Commission; Maryland Department of Aging; 
Department of Commerce; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - April 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8