START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1478 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1478 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Report on Establishing a Directory of Home Health Care 
Providers 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), by December 31, 2025, to 
report on the feasibility of establishing and maintaining an online directory of home health 
care providers to (1) allow an individual seeking home health care services to identify a 
home health care provider based on specified criteria and (2) support statewide 
communication to home health care providers. MDH must consult with specified 
stakeholders, including the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA), and submit the report 
to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can consult with stakeholders and submit the required report with 
existing budgeted resources. MDOA can consult with MDH with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH, in consultation with stakeholders, must report on the feasibility of 
establishing and maintaining an online directory of home health care providers for the 
purposes of:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1478/ Page 2 
 
allowing an individual seeking home health care services to identify a home health 
care provider in a statewide directory based on specified criteria, such as language 
proficiency, certifications, previous experience, or special skills; and  
 
supporting statewide communication to home health care providers for (1) retention 
and recruitment by helping individuals to become and remain enrolled as home- and 
community-based services providers under Medicaid; (2) workforce development 
by connecting home health care providers to training and workforce development 
opportunities that support consumers’ specific health needs; and (3) facilitating 
communication with home health care providers in the event of a public health or 
other emergency.  
 
The report must include (1) information on which other states have established home health 
care provider directories; (2) the types of information that would be appropriate to include 
in a home health care provider directory; (3) a review of home health care provider 
directories already established by counties in the State; (4) a review of existing home health 
care consumer resources and service programs already available through the 
Maryland Health Care Commission and the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ); and 
(5) recommendations on establishing and maintaining a home health care provider 
directory based on available federal and State funding for home health care directories.  
 
Current Law:  “Home health care” includes any of the following services:  (1) audiology 
and speech pathology; (2) dietary and nutritional services; (3) drug services; (4) home 
health aide; (5) laboratory; (6) medical social services; (7) nursing; (8) occupational 
therapy; (9) physical therapy; (10) provision of invasive medical equipment; and (11) home 
medical equipment services. 
 
A residential service agency (RSA) is an agency that employs or contracts with individuals 
to provide at least one home health care service for compensation to an unrelated sick or 
disabled individual. Some RSAs have nurses that provide skilled care and certified 
caregivers that provide assistance with activities of daily living. Other RSAs provide 
physical therapy, occupational therapy, or speech therapy, or durable medical equipment. 
RSAs are licensed by OHCQ in MDH. As of February 26, 2025, there were 2,710 licensed 
RSAs in Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1478/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3