START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1464 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1464 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles – Rental Fleet Vehicles – Registration 
 
 
This bill establishes an alternative registration process for rental fleet vehicles and requires 
the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to issue distinctive registration plates for rental 
vehicles registered under the alternative process. Under the bill, the owner of a fleet of 
five or more rental vehicles may register any rental vehicle in the fleet (1) under the bill’s 
provisions or (2) under current statutory provisions that apply to the registration of rental 
vehicles. MVA may not require the attachment, display, or issuance of a validation tab for 
such a vehicle. To the extent practicable, registration of each rental vehicle that is part of 
the same fleet must expire on the same date. The annual registration fee for a rental vehicle 
is the same registration fee that applies to rental vehicles (i.e., of the applicable class) under 
current law. In addition to the annual registration fee, an owner of a rental vehicle registered 
under the bill must pay a one-time initial registration fee of up to $8.50 when the new 
registration plates are issued. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues increase from FY 2026 through 
2028 (ranging from $208,000 to $69,300) due to payment of the one-time registration fee. 
Likewise, TTF expenditures increase from FY 2026 through 2028 (ranging from $293,600 
to $107,900) to produce and mail the registration plates, as required by the bill.  
TTF revenues and expenditures are likely not materially affected after FY 2028, as 
discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$208,000 
$277,300 
$69,300 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$293,600 
$411,100 
$107,900 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($85,600) 
($133,800) 
($38,600) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1464/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Registration fees for rental vehicles differ from standard vehicle 
registration fees. Exhibit 1 shows the annual registration fee for various classes of rental 
vehicles.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Annual Vehicle Registration Fees for Rental Vehicles by Class 
 
Class of Rental Vehicle 
Registration Fee (Annual) 
A (passenger) / M (multipurpose) 
 
≤ 3,700 lbs. 
$27.00 
> 3,700 lbs. 
40.50  
D (motorcycle)* 
55.00  
E (truck)** 
33.75 
F (tractor) 
Variable 
G (nonfreight trailer) 
Variable 
G (freight trailer or semitrailer)*** 
20.25 
 
* Increases to $65.00 on July 1, 2025. 
** Lower-weight vehicles within this class pay a fixed registration fee, while higher-weight vehicles  
pay a variable registration fee based on weight increments. 
*** In addition to a variable registration fee based on weight increments. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MVA advises that, as of February 2025, there are 280 businesses with 
active rental fleets of over five vehicles, totaling approximately 65,250 vehicles. These 
vehicle fleets are all assumed to participate in the bill’s registration process and obtain the 
registration plates required under the bill. This analysis assumes no significant growth in 
the number of vehicles participating in the alternative registration process once the bill 
takes effect. 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, under current law, fleet vehicles pay the fee applicable to the vehicle 
class upon registration. As the bill does not exempt vehicles from standard registration fees 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1464/ Page 3 
when registering under the alternative registration process, the one-time $8.50 fee is an 
additional (i.e., not a substitute) fee that results in additional TTF revenues. 
 
The 65,250 vehicles are assumed to be distributed evenly across fiscal years for registration 
purposes; therefore, taking into account the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date, 
approximately 24,469 vehicles are expected to register under the alternative registration 
process in fiscal 2026. Accordingly, TTF revenues increase by $207,984 in fiscal 2026, 
$277,313 in fiscal 2027, and $69,328 in fiscal 2028. This revenue pattern reflects 
approximately 32,625 vehicles registering annually (with 8,156 vehicles registering for the 
first time in fiscal 2028 because they were ineligible in fiscal 2026 due to the bill’s effective 
date). As the $8.50 registration fee is a one-time fee, the entire currently eligible population 
is anticipated to have registered and paid the one-time fee by the end of fiscal 2028, 
resulting in no material effect on TTF revenues in subsequent years.  
 
The bill specifies that a vehicle registering under the alternative registration process is not 
required to attach or display a validation tab (i.e., registration sticker). While this results in 
cost savings, the overall savings are assumed to be minimal, as MVA must still mail a 
registration card upon initial registration and renewal (MVA currently mails both a 
registration card and a registration sticker but will only mail the card under the bill).  
 
Assuming MVA continues mailing out registration cards (but without stickers),  
TTF expenditures increase for only three years (fiscal 2026 through 2028) as the eligible 
population of vehicles registers and obtains new registration plates. TTF expenditures (of 
$293,625 in fiscal 2026, $411,075 in fiscal 2027, and $107,907 in fiscal 2028) reflect the 
cost of producing and mailing the new registration plates, with a 5% increase in 
production/mailing costs each year. After all currently eligible vehicles have obtained the 
new registration plates by the end of fiscal 2028, there is no material effect on 
TTF expenditures in subsequent years. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that small businesses have a fleet of active vehicles 
registered as short-term rentals and choose to participate in the alternative registration 
process established by the bill, they are subject to the procedures of the new registration 
process and will also be subject to the initial $8.50 fee.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 863 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1464/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4