START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1424 
(Delegate J. Lewis, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Support and Protections for Individuals Affected by Federal Actions (Protect 
Our Federal Workers Act) 
 
This emergency bill expands the purposes of the Catastrophic Event Account and the 
Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund (renamed as the Federal 
Government Employee Assistance Loan Fund or FGEALF) so that funds may be used to 
provide financial assistance to former federal employees. Among other things, the bill 
alters eligibility requirements for loans from FGEALF, authorizes loan forgiveness, and 
authorizes transfer of $5.0 million from the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day 
Fund) to FGEALF in fiscal 2025. The bill expands the Attorney General’s powers under 
the Maryland Defense Act and increases a mandated appropriation to the Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG) to at least $2.5 million, with $1.5 million authorized to be 
transferred to OAG from the Rainy Day Fund in fiscal 2025. The bill also temporarily 
establishes the Expedited Hiring Program in the Department of Budget and Management 
(DBM) specifically to hire eligible applicants (who left federal service) for vacant skilled 
and professional service positions in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS). 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Rainy Day Fund expenditures increase by $6.5 million in FY 2025; special 
fund revenues (FGEALF and OAG) increase commensurately, with expenditures made the 
following year. Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) expenditures increase by $500,000 in 
FY 2025 and $1.5 million in FY 2026 to staff expedited hiring ($2.0 million is budgeted in 
DPA for this purpose). Catastrophic Event Account expenditures increase by $10.0 million 
in FY 2026, with corresponding increases in FGEALF revenues and expenditures for loans. 
General fund expenditures increase by $1.7 million in FY 2026 and $1.5 million annually 
thereafter. This bill increases a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$6.5 
$10.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.7 
$1.5 
$1.5 
$1.5 
SF Expenditure 
$7.0 
$28.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($0.5) 
($19.7) 
($1.5) 
($1.5) 
($1.5)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1424/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, but county governments may benefit from the Expedited Hiring Program 
exploring opportunities to support hiring by interested county governments. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Consistent with its broader purposes under the bill, the Federal 
Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund is renamed as FGEALF. Funds 
in the Catastrophic Event Account and FGEALF may be used to provide financial 
assistance to former federal employees facing financial hardship from the closure, 
relocation, or mass layoff of a unit of the federal government, or other similar 
circumstances. Accordingly, funds in the Catastrophic Event Account may be used to assist 
a unit of State or local government in connection with a closure, relocation, or mass layoff 
of a unit of the federal government. 
 
FGEALF must only be used to provide no-interest loans to State residents (as opposed to 
federal employees who are required to work at a work site in the State under current law) 
who either:   
 
 
are federal employees, required to report to work, and not being paid because of a 
full or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations after 
January 1, 2025; or 
 
are experiencing financial hardship (as determined by the Maryland Department of 
Labor (MD Labor)) and, in the immediately preceding six months (and on or after 
January 1, 2025), were terminated from employment by the federal government due 
to the closure, relocation, or mass layoff of a unit of the federal government, or other 
similar circumstances beyond the employees’ control.  
 
The purpose and eligibility criteria of the fund are modified to reflect these changes. 
MD Labor may establish other criteria to best assist federal employees facing financial 
hardship. MD Labor may forgive a loan, and MD Labor must establish repayment 
procedures if repayment is required. MD Labor may disclose information to third-party 
vendors to verify federal employment as specified, subject to privacy considerations. 
 
The Comptroller may disclose tax information to MD Labor to the extent necessary to 
administer FGEALF or to detect and prevent fraudulent FGEALF claims. 
 
MD Labor must conduct research and analysis on foreclosure activity in the State, 
particularly as it relates to federal workers and, to the extent practicable, federal contractors 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1424/ Page 3 
impacted by layoffs since January 1, 2025, and report to the General Assembly by 
December 31, 2025, as specified. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
In addition to the Attorney General’s powers specified under current law, the bill authorizes 
the Attorney General to investigate, commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or 
criminal suit or action that is based on the federal government’s action or inaction that 
threatens the public interest and welfare of the residents of the State with respect to 
protecting State residents who:   
 
 
are federal government employees who are not being paid because of a full or partial 
federal government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations; 
 
were federal employees who, on or after January 1, 2025, either were terminated 
from federal employment due to the closure, relocation, or mass layoff of a unit of 
the federal government, or other similar circumstances beyond the employees’ 
control or separated from employment by the federal government as a result of a 
voluntary separation incentive payment; 
 
are inappropriately denied federal benefits that they have earned, including 
Social Security benefits, Medicare, and Veterans Affairs benefits; or 
 
are inappropriately denied federal entitlements, including Medicaid. 
 
The Governor must include an appropriation of at least $2.5 million (instead of 
$1.0 million) in the annual budget for OAG’s authorized activities and for OAG to employ 
attorneys (instead of five attorneys as specified under current law). 
 
Rainy Day Fund 
 
After providing the Legislative Policy Committee with at least seven days to review and 
comment, the Governor may transfer from the Rainy Day Fund up to $5.0 million to 
FGEALF and $1.5 million to the expenditure accounts of the Attorney General. These 
provisions terminate on June 30, 2025. 
 
Expedited Hiring Program 
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may contract with another entity to assist with 
the implementation of the program, subject to available funding. An appointing authority 
may recruit for a vacant skilled and professional service position in accordance with the 
bill and must aim to complete the recruitment for the position within 40 days. An eligible 
applicant is an individual applying for a vacant position in State government who 
(1) self-certifies (and provides documentation on request) having served in the federal 
government, as specified, and left federal service after January 15, 2025, and (2) has 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1424/ Page 4 
relevant federal expertise or experience to meet the requirements, based on the position 
description, for the vacant State position. The Expedited Hiring Program terminates on 
April 30, 2026. 
 
The Expedited Hiring Program must:   
 
 
develop guidance for appointing authorities on aligning job titles and position 
descriptions with the federal equivalent positions without requiring substantive 
changes to the descriptions or classifications of the positions; 
 
conduct marketing and recruitment activities to recruit eligible applicants for vacant 
positions; 
 
rate the qualifications of each applicant while a vacant position is open; 
 
communicate with applicants throughout the hiring process to maintain the 
applicants’ interest in the position; 
 
develop a process to refer applicants to other vacant positions in State government; 
and 
 
explore opportunities to expand the program to support hiring by interested county 
governments. 
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management must implement the program in phases, as 
specified, and establish reasonable timelines for each phase of implementation. The 
Secretary of Budget and Management must adopt regulations to implement the program 
and revise the eligibility conditions to include reviewing applications from former federal 
contractors. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Catastrophic Event Account 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account, which is within the State Reserve Fund and administered 
by DBM, enables the State or a local government to respond quickly to a natural disaster 
or catastrophe that could not be addressed within existing State appropriations. It may also 
be used for federal employee financial hardship in the event of a full or partial federal 
government shutdown due to a lapse in federal appropriations. 
 
Funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account (1) may not be used to offset 
operating deficiencies in regular programs of State government but (2) as noted above, may 
be expended to assist a unit of State or local government in funding costs in connection 
with a natural disaster, a catastrophic situation, or a full or partial federal government 
shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1424/ Page 5 
The Catastrophic Event Account consists of direct appropriations in the budget bill. 
Investment earnings are credited to the Rainy Day Fund. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly projects a closing fund balance of $10.0 million for fiscal 2026, 
which has been maintained for several years. 
 
Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund 
 
The Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund, administered by 
MD Labor, must only be used to provide no-interest loans to federal employees who are 
(1) required to report to work at a work site located in the State and (2) not being paid 
because of a full or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
MD Labor must establish procedures and eligibility criteria for loans from the fund, as 
specified, such as repayment timelines. In addition to funds appropriated in the State budget 
and other sources, the fund consists of (1) money transferred from the Catastrophic Event 
Account and (2) repayments on loans made from the fund. 
 
Unemployment Compensation for Federal Employees 
 
The Unemployment Compensation for Federal Employees (UCFE) program provides 
unemployment compensation for federal employees who lost their employment through no 
fault of their own. The same terms and conditions that apply to individuals eligible for 
regular unemployment insurance apply to UCFE claimants. For additional general 
information about the State Unemployment Insurance (UI) program, see the 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance. 
 
Maryland Defense Act  
 
Under Chapter 26 of 2017 (the Maryland Defense Act), the Attorney General may 
investigate, commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or criminal suit or action that is 
based on the federal government’s action or inaction that threatens the public interest and 
welfare of the residents of the State with respect to (1) protecting the health of the residents 
of the State and ensuring the availability of affordable health care; (2) safeguarding public 
safety and security; (3) protecting civil liberties; (4) preserving and enhancing the 
economic security of workers and retirees; (5) protecting financial security of the residents 
of the State, as specified; (6) protecting the residents of the State against fraud and other 
deceptive and predatory practices; (7) protecting the natural resources and environment of 
the State; (8) protecting the residents of the State against illegal and unconstitutional federal 
immigration and travel restrictions; or (9) otherwise protecting as parens patriae, the 
State’s interest in the general health and well-being of its residents.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1424/ Page 6 
Before commencing a suit or action, the Attorney General must provide the Governor with 
written notice and an opportunity for review and comment, unless the Attorney General 
determines that emergency circumstances require immediate action. If the Governor 
objects to the intended suit or action, then the Governor must provide in writing to the 
Attorney General the reasons for the objection within 10 days after receiving the notice. 
Unless there are emergency circumstances that require the immediate commencement of 
the suit or action, the Attorney General must consider the Governor’s objection before 
proceeding. If the Attorney General determines that emergency circumstances require the 
immediate commencement of a suit or action to protect the public interest and welfare of 
the residents of the State, as specified, the Attorney General must provide the Governor 
notice of the suit or action as soon as reasonably practicable. The Governor must include 
an appropriation of at least $1.0 million in the annual budget for the authorized activities 
and to employ five attorneys. 
 
Under Chapter 26, the General Assembly finds (1) the federal government’s action or 
failure to take action may pose a threat to the health and welfare of the residents of the 
State and (2) the State should investigate and obtain relief from any arbitrary, unlawful, or 
unconstitutional federal action or inaction and prevent such action or inaction from 
harming the residents of the State.  
 
State Employees within the State Personnel Management System 
 
SPMS has four major employment categories designated in statute:   
 
 
executive service, which consists of chief administrators of principal units or 
comparable positions, including deputy secretaries or assistant secretaries; 
 
management service, which consists of positions that involve direct responsibility 
for the oversight and management of personnel and financial resources and that 
require the exercise of discretion and independent judgment; 
 
professional service, which consists of positions that require advanced knowledge 
in a field of science or learning and that normally require a professional license, 
advanced degree, or both; and 
 
skilled service, which consists of all other positions. 
 
Skilled and Professional Service Positions within the State Personnel Management System 
 
DBM must review and audit recruitment and hiring practices of all appointing authorities 
at least once every three years. When a skilled service or professional service position is to 
be filled, the appointing authority must complete a position selection plan that includes 
specified information. Each unit within SPMS must fill vacant skilled service and 
professional service positions in accordance with a position selection plan. DBM must 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1424/ Page 7 
assist units in developing application forms, position selection plans, selection tests, and 
announcement forms. 
 
If current employees or contractual employees may be eligible for a vacant position, then 
a job announcement must be posted for at least two weeks before the deadline for 
submitting applications. The position vacancy must be advertised for at least two weeks 
before the application deadline by making available a job announcement to all appropriate 
State agencies and using any other method to ensure a sufficient pool of applicants, 
including printed advertisements in newspapers and journals, paper and electronic bulletin 
board postings, and special notices. 
 
The appointing authority must review the applications received to determine the qualified 
applicants, prepare a register of qualified applicants in random order, and send a notice to 
unqualified applicants that they failed to meet the minimum qualifications for the position. 
After the close of a position announcement, the appointing authority must also send notice 
of a competitive examination at least 10 days before the test administration date if such an 
examination is required. If at least 2 but fewer than 10 applicants meet the minimum 
requirements for a position, the appointing authority may readvertise the position vacancy 
or make a selection from the register without the need for further selection testing. 
 
An appointing authority may forego the SPMS position selection plan and recruit for a 
skilled or professional service position if the appointing authority decides to recruit for the 
position, the position is difficult to fill, the recruitment must occur in a timely manner, and 
DBM is notified. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MD Labor advises that forgiven loans are not considered wages for 
UCFE and UI purposes. Thus, the bill has no effect on UCFE or UI benefits, although loans 
from FGEALF supplement benefits from UCFE that are available to federal employees 
who are laid off.  
 
There are approximately 160,000 civilian federal jobs in Maryland. Virginia and the 
District of Columbia each have around 190,000 federal jobs, and many Marylanders 
commute to those jurisdictions. (These employment counts do not include classified 
agencies like the National Security Agency in Maryland and the Central Intelligence 
Agency in Virginia.) An analysis of tax year 2021 data by the Comptroller’s Office found 
about 256,000 Marylanders received a federal W-2, representing about 8% of taxpayers. 
Thus, a significant number of State residents are federal employees who may become 
eligible for loans under the FGEALF Program if they are terminated due to the closure, 
relocation, or mass layoff of a unit of the federal government, or other similar 
circumstances beyond the employees’ control and are facing financial hardship. MD Labor 
estimates that more than 10,000 former federal employees may apply for loans. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1424/ Page 8 
Maryland Department of Labor Administrative Costs 
 
FGEALF may only be used to provide no-interest loans, so general funds are needed to 
administer the program. Accordingly, general fund expenditures for MD Labor’s Office of 
the Secretary increase by $1.7 million in fiscal 2026, which assumes a start-up delay until 
July 1, 2025. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 10 contractual claims processors to 
process loans. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and other 
operating expenses. It also includes $950,000 for MD Labor to contract with an information 
technology (IT) vendor to maintain a cloud-based application platform as well as provide 
project management services, data analytics, and customer support. 
 
Contractual Positions 
10 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$682,891 
IT Vendor Expenses 
950,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
       76,450 
Total FY 2026 General Fund Expenditures 
$1,709,341 
 
This analysis assumes contractual employees are only needed in fiscal 2026 as MD Labor 
expects the majority of federal layoffs to occur within the first year. MD Labor also 
anticipates using 10 existing full-time employees from its divisions to assist with 
application submissions and provide in-person support, similar to how MD Labor operated 
the Port of Baltimore Worker Support Program. To the extent that these employees work 
in federally funded programs, general fund expenditures increase further to reimburse 
federally funded programs for their time. To the extent loans are needed beyond 
fiscal 2026, existing MD Labor employees can likely continue the program if needed. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Additionally, existing MD Labor employees can conduct research and analysis on 
foreclosure activity and meet the bill’s reporting requirement. 
 
Special Funds for Loans 
 
Under current law, the Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund 
Program has not been launched and written policy guidance has not been issued. However, 
MD Labor advises that, under the current program, eligible federal employees would be 
able to receive a $700 no-interest loan. If a federal shutdown were prolonged and funding 
remained, a second loan could be offered. Loans would be due to be repaid to the State 
once the shutdown had ended and after they had received back pay for the shutdown period. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1424/ Page 9 
The bill does not specify the terms of the loans under the FGEALF Program, but they are 
likely similar to those under the current program. 
 
Transfers for Capitalization of FGEALF:  The Governor may transfer up to $5.0 million 
from the Rainy Day Fund to FGEALF in fiscal 2025. The Catastrophic Event Account has 
a projected fund balance of $10.0 million for fiscal 2026; assuming 10,000 loan recipients 
and $700 loan amounts, the program initially requires $7.0 million. However, if the number 
of loan applicants exceeds that estimate, or if MD Labor allows for multiple rounds of loan 
applications or offers more generous loans, the program could use the full $10.0 million in 
the Catastrophic Event Account, along with the $5.0 million transfer from the Rainy Day 
Fund. This analysis, therefore, assumes that the Governor transfers $5.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 from the Rainy Day Fund and $10.0 million in fiscal 2026 from the 
Catastrophic Event Account for the program, so special fund expenditures from those 
accounts increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025 and by $10.0 million in fiscal 2026, 
respectively. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly to reflect the transfers from 
the Rainy Day Fund and the Catastrophic Event Account to FGEALF.  
 
No-interest Loans under the Program:  Special fund expenditures for FGEALF increase to 
provide no-interest loans to former federal employees, beginning as early as fiscal 2025 
but more likely in fiscal 2026, and special fund revenues increase as those loans are repaid 
(if not forgiven), likely in fiscal 2026 and 2027. However, it is unknown to what extent 
loans will be forgiven or will require repayment. The actual amounts and exact timing 
cannot be predicted. Any expenditures in fiscal 2025 would have to be made with existing 
staff; accordingly, this analysis assumes that loans are not made until fiscal 2026 – which 
is when contractual employees and an IT vender are expected to be hired. Thus, the funds 
transferred in fiscal 2025 are assumed to be held as fund balance (and encumbered for 
expenditure in fiscal 2026). Accordingly, special fund expenditures from FGEALF 
increase by as much as $15.0 million in fiscal 2026 for no-interest loans to former federal 
employees. 
 
To the extent State residents are terminated from employment by the federal government 
due to the closure, relocation, or mass layoff of a unit of the federal government, or other 
similar circumstances beyond the employees’ control and are facing financial hardship 
beyond fiscal 2026, special fund revenues and expenditures increase in the out-years (with 
more transfers from the Catastrophic Event Account) to provide additional loans; as such 
out-year actions are uncertain, related costs are not reflected in this analysis. 
 
Other Effects:  As discussed above, the bill is likely to deplete the $10.0 million fund 
balance of the Catastrophic Event Account in fiscal 2026. To the extent that loan 
repayments (if not forgiven) do not fully replenish the fund, general fund expenditures may 
increase, up to $10.0 million in fiscal 2027, to replenish the Catastrophic Event Account. 
However, any such funding is discretionary and not included in this analysis.  

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1424/ Page 10 
Additionally, under current law, any interest generated by the Catastrophic Event Account 
is credited to the Rainy Day Fund. Accordingly, special fund revenues to the Rainy Day 
Fund decrease minimally in fiscal 2026 as a result of funding being transferred from the 
Catastrophic Event Account. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
The Governor may transfer $1.5 million from the Rainy Day Fund to the expenditure 
accounts of the Attorney General. This analysis assumes that transfer is made; accordingly, 
special fund expenditures for the Rainy Day Fund increase by $1.5 million in fiscal 2025, 
with the monies treated as special fund revenues by OAG. This analysis assumes those 
monies are encumbered for expenditure in fiscal 2026. Additionally, the bill increases a 
mandated appropriation to OAG from at least $1.0 million to at least $2.5 million; thus, 
general fund expenditures for OAG also increase by $1.5 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027. 
 
Any additional general fund expenditures are discretionary (and presumed to not be 
needed) for fiscal 2026. Instead, this analysis assumes a start-up delay to July 1, 2025, to 
hire the additional OAG attorneys. Accordingly, the $1.5 million transfer from the 
Rainy Day Fund is assumed to be expended by OAG as special funds in fiscal 2026. 
 
This funding is anticipated to support the salaries and fringe benefits for additional 
attorneys and related costs – specifically, one principal counsel, four assistant Attorneys 
General, one administrative officer, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. The actual cost to comply with the bill’s provisions may be less than the 
additional mandated appropriation of $1.5 million each year. For example, the estimated 
cost for salaries, fringe benefits, and associated operating requirements for these 
six positions at the grades specified by OAG is $861,519 in fiscal 2025, increasing to 
$901,486 in fiscal 2030. However, OAG notes the office may need additional positions at 
some point in the future based on workload.  
 
Also, as the bill only authorizes the Attorney General to initiate an action or defend against 
an action, as specified, and does not require the Attorney General to take a specific action, 
there may be years in which no legal actions occur. Because the mandated appropriation 
may only be used for the functions specified in the bill and under current law, any unused 
funds revert to the general fund at the end of each fiscal year, as required by State law, 
although this impact has not been accounted for in this analysis. Furthermore, staffing costs 
must be covered in perpetuity. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1424/ Page 11 
Department of Budget and Management 
 
DBM notes that the current average time to hire from posting a job opening is 
approximately 100 days for most skilled and professional service positions. Thus, it will 
face challenges to meet the bill’s 40-day goal for completing the recruitment process with 
existing resources. Therefore, DBM needs additional contractual employees and/or vendor 
support throughout calendar 2025 to assist with this goal, among other responsibilities, 
including improving candidate identification and evaluation and back-end processing 
capacity. It is unknown how many contractual employees are needed at this time. 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly appropriates $2.0 million to 
DPA in fiscal 2025, specifically for the expedited hiring of former federal employees. 
DBM intends to use those monies to hire the contractual employees and/or obtain the 
vendor services necessary to implement the bill. Thus, special fund expenditures from DPA 
increase by as much as $2.0 million in total – drawn down over two fiscal years. This 
analysis assumes $500,000 is expended in fiscal 2025 and the remainder – $1.5 million – 
is expended in fiscal 2026 (although more spending could occur in fiscal 2025, if needed, 
with less spending in fiscal 2026). The program terminates April 30, 2026, so ongoing 
contractual support is not needed in the out-years. 
 
Comptroller 
 
The Comptroller’s Office can disclose tax information to MD Labor with existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 683 (Senator Charles, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and 
Management; Office of the Comptroller; Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the 
Attorney General; U.S. Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1424/ Page 12 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1424/ Page 13 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MD Labor) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly. As UI taxes are applied to the 
first $8,500 earned by each employee, each calendar year, the first two quarterly tax 
payments are typically the largest. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 1424/ Page 14 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
n/a 
$1,067.8 
n/a 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
961.0 
$1,067.8 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
854.2 
961.0 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
747.5 
854.2 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
640.7 
747.5 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
640.7 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2023 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. State law also generally requires a federal solvency goal to be met prior to moving to a tax table 
with lower rates (i.e., from Table F to Table A). The federal solvency goal, which is designed to ensure the State’s 
ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and varies with the total 
wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recent recessions. 
 
A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with nonzero (.0001 to .0027) 
benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; compensation less than that 
amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. Table A was in effect in 2024 and is once again in effect in 2025.  
 
As of January 1, 2025, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the  
first four of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the 
benefit year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most 
recently completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 1424/ Page 15 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MD Labor-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 

END OF PAGE 15