START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1440 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1440 
(Delegate R. Lewis, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Courts - Parental Accommodations 
 
 
This bill requires a circuit courthouse that is constructed or undergoes a major renovation 
project on or after October 1, 2025, to maintain on its premises a private lactation room 
that may be used by employees of the court and members of the public to nurse and express 
breast milk. The bill also authorizes a jury judge or jury commissioner to excuse from jury 
service an individual who is a breast‐feeding mother or has legal custody of (and is 
personally responsible for) a child younger than age three requiring continuous care by the 
individual during normal court hours. By December 31, 2025, and annually thereafter, the 
Judiciary must collect and report specified information to the General Assembly regarding 
jury duty excusals. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $44,800 in FY 2026 only for one-time 
costs incurred by the Judiciary, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent circuit courthouses undergo new construction or a major 
renovation project, local government expenditures may increase to provide a lactation 
room, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a 
unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The lactation room must include (1) a chair with a table and electrical 
outlet nearby to accommodate placement of a breast pump device; (2) a door that may be 
locked from the inside; (3) a sink; and (4) a refrigerator. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1440/ Page 2 
The bill specifies that a jury judge or jury commissioner may, but is not required, to excuse 
an individual who is a breast‐feeding mother, or an individual who has legal custody of 
(and is personally responsible for) a child younger than three requiring continuous care by 
the individual during normal court hours. 
 
“Breast‐feeding mother” means a mother who is feeding her child breast milk, either 
directly from her breast or by expressing and bottle‐feeding the child.  
 
By December 31, 2025, and annually thereafter, the Judiciary must collect and report to 
the General Assembly the following information for the preceding calendar year:  (1) the 
number of individuals requesting to be excused for jury duty, based on the existing 
provision (referenced below) and those circumstances added by the bill; and (2) the number 
of individuals granted or denied an excusal. The information reported must be 
disaggregated by jurisdiction, the type of excusal requested, and whether the excusal 
request was granted or denied.  
 
Current Law:   
 
State Employees – Nursing Mothers 
 
Pursuant to § 2-310 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, the State, through its 
appropriate officers and employees, must provide (1) a reasonable break time for an 
employee to express breast milk for the nursing child after the child’s birth each time the 
employee needs to express the milk and (2) on notice, a place, other than a bathroom, that 
is shielded from view and free from coworkers and the public and that may be used by an 
employee to express breast milk. The State may not be required to compensate an employee 
receiving reasonable break time for any time spent expressing breast milk at work. 
 
Jury Service – Excusal 
 
Each adult citizen of the State has both the opportunity for jury service and, when 
summoned, the duty to serve. Subject to specified requirements, a jury judge or jury 
commissioner may disqualify, excuse, or exempt an individual who is summoned for jury 
service or reschedule jury service. To be excused, an individual must show, on a juror 
questionnaire, during an interview or by other competent evidence, that extreme 
inconvenience, public necessity, or undue hardship requires excusal. An individual may be 
excused (1) only for the period that the jury judge or jury commissioner considers 
necessary and (2) not more than twice unless the individual has shown an extraordinary 
circumstance that requires an additional excuse. Once the period of excusal has expired, a 
jury commissioner must again summon the individual for jury service. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1440/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $44,844 in 
fiscal 2026 only for one‐time costs to (1) update the online and printed versions of the juror 
qualification forms and (2) develop a report with specified information required by the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The Judiciary advises that of the 24 circuit courthouses in the State,  
7 have dedicated lactation or wellness rooms that meet the bill’s requirements. An 
additional 12 locations have accommodations for lactation, such as private rooms or 
conference rooms; these areas vary in terms of the specific accommodations available 
(e.g., refrigerator, sink, etc.). Five circuit courthouses have no specific designated lactation 
room; however, in regard to jury service, all circuit courts provide some form of 
accommodation to breast‐feeding mothers, such as through rescheduling, excusal, or 
providing a private lactation space. 
 
To the extent circuit courthouses undergo new construction or a major renovation project 
on or after October 1, 2025, local government expenditures may increase, potentially 
significantly, to provide a lactation room that complies with the bill’s requirements. For 
example, St. Mary’s County estimates that it can handle the bill’s requirements at a cost of 
$25,000. Conversely, Prince George’s County estimates expenditures may be significantly 
more based on the potential need to upgrade existing plumbing infrastructure. The extent 
to which any expenditures are incurred depend on whether a county constructs or 
undertakes major renovation after the bill’s effective date, as well as whether there are 
existing county requirements in regard to lactation rooms. 
 
Provisions regarding jury service may have an operational impact on circuit courts but are 
not anticipated to have a material effect on local finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Montgomery, Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1440/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4