START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1450 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1450 
(Delegate Qi) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Maryland Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer 
Incentive Program - Alterations 
 
 
This bill removes the award and investment limits under the Maryland Small Business 
Innovation Research and Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Incentive Program in the 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO). A business is still limited to 
one award or investment per fiscal year and three awards or investments in total. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect overall revenues or expenditures for the 
program, but it may reallocate funding between eligible recipients, as discussed below. 
TEDCO can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Current Law:  SBIR/STTR awards are those provided under an applicable SBIR/STTR 
award program by an agency of the federal government for a business to engage in research 
and development that has a strong potential for commercialization. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1450/ Page 2 
To qualify for participation in the SBIR/STTR Program, a small business must (1) meet 
the existing definition of a qualified business in State law and (2) have received an 
SBIR/STTR Phase I or Phase II award during the six months immediately preceding the 
submission of its program application. 
 
Subject to the above eligibility requirements, specified application requirements, and the 
availability of funding for the program, an eligible small business may apply for an award 
or investment of 25% of an SBIR/STTR award, limited to $25,000 for Phase I funding or 
$75,000 for Phase II funding. Awards or investments may exceed the maximum amount if 
the TEDCO board determines that the award is necessary to better serve the community 
and purposes of the program. TEDCO may make up to 20 Phase I awards or investments 
and 10 Phase II awards or investments per fiscal year. Businesses are limited to one award 
or investment per fiscal year and up to three awards or investments in total. 
 
The Maryland SBIR/STTR Incentive Matching Fund in TEDCO may be used only to 
provide awards or investments to eligible small businesses and to pay the costs necessary 
to administer the program, including marketing, outreach, and technical assistance. 
 
For a general description of the SBIR/STTR Incentive Program and other TEDCO 
programs, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology Development Corporation. 
 
The Bill:  The per-award or investment limits and the maximum number of Phase I and II 
awards and investments that may be provided under the program are removed. A business 
is still limited to one award or investment per fiscal year and three awards or investments 
in total. Other program requirements are unchanged. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not directly affect overall revenues or expenditures for 
the program, and, if overall program funding does not change, the bill may reallocate 
funding between eligible recipients. Under this assumption, TEDCO can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $1.33 million for awards and investments and $0.5 million for 
technical assistance, the same funding as fiscal 2025. 
 
However, general fund expenditures for TEDCO may increase if the bill leads to an 
increased expectation for funding, which is no longer functionally limited by the general 
restrictions on awards and investments each fiscal year under current law. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures for the Maryland SBIR/STTR Incentive Matching Fund would 
increase correspondingly as any additional funding is received and used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill removes award limits under the program, which may lead 
to some small businesses receiving different funding amounts compared to what they 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1450/ Page 3 
otherwise would, including no funding. The effect on any particular small business could 
be meaningful. 
 
Additional Comments:  The U.S. Small Business Administration administers the 
SBIR Program and the STTR Program. Phase I awards are made to evaluate the feasibility 
and merit of a scientific or technical idea. Phase II awards are granted to expand on the 
results of a Phase I concept. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 302 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; U.S. Small 
Business Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1450/ Page 4 
Appendix – Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021. 
Related mandated appropriations are also noted.  
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the annual budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that  
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund (in TEDCO regulations); 
(2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic disadvantage; 
and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time of investment 
by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of State pension systems. Subject to specified 
criteria related to unappropriated general fund surplus, the Governor was required 
to include $10.0 million in the fund in the fiscal 2024 budget bill. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1450/ Page 5 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to 
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – support economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million to the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – create a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serve as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinate cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor (1) must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $99,000 for the fund to be used for talent pipeline 
management and (2) may include an additional appropriation in the annual budget 
bill of $250,000 for the fund. 
 
 
Human-Relevant Research Program and Fund – promote State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting 
research on nonhuman animals. 
 
 
Pava LaPere Innovation Acceleration Grant Program – fosters growth of the 
entrepreneurial innovation ecosystem in the State by providing grants to 
technology-based start-up companies that are founded by students of postsecondary 
institutions located in the Baltimore-Columbia-Towson Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (MSA) and have their principal place of business in the MSA. Each fiscal year, 
the Governor must include an appropriation for the program in the annual budget 
bill, although no amount is specified. 
 
 
Baltimore Innovation Initiative Pilot Program – provides incentives for and 
grows technology start-up companies founded by students or faculty at eligible 
universities. For fiscal 2025 and 2026, the Governor must include in the annual 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1450/ Page 6 
budget bill an appropriation of $1.5 million for the program. The program 
terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6