START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1474 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1474 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists - Temporary Telehealth 
Licenses - Establishment 
 
 
This bill creates a temporary telehealth license to be issued by the State Board of 
Professional Counselors and Therapists to qualified applicants authorized to provide 
clinical professional counseling or counseling services in another State. The license 
authorizes the holder to provide clinical professional counseling services through telehealth 
in Maryland only to an out-of-state resident enrolled at and residing at or near an institution 
of higher education in the State. The student and the counselor must have a previously 
established therapeutic relationship that has existed for at least six months. The license has 
a term of six months and may not be renewed. If the holder of a temporary telehealth license 
commits a violation of Title 17 of the Health Occupations Article, the board may not issue 
the individual a regular Maryland license for at least two years from the date the violation 
occurred. The board must adopt specified regulations related to the license. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on the board can be absorbed within existing 
budgeted resources. Any impact on board revenues from application fees for the temporary 
license is assumed to be minimal. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1474/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To board may issue a temporary telehealth license to an individual who 
(1) is not authorized to practice clinical professional counseling in Maryland; (2) is 
authorized to provide clinical professional counseling or counseling services in another 
state; (3) is in good standing with the regulatory authority in the other state; (4) meets any 
other qualifications set by the board in regulations; and (5) submits a temporary telehealth 
application. 
 
The board must adopt regulations to establish qualifications, application fees, conditions, 
and/or limitations applicable to a temporary telehealth licensee, and any other regulations 
necessary for implementation, administration, and enforcement of the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the State Board of 
Professional Counselors and Therapists to practice professional counseling in Maryland. 
An applicant for a professional counseling license must have (1) a master’s or doctoral 
degree from an accredited educational program approved by the board; (2) completed 
instruction in specified study areas; (3) completed a specified amount of supervised clinical 
experience; (4) passed the National Counselors Examination of the National Board for 
Certified Counselors and the Maryland Law Assessment; and (5) submit to a criminal 
history records check. The board may not issue a license if the criminal history record 
information has not been received. 
 
Interstate Licensed Professional Counselors Compact 
 
Chapters 134 and 135 of 2021 entered Maryland into the Interstate Licensed Professional 
Counselors Compact. The purpose of the compact is to increase public access to 
professional counseling services and provide opportunities for interstate practice by 
licensed professional counselors who meet uniform licensure requirements. A member 
state must grant the privilege to practice to a licensee holding a valid unencumbered license 
in another member state in accordance with the terms of the compact and rules. A member 
state must recognize the right of a licensed professional counselor with a privilege to 
practice professional counseling in any member state through telehealth. 
 
As of April 2025, 38 states (including Maryland) have passed the compact language. 
According to the Counseling Compact Commission, the commission hopes to begin taking 
applications for compact privileges in 2025. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1474/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 23, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3