START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1443 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1443 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Local Government - Hiring and Promotion Preferences for Veterans and Spouses 
of Service Members and Veterans (Families Serve Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes counties and municipalities to grant hiring and promotion preferences 
to (1) an eligible veteran; (2) the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service-connected 
disability; (3) the spouse of an eligible service member; or (4) the surviving spouse of a 
deceased eligible veteran. Any such preference, if awarded, does not violate any State or 
local equal employment opportunity law. The bill further authorizes counties or 
municipalities that use selection tests to hire or promote employees to award  
10 credit points on the test, or their equivalent, to the same individuals. A county or 
municipality that elects to offer hiring or promotion preferences or credits under the bill 
may adopt a local law granting the preferences or credits before implementing the 
preferences or credits. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local governments. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is authorizing in nature for county and municipal 
governments. Awarding discretionary preferences or credits has no direct effect on local 
governmental finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1443/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
An “eligible spouse” means an individual who is married to a full-time active duty member 
of any branch of the uniformed services of the United States. 
 
An “eligible veteran” means a veteran of any branch of the uniformed services of the 
United States who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate of satisfactory 
completion of service, including the National Guard and the military reserves. 
 
Selection Test Credit 
 
For a county or municipality that uses a selection test for the hiring or appointment of 
employees, the county or municipality may adopt a local law providing 10 credit points, or 
its equivalent, on a selection test for: 
 
 
an eligible spouse; 
 
an eligible veteran; 
 
the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service connected disability; or 
 
the surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran. 
 
Further, a local law adopted for the purpose of awarding credit points to those individuals 
specified may also add two additional credit points, or its equivalent, on a selection test for 
a former prisoner of war. Credits may not be granted to (1) a current employee of the county 
or municipality or (2) an eligible veteran who is convicted of a crime after being discharged 
from or completing military service. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definition 
 
An “eligible service member” means a full-time active duty member of any branch of the 
uniformed services of the United States. 
 
Hiring and Promotion Preferences 
 
An employer may grant a hiring and promotion preference to an eligible veteran, an eligible 
spouse, the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service-connected disability, or the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1443/ Page 3 
surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran. Granting this preference does not violate 
any State or local equal employment opportunity law. The State and local governments are 
not considered employers. 
 
State Employees within the State Personnel Management System 
 
For positions in the State Personnel Management System for which selection tests are used, 
the following credits may be applied to the results of selection tests for applicants who are 
otherwise qualified and have at least the minimum passing score on a selection test for: 
 
 
current State employees (one-quarter point for each year of State service, up to 
5 points);  
 
veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, an eligible spouse, spouses of veterans with 
service-connected disabilities, and surviving spouses of a deceased eligible veteran 
(10 points, plus 2 points for a former prisoner of war);  
 
residents of high unemployment counties for specified positions in correctional 
facilities (5 points);  
 
State residents (5 points); and 
 
individuals with a disability (5 points). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 872 (Senator Jennings) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):   Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Maryland Department of Labor; Baltimore, Cecil, 
Frederick, and Montgomery County; Maryland Municipal League; City of Frederick; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3