START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1475 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1475 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland State Department of Education - Publicly Funded Prekindergarten - 
Analysis and Report (Mixed Delivery Model Viability Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to convene a 
workgroup to conduct an analysis of the mixed delivery, publicly funded full-day 
prekindergarten system. The workgroup must solicit feedback from public prekindergarten 
providers, private prekindergarten providers, and child care providers who have elected not 
to participate in the full-day publicly funded prekindergarten program. By June 1, 2026, 
the workgroup must submit to the State Board of Education and the Accountability and 
Implementation Board (AIB) a specified interim report; by December 31, 2027, the 
workgroup must submit to AIB and the General Assembly a specified final report. The bill 
specifies workgroup membership. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can staff the workgroup with existing resources; however, resources 
may need to be temporarily diverted from existing projects. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies numerous items that the workgroup, in conducting the 
analysis, must review, including various policies; funding, invoicing, and reimbursement 
mechanisms; certain timelines and guidelines; quality rating and administrative processes; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1475/ Page 2 
languages used in various materials and interactions; opportunities to pool resources among 
private prekindergarten providers; provider challenges in building or adapting 
prekindergarten facilities; and how best to provide quality early childhood education for 
students with and without disabilities in the same classroom. The workgroup may 
(1) consult additional subject matter and policy experts that the workgroup determines are 
beneficial in conducting the analysis and (2) establish subcommittees to carry out the 
analysis.  
 
The interim report must cover the results of the workgroup’s analysis, including 
recommendations for changes to regulations, policies, and procedures to increase the 
efficacy of the publicly funded prekindergarten program and to make the program more 
equitable for providers and families. The final report must cover the results of the analysis, 
any changes made by MSDE in response to the recommendations in the interim report, and 
any additional recommendations from the workgroup for changes to regulation, policies, 
procedures, or statute regarding the mixed delivery, publicly funded prekindergarten 
system. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Full-day Prekindergarten 
 
The full-day prekindergarten funding formula provides State and local funding for 
voluntary full-day prekindergarten for (1) children who are three or four years old from 
low-income families and homeless youths and whose family income is less than or equal 
to 300% of the federal poverty level (FPL) (Tier I children) and (2) four-year-olds from 
families whose income is – for fiscal 2026 funding – between 300% and 360% of FPL, and 
beginning fiscal 2027 between 300% and 600% of FPL (Tier II students). 
 
There is no family share for Tier I students. For Tier II students, a sliding scale developed 
by MSDE determines the family share. For four-year-olds from families with income above 
600% (Tier III), the family share covers the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, 
a local board may provide up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family. Local 
governments are required to fund the local share of the full-day prekindergarten program. 
The funding formula for full-day prekindergarten is based in part on the per pupil amount. 
The per pupil amount is $14,473 for fiscal 2026, escalates to $19,950 in fiscal 2027 and 
2028, and increases annually by inflation beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Beginning in the 2024-2025 school year, prekindergarten slots provided by eligible private 
providers must account for at least 10% of the total prekindergarten slots provided by 
eligible prekindergarten providers in each county. The proportion of eligible private 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county increases by 10 percentage points every 
school year, until, in the 2028-2029 school year, and each subsequent school year, eligible 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1475/ Page 3 
private provider prekindergarten slots account for at least 50% of eligible prekindergarten 
provider prekindergarten slots in each county. 
 
Priority in expanding full-day prekindergarten slots is given to three- and four-year-olds 
who are Tier I children, children with disabilities regardless of family income, and children 
living in homes where English is not the primary spoken language. The proportion of 
enrolled Tier I children who are three- and four-year-olds must increase annually until all 
such children are enrolled in a full-day prekindergarten program. The fiscal 2026 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $172.6 million for the program. 
 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program 
 
The purpose of the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, administered by MSDE, is 
to broaden the availability of high-quality prekindergarten and school readiness services 
throughout the State for children and their families in coordination with the expansion of 
publicly funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (the 
Blueprint). The program is a competitive grant program to provide grants to qualified 
providers, including (1) a local board of education or (2) if partnering with a local board 
under a memorandum of understanding, a State accredited or nationally accredited child 
care program or a nonpublic school approved by MSDE to provide prekindergarten 
services. 
 
Grants may be used to add available slots to expand prekindergarten services, including 
(1) establishing or expanding full-day prekindergarten for eligible young children and 
(2) expanding existing half-day prekindergarten programs into full-day prekindergarten for 
eligible young children. Grants may not be used (1) to supplant existing funding for 
prekindergarten services; (2) for capital improvements; or (3) to fund the same full-day 
prekindergarten slot that is funded under the full-day prekindergarten program established 
by Blueprint legislation.  
 
Through fiscal 2029, the Governor must annually appropriate to the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Fund (established to provide funds to the program) an amount that is at least 
equal to the total amount of all funds received by the program in the prior fiscal year. 
Beginning in fiscal 2030, funds appropriated to the Prekindergarten Expansion Fund must 
be consolidated into the publicly funded full-day prekindergarten program. The fiscal 2026 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $26.6 million for the program, level 
with the prior year.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1475/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 31, 2025 
Enrolled - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2025 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4