START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1442 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1442 
(Delegate Edelson) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Juveniles - Truancy Reduction Pilot Programs - Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland’s annual report on 
Truancy Reduction Pilot Programs (TRPPs) to include (1) the number of TRPPs 
established in the State; (2) the number of participants in each TRPP; (3) information on 
the outcomes of the participants in each TRPP; and (4) recommendations to improve the 
function of current TRPPs. The bill terminates December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under § 7-301 of the Education Article, subject to limited exceptions, each 
child who resides in the State and is age 5 or older and younger than age 18 must attend a 
public school regularly during the entire school year. A child who is required by law to 
attend school and is habitually truant can be designated a child in need of supervision, 
which makes the child subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court under  
Title 3, Subtitle 8A of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. However, current law 
(Title 3, Subtitle 8C of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article) also sets forth specific 
procedures for addressing truancy in jurisdictions in which a TRPP has been established. 
In a county in which a TRPP has been established, an authorized school official may file 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1442/ Page 2 
with the juvenile court a petition alleging that a child who is required to attend school failed 
to do so without lawful excuse, as specified. 
 
Circuit Administrative Judges of the First, Second, Third, Sixth, and Seventh circuits may 
establish TRPPs in specified counties within their judicial circuits. Dorchester, Frederick, 
Harford, Kent, Prince George’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester counties are 
currently authorized to have TRPPs. 
 
Dispositions under a Truancy Program 
 
When making a disposition on a petition that has been filed as part of a TRPP, the court 
may order the child to (1) attend school; (2) perform community service; (3) attend 
counseling, including family counseling; (4) attend substance abuse evaluation and 
treatment; (5) attend mental health evaluation and treatment; or (6) keep a curfew with the 
hours set by the court. The court must retain jurisdiction until every condition of the court’s 
order is satisfied. 
 
Annual Reporting Requirements 
 
By November 1 of each year, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland must 
report to the General Assembly on each established TRPP. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Judiciary, as part of its case management information system, 
regularly collects data on participants of TRPPs, which includes (1) client identification 
and demographics; (2) program enrollment and tracking; (3) engagement and performance 
metrics; (4) services provided; and (5) behavioral management and responses. The 
Judiciary advises that it can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources assuming 
that (1) it is not required to report on outcomes external to the Judiciary and (2) existing 
data collection is sufficient for compliance with the bill’s reporting requirements.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1442/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3