START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1524 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1524 
(Wicomico County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Wicomico County Board of Education - Election of Members, Student Member, 
and Compensation 
 
 
This bill adds at least one nonvoting student member to the Wicomico County Board of 
Education and authorizes the board to grant a scholarship to a student member. 
Additionally, the bill requires that, beginning with the general election in 2026, the 
seven elected members of the board must each be elected from one of the 
seven councilmanic districts in the county. As a result, there are no at-large members of 
the board under the bill. The bill also authorizes the Wicomico County Council to set a 
salary greater than the current annual compensation amounts required for elected members 
($3,700) and board chair ($4,000). Elected and student members are entitled to 
reimbursement for travel and other expenses, as provided in the county board’s budget, 
upon submission of vouchers in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the 
board. A student member is not entitled to any compensation or payment beyond 
reimbursement for expenses incurred in their capacity as a board member and the 
scholarship as authorized by the county board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the Wicomico County Council chooses to set a salary greater 
than the current annual compensation amounts for elected board members and to the extent 
the board chooses to award scholarships to student members, Wicomico County Board of 
Education expenditures increase. Any reimbursement for expense vouchers of elected and 
student members is assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing resources of the 
board. The Wicomico County Board of Elections can make any needed adjustments to 
board member elections with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1524/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Each student member of the board must be an eleventh or twelfth grade 
student in good standing and regularly enrolled in the Wicomico County Public School 
System (WCPS). Student members must serve for a term of one year beginning July 1 after 
the selection of the member. Each student member is charged with advising the 
county board on the thoughts and feelings of students in WCPS. Unless invited to attend 
by an affirmative vote of a majority of the elected members of the board, the 
student members may not attend a closed session of the county board. The bill makes 
additional technical changes to distinguish between student and nonstudent (elected) 
members of the board. 
 
Current Law:  The Wicomico County Board of Education consists of seven nonpartisan 
members with one member elected from each of the five councilmanic districts in the 
county elected by the voters of each district and two at-large members elected by the voters 
of the entire county. Members are elected in gubernatorial election years and serve a term 
of four years until a successor is elected and qualifies. 
 
Wicomico County Public Schools advises that there are currently four student 
representatives (typically each school’s student government association president) who 
give presentations at board meetings on current events of interest at each of the  
four high schools in the county. However, such students are not members of the board who 
each sit for the entirety of board meetings and are able to ask questions or provide input on 
each matter before the board. Student representatives currently serve without 
compensation. 
 
The Wicomico County Board of Education is one of 20 elected school boards in the State. 
There are also 4 combined appointed and elected school boards. The Appendix – Local 
Boards of Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local boards of education. 
 
Each member of the Wicomico County Board of Education must receive $3,700 annually 
as compensation, except for the chair of the board who must receive $4,000 annually. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill requires that members be elected from each of 
seven councilmanic districts, there are presently only five councilmanic districts in 
Wicomico County. However, Wicomico County has proposed a new seven-member 
councilmanic district map pursuant to a consent decree agreed to by Wicomico County and 
the NAACP. Accordingly, this analysis assumes that a revised seven-district councilmanic 
map will be finalized and implemented prior to the 2026 general election. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1524/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1032 (Wicomico County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland State Board 
of Elections; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 31, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 31, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1524/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. Twenty-two boards have student members; 
however, only 8 boards allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority 
to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with 
voting student members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to 
operating and capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2025 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Anne Arundel 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore City 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed by Governor from county at 
large  
7 elected from councilmanic districts  
1 student (one-year term)  
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed by Governor from county at 
large 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1524/ Page 5 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Charles 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Harford 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed by County Executive from 
county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (one-year term)  
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term) 
Kent 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Prince George’s 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Somerset 
5 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Washington2 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Wicomico 
7 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1524/ Page 6 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term) 
 
 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed and elected board:  (1) in Baltimore County, members are 
appointed by the Governor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore County School Board 
Nominating Commission; (2) in Caroline County, members are appointed by the Governor with the advice 
and consent of the Senate; (3) in Baltimore City, members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names 
provided by the Baltimore City Public School Board Community Panel; and (4) in Harford County, 
members are appointed by the county executive with the advice and consent of the county council.  
 
2 Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6