START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 333

Chapter 333

(House Bill 1543)

AN ACT concerning

Gaming – Sports Wagering Facilities – Request for Relocation

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain sports wagering facility licensees to submit a
written request to the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission to relocate the
sports wagering facility, subject to certain limitations; and generally relating to
sports wagering facilities.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 9–1E–07(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

9–1E–07.

(J) (1) A SPORTS WAGERING FACILITY LICENSEE ISSUED A LICENSE
UNDER § 9–1E–06(A)(2)(II) OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY SUBMIT A WRITTEN REQUEST TO
THE COMMISSION TO RELOCATE A CLASS B SPORTS WAGERING FACILITY.

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY GRANT A REQUEST SUBMITTED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ONLY IF:

(I) THE SPORTS WAGERING FACILITY LICENSEE WAS
ORIGINALLY ISSUED A CLASS B SPORTS WAGERING FACILITY LICENSE ON OR
BEFORE SEPTEMBER 30, 2023; AND

(II) THE NEW LOCATION FOR THE SPORTS WAGERING FACILITY:

1. IS WITHIN THE SAME COUNTY; AND

2. COMPLIES WITH THE LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
UNDER § 9–1E–06 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 333 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. SUBJECT TO § 9–1E–15(Q) OF THIS SUBTITLE, IS
APPROVED BY THE SPORTS WAGERING APPLICATION REVIEW COMMISSION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2