START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1547 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1547 
(Delegate A. Jones) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Barbers and Cosmetologists - License Qualifications - Domestic Violence 
Awareness Training 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Barbers and the State Board of Cosmetologists to 
require, as a qualification for licensure, an applicant to complete one hour of training in 
domestic violence awareness. The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) must 
approve training programs that an individual may complete to satisfy the training 
requirement, which must be offered in person or virtually. The training must include 
guidance on (1) recognizing the signs of domestic violence; (2) strategies to navigate 
conversations with clients who may be victims of domestic violence; (3) how to listen to 
and communicate with victims of domestic violence; and (4) connecting clients with 
resources and support groups for victims of domestic violence. The boards must require an 
individual who holds a license or limited license prior to the bill’s effective date to 
complete the training as a requirement for the next renewal of the license or limited license. 
The bill takes effect January 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by approximately $10,000 in FY 2026 
for reprogramming. Revenues are not materially affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1547/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Board of Barbers 
 
The State Board of Barbers issues barber and barber-stylist (limited) licenses. The barber 
license encompasses the full scope of barbering, while the barber-stylist license applies 
solely to the hair portion of barbering. The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for 
licensure must pass a written and a practical exam and meet specified experience 
(apprenticeship) or education (1,200 hours of instruction at an approved barber school for 
a barber license) requirements. A registered apprentice must complete at least 2,250 hours 
of supervised work as an apprentice within two years prior to applying for a license.  
 
State Board of Cosmetologists 
 
The State Board of Cosmetologists issues two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and 
senior cosmetologist) and four limited licenses (hairstylist, blow-drying, nail technician, 
and esthetician). A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to 
provide hair, nail, and esthetic services. A limited license authorizes the licensee to provide 
just that service. The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure must pass a 
written and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school.  
 
A licensed barber seeking a cosmetology license may be credited with one-half of the 
training requirement for a cosmetology license; the same is true for a licensed cosmetologist 
seeking a barber license.  
 
State Barbers and Cosmetologists Boards’ Fund 
 
Chapter 256 of 2017, established the State Barbers and Cosmetologists Boards’ Fund in 
MD Labor and redirected licensing revenue associated with the boards from the 
general fund to the new special fund. At the end of each fiscal year, any unspent and 
unencumbered portion of the special fund in excess of $100,000 (i.e., the operating surplus) 
reverts to the general fund. For example, if the fund has $130,000 at the end of a fiscal year, 
then $30,000 reverts to the general fund.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1547/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3