START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1516 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1516 
(Delegate Queen) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Institutions - Consumer Credit - Application of Licensing 
Requirements (Maryland Secondary Market Stability Act of 2025) 
 
 
This emergency bill generally exempts from State licensure requirements (1) a trust 
established by any corporate instrumentality of the federal government to acquire mortgage 
loans and (2) a passive trust that acquires a mortgage loan but does not make mortgage 
loans, is not a mortgage broker or servicer, and does not engage in servicing mortgage 
loans. The bill also establishes the Maryland Licensing Workgroup, staffed by the Office 
of Financial Regulation (OFR) within the Maryland Department of Labor to study and 
make recommendations on licensing requirements for persons that provide financial 
services in the State. By December 31, 2025, the workgroup must report its 
recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly, as specified. The workgroup 
terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for OFR may be affected due to the 
modification of licensing requirements, as discussed below. OFR can staff the workgroup 
with existing resources. Expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to 
be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “trust” includes any trust established under the laws of the State or any 
other state. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1516/ Page 2 
A “passive trust” means a trust that (1) acquires or is assigned mortgage loans in whole or 
in part; (2) does not make mortgage loans; (3) is not a mortgage broker or mortgage 
servicer; and (4) is not engaged in the servicing of mortgage loans, which does not include 
the act of transmitting or directing payments received by a mortgage servicer. 
 
Maryland Licensing Workgroup 
 
The workgroup must study: 
 
 
all licensing statutes and regulations adopted under those statutes concerning the 
provision of financial services in the State; 
 
the need for (and the efficacy of) the existing licensing and registration system for 
actively licensed persons who provide financial services in the State; and 
 
whether there is any benefit to expanding existing licensing or registration systems 
to persons not already subject to those requirements. 
 
The workgroup must also make recommendations related to the above study requirements. 
 
In conducting the study, the workgroup must, at a minimum, consider the potential impacts, 
costs, and benefits of its recommendations on: 
 
 
residents of the State; 
 
persons facilitating, brokering, making, servicing, or acquiring loans in the State; 
 
the availability of credit in the State; 
 
the cost of credit in the State compared to other states; and 
 
the capital markets, including the volume of secondary market transactions. 
 
Current Law:  An “installment loan” means a loan or extension of credit made for 
consideration under specified provisions of the Commercial Law Article (i.e., related to 
interest and usury, revolving credit, and closed end credit). 
 
Under the Maryland Mortgage Lender Law, a “mortgage lender” means any person who 
(1) is a mortgage broker; (2) makes a mortgage loan to any person; or (3) is a mortgage 
servicer. A “mortgage lender” does not include (1) a financial institution that accepts 
deposits and is regulated under Title 3, 4, 5, or 6 of the Financial Institutions Article; (2) the 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; (3) the Federal National Mortgage 
Association; (3) the Government National Mortgage Association; (4) any person engaged 
exclusively in the acquisition of all or any portion of a mortgage loan under any federal, 
State, or local governmental program of mortgage loan purchases; or (5) an affiliated 
insurance producer-mortgage loan originator, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1516/ Page 3 
A “mortgage lending business” means the activities that define a mortgage lender and 
require the person engaging in those activities to be licensed, as specified. A “mortgage 
lending business” includes the making or procuring of mortgage loans secured by a 
dwelling or residential real estate located outside Maryland. 
 
A “mortgage loan” means any loan primarily for personal, family, or household use that is 
secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other equivalent consensual security interest on a 
dwelling or residential real estate on which a dwelling is constructed or intended to be 
constructed. A “mortgage” loan includes a loan in which funds are advanced through a 
shared appreciation agreement. 
 
Additionally, a “mortgage” includes a deed of trust that secures a debt or the performance 
of an obligation. 
 
A “credit grantor” is any individual, corporation, business trust, or other specified entity 
making a loan or other extension of credit, as specified. Among other things, a credit 
grantor includes any person who acquires or obtains the assignment of a revolving credit 
plan, as specified. A credit grantor making a loan or extension of credit is subject to the 
licensing, investigatory, enforcement, and penalty provisions under Title 11, Subtitle 3 of 
the Financial Institutions Article. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  OFR advises that a recent Appellate Court of Maryland decision, 
Estate of H. Gregory Brown v. Carrie M. Ward, et al. (2024), which held that passive trusts 
that hold mortgage loans are subject to licensure under State law, obligates OFR to annually 
license thousands of passive trusts and to carry out related examinations. 
 
OFR further advises that the majority of all mortgage loans are sold on the secondary 
market (i.e., very few are held by the original lender). Purchasers of the loans typically 
issue residential mortgage-backed securities, with the loans assigned to passive trusts. 
 
As a result of the Appellate Court decision, OFR notes that several lenders have expressed 
an unwillingness to include Maryland loans in securitized pools due to uncertainties about 
compliance (and the related cost of obtaining the appropriate license). OFR advises that 
lenders are unlikely to make loans without certainty that the loans can be sold (and held) 
in loan pools; as a result, mortgage lending in the State may be inhibited, ultimately 
affecting borrowers’ access to affordable mortgage options. 
 
OFR advises that it is unable to determine the number of lenders and related trusts that may 
seek licensing (i.e., as opposed to simply ceasing making or buying mortgages in the State) 
in the absence of the bill. Therefore, the exact impact of the bill on special fund revenues 
and expenditures cannot be determined. Nevertheless, this analysis generally assumes that, 
under current law, special fund revenues and expenditures for OFR likely increase, at least 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1516/ Page 4 
minimally, to license and regulate any new licensees, as required by the court decision. By 
exempting the specified entities (generally passive trusts) from licensing and regulation, 
the bill thus results in foregone special fund revenues and expenditures. As the exact 
number of entities that may seek licensing is unknown, a reliable estimate of the net effect 
is not feasible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1026 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4