START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1510 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1510 
(Delegate Pippy, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Medical Records - Notice of Destruction - Method 
 
 
This bill requires that a notice about the destruction of a medical record or laboratory or 
x-ray report be made by first-class mail or email, rather than by both methods. However, 
if no response or delivery receipt is obtained from an email notice, a health care provider 
must provide notice by first-class mail at least 10 days before the date on which the record 
is to be destroyed. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for when the patient is a minor, a health care provider may not 
destroy a medical record or laboratory or x-ray report about a patient for at least seven years 
after the record or report is made. For minor patients, the record or report may not be 
destroyed until seven years after the patient turns 18, unless (1) the minor’s parent or 
guardian is notified or (2) if the documented medical care was provided under § 20-102(c) 
or § 20-103(c) of the Health-General Article, the minor patient is notified. 
 
A notice of destruction of records must be made by first-class mail to the patient’s last 
known address and email to the last known email address of (1) the patient, or (2) if the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1510/ Page 2 
patient is a minor and the medical care was not provided under § 20-102(c) or § 20-103(c) 
of the Health-General Article, the patient’s parent or guardian. The notice must include 
(1) the date on which the medical record will be destroyed and (2) include a statement that 
the record or its synopsis must be retrieved at a designated location, if desired. A health care 
provider must make the record or report available for retrieval by the patient or the 
parent/guardian of a minor patient within 60 days of the destruction date, and at the location 
designated in the notice. 
 
An individual who knowingly violates any of these provisions is liable for damages. A 
health care facility that knowingly violates these provisions is subject to an administrative 
fine of up to $10,000 for all violations cited in a single day. A health care provider or their 
agent, employee, officer, or director is subject to (1) a fine of up to $1,000 for their first set 
of violations in a single day, (2) a fine of up to $2,500 for the second set of violations cited 
in a single day, and (3) a fine of up to $5,000 for any subsequent set of violations cited in 
a single day. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.01.16.05), a provider must ensure 
confidentiality of medical records throughout the disposal process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2