START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 73 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 73 
(Senator Simonaire, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Chesapeake Conservation Corps Program - Renaming 
 
 
This bill renames the Chesapeake Conservation Corps Program to be the Thomas V. Mike 
Miller, Jr. Chesapeake Conservation and Climate Corps Program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Chesapeake Conservation Corps Program is administered by the 
Chesapeake Bay Trust (CBT) in consultation with the Chesapeake Conservation Corps 
Board. Statute establishes various purposes of the program, including: 
 
 
promoting, preserving, protecting, and sustaining the environment; 
 
providing young adults with opportunities to become better citizens, students, and 
workers through meaningful service to their communities and the State; 
 
mobilizing, educating, and training youth and young adults to work with 
communities and schools to promote energy conservation and mitigate and prevent 
threats to the environment; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 73/ Page 2 
 
mobilizing, educating, and training youth and young adults to deploy clean energy 
technology and mitigate and prevent the environmental and health impacts of 
climate impacts in communities disproportionately affected by climate impacts; 
 
ensuring underserved and geographical climate disparities populations are given 
assistance needed to prepare for and adapt to climate impacts; 
 
providing a green career ladder and opportunities for all youth and young adults, 
especially those most at risk, to be exposed to and trained in the energy efficiency, 
environmental protection, governmental and regulatory administration, and 
renewable energy generation sectors; 
 
educating and training communities and individuals for the long-term action needed 
to continue to promote, preserve, protect, and sustain the environment after a Corps 
project has been completed; 
 
acting as a coordinator and facilitator of efforts to foster public-private partnerships 
in developing “green-collar” job opportunities and in enhancing and expanding the 
workforce available for environmental protection and clean energy industries; and 
 
channeling available public and private resources to the protection, conservation, 
and preservation of the environment of the State. 
 
CBT, in consultation with the Corps Board, must make grants to qualified organizations 
for the creation or expansion of full- or part-time programs that engage and develop 
volunteers and stipend volunteers in environmental and energy conservation projects. 
 
For stipend volunteer programs, CBT and qualified organizations must principally recruit 
individuals for a minimum 6-month commitment who, at the time of enrollment, are 
ages 18-25 (or ages 18-26 for programs developed to implement climate mitigation and 
clean energy projects). For summer volunteer programs, including summer stipend 
programs, CBT and qualified organizations must principally recruit individuals who, at the 
time of enrollment, are ages 15-18. 
 
The Corps Program’s projects and activities must meet an identifiable public need: 
 
 
with specific emphasis on projects that result in long-term preservation, protection, 
and conservation of the environment, in areas including environmental restoration, 
agriculture/forestry, infrastructure, and educational improvements; or 
 
within a community disproportionately affected by climate impacts, with specific 
emphasis on climate mitigation and clean energy projects that result in long-term 
reductions to greenhouse gas emissions and improvements to public health and the 
environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 73/ Page 3 
Statute provides various examples of specific types of projects that can be undertaken in 
the areas of (1) environmental restoration; (2) agriculture/forestry; (3) infrastructure; 
(4) education; (5) energy conservation; (6) climate mitigation; and (7) clean energy. 
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022) added climate mitigation and 
clean energy to the Corps Program’s purpose and focus (the program currently operates as 
the “Chesapeake Conservation and Climate Corps”) and established an annual mandated 
appropriation, beginning in fiscal 2024, of $1.5 million to CBT for the Corps Program to 
implement climate mitigation and clean energy projects. 
 
Additional Comments:  Former Maryland Senate President (1987-2020) Thomas V. Mike 
Miller, Jr. sponsored Senate Bill 311 of 2010, enacted as Chapter 275 of 2010, which, along 
with Chapter 276 of 2010, created the Chesapeake Conservation Corps Program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Service and 
Civic Innovation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3