START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 32 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 32 
(Senator Gile) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Real Property - Holding Over - Expedited Hearing and Service of Summons for 
Active Duty Service Members 
 
 
This bill establishes specific requirements in tenant holding over actions if the landlord or 
the landlord’s spouse (1) is on active duty with the U.S. Military; (2) has relocated to the 
State as a direct result of being on active duty; (3) intends to occupy the property that is the 
subject of the complaint following the entry of a judgment; and (4) submits supporting 
documentation. In applicable actions under the bill, the District Court must order in the 
summons for the tenant, assignee, or subtenant to appear before the court no later than 
45 days after the date the landlord makes a complaint to repossess the property. If the 
constable or sheriff of the county does not serve the summons within 10 days after issuance, 
the summons may be served by a private process server. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a landlord must provide notice of the intent to terminate a 
tenancy and repossess the property within timeframes established in statute; the timeframes 
and specific requirements of the notice depend, in part, on the term of the lease, the type of 
tenancy, and whether the lease is a written one. For example, if the parties have a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 32/ Page 2 
written lease for a stated term in excess of one week or a tenancy from month to month, 
written notice is generally required 60 days before the expiration of the tenancy. In the case 
of tenancies from year to year (including tobacco farm tenancies but excluding all other 
farm tenancies), written notice is generally required 90 days before the expiration of the 
current year of the tenancy. After required notice is provided, if the tenant or person in 
actual possession refuses to comply, the landlord may file a complaint in the District Court 
under procedures specified in statute. 
 
The District Court must issue a summons, directed to any constable or sheriff entitled to 
serve process and ordering the constable/sheriff to notify the tenant (or assignee/subtenant) 
to appear in court on a designated date. The constable or sheriff must serve the summons, 
as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1316 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 229 (Delegate Chisholm, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2