START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 89 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 89 
(Senators Simonaire and Jackson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of the Environment - Notation of Veteran Status 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to establish a 
process in collaboration with one or more boards under its direction and control that 
requires a board to include a notation of an individual’s veteran status on a professional 
license or certificate. The bill establishes additional specifications for any process 
implemented by MDE. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can implement the process authorized by the bill using existing 
budgeted resources. The bill is not anticipated to otherwise materially impact 
State operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If MDE establishes the process authorized by the bill, an application for 
a professional license or certificate must allow an individual to submit official certification 
of veteran status, as specified. The application must also allow an applicant to indicate 
consent to (1) having a notation of veteran status on the applicant’s credential and (2) being 
contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies about eligibility for State or federal 
veterans benefits. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 89/ Page 2 
If an applicant submits the appropriate documentation and required consent, the board must 
include the notation of veteran status on the applicant’s license or certificate. On request 
from an Executive Branch agency, and in accordance with the Maryland Public 
Information Act, a board must electronically transmit appropriate information about the 
applicant. 
 
MDE and relevant boards may adopt regulations related to the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Several boards under MDE are responsible for the licensing and 
certification of professionals in careers related to the environment. These include the 
Marine Contractors Licensing Board, the Board of Waterworks and Waste Systems 
Operators, and the State Board of Well Drillers. 
 
Generally, to obtain a license or certificate, an applicant must submit to the board an 
application on the form that the board provides and pay the required application fee (in 
addition to meeting any specified requirements regarding experience, education, and/or 
examination, as applicable). 
 
The Department of Veterans and Military Families exists as a principal department of State 
government and is responsible for, among other duties, delivering services and programs 
to assist the State’s veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and 
local benefits provided by law in recognition for their service. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  To implement the process authorized by the bill, MDE 
must update forms and databases to account for the intake of new information related to 
veteran status. These changes can be accommodated using existing budgeted resources. 
The licensing boards under MDE do not anticipate any material impact on operations or 
finances. 
 
Although the bill’s provisions may facilitate additional veterans applying and being 
deemed eligible for certain benefits, any associated impact is not anticipated to materially 
affect State or local finances or operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 89/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Military Department; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3