START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 9 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 9 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission - Academic Program Approval - 
Revisions 
 
This emergency bill requires private nonprofit institutions of higher education to submit 
semi-annual letters of intent to the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC), 
identifying new graduate-level programs they plan to propose within the next six months 
to two years, aligning with the process required of public four-year institutions. The bill 
also repeals provisions granting five specified institutions of higher education exclusive 
authority to propose “emerging workforce need programs” for 90 days, thereby putting all 
institutions on the same footing. Further, the bill clarifies that letters of intent are intended 
for collaboration and feedback rather than conferring any right of first refusal. It also 
repeals the requirement for MHEC to circulate these letters. Instead, MHEC must review 
them and identify proposed programs that are similar to others; MHEC may notify the 
affected institutions to encourage coordination. Finally, the bill clarifies the requirements 
for updates to the State Plan for Higher Education. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC can accept additional letters of intent, review them, and make any 
changes to the State Plan update process using existing resources. Higher education 
revenues and expenditures for public four-year institutions of higher education are not 
likely materially impacted by repealing the 90-day period for exclusive authority to 
propose specified programs as those provisions in current law have not yet been 
implemented. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 9/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Specifically, the requirements related to letters of intent may not be 
construed to give an institution the right of first refusal for any program included in a letter 
of intent submitted to MHEC under the bill.  
 
After review of the letters of intent submitted by each institution, MHEC must determine 
whether an intended program is similar to an existing program or another intended program 
included in another institution’s letter of intent. If MHEC determines that an intended 
program is similar to another program, MHEC may notify the affected institutions of its 
determination, provide feedback, and encourage discussion and collaboration between the 
institutions.  
 
The bill repeals the requirement for the update to the State Plan due January 1, 2025, to 
include emerging workforce needs and any specific academic programs institutions could 
develop to fulfill or support identified needs. The bill also repeals the requirement that 
MHEC submit the update to the Legislative Policy Committee for review and comment 
before adoption. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 963 of 2024 established a new process for academic program 
approval and institutional mission statements based on identifying State and regional 
workforce needs. 
 
Letter of Intent for Graduate Level Program Approval 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, MHEC must require each public senior institution to submit a 
letter of intent to MHEC that identifies each new graduate level program that an institution 
intends to propose for approval; a letter of intent must be submitted every six months with 
all new graduate programs the institution intends to propose within the upcoming 
six-month to two-year time period. MHEC must use this letter to (1) facilitate collaboration 
between institutions and (2) provide feedback to an institution prior to submission of the 
new program for approval, as specified. MHEC must circulate each letter of intent among 
institutions but may not post an institution’s letter of intent publicly. MHEC may not use a 
letter to establish any preference or priority for approval of a program proposal. MHEC 
must establish requirements for submitting a letter. Except under specified conditions, 
MHEC may approve a program proposal only if the institution has included the program 
in a letter of intent. 
 
Graduate Level Emerging Workforce Need Programs 
 
An “emerging workforce need program” means a graduate level program identified by 
MHEC (in the State Plan for Higher Education or each annual update to the workforce 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 9/ Page 3 
needs as an appendix to the plan) that (1) no institution of higher education in the State 
offers; (2) addresses a job or industry need that is innovative, unique, and rare; and 
(3) could leverage federal, State, or private resources on a long-term basis with immediate 
development by an institution of higher education. “Emerging workforce need program” 
does not mean a specific academic program identified by MHEC to fulfill or support an 
identified current State and regional workforce need. 
 
There are requirements for the approval of an emerging workforce need program, which 
apply after adoption to the updated State Plan for Higher Education (which was due 
January 1, 2025). 
 
Generally, MHEC may approve a program proposal (as it relates to a new program, a 
substantial modification to an existing program, or an online program) for an academic 
program for an emerging workforce need program for five public institutions:  
Bowie State University (BSU); Coppin State University (CSU); Morgan State University 
(MSU); the University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP); and the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES). Further, within 90 days after the quadrennial review of 
the State plan and each annual update to it, each of those institutions must submit a notice 
of intent to submit a proposal in the upcoming year for an emerging workforce need 
program. MHEC must share the notice of intent with all segments of higher education, 
facilitate collaboration between institutions, provide feedback to the institution before it 
submits the new program for approval, and identify State resources to assist the institution 
in developing the program. 
 
However, another institution may have a proposal approved under two specified 
circumstances. First, if none of the five specified institutions submits a notice of intent as 
required within the 90-day period, any institution of higher education in the State may 
immediately submit a proposal for an academic program for approval by MHEC. Second, if 
one of the five specified institutions chooses to collaborate with any other institution of 
higher education in the State to implement an emerging workforce need program within 
the one-year period after its identification in the quadrennial State plan or an annual update 
to it, MHEC may approve a proposal for an academic program for the collaborating 
institution. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Repealing the requirement that BSU, CSU, MSU, UMCP, and UMES 
have exclusive authority for 90 days to submit a proposal for an academic program for an 
emerging workforce need program at the graduate level may affect institutional revenues 
and expenditures. Any such impact on the specified institutions as well as other institutions 
cannot be reliably estimated. As discussed below, this section of law has not yet been 
implemented. Nevertheless, such an advantage could have ultimately increased revenues 
and enrollment for the selected institutions. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 9/ Page 4 
Clarifying that letters of intent do not grant institutions a right of first refusal has no 
material fiscal impact on institutions. 
 
As MHEC already reviews program proposals for duplication, repealing the requirement 
to distribute all letters of intent to each institution – and instead allowing MHEC to share 
them only with institutions that have similar existing or proposed programs – is not 
expected to have a material fiscal impact. As under current law, planning and coordination 
among institutions is still anticipated to occur. 
 
Additional Comments:  The co-chairs of the Program Approval Process Workgroup 
introduced House Bill 1244 and Senate Bill 1022 in the 2024 session to implement the 
workgroup’s recommendations. However, the enrolled version of House Bill 1244 deviated 
from the recommendations (whereas Senate Bill 1022 did not pass). Specifically, 
House Bill 1244 included a new section, § 11-206.5 of the Education Article, which grants 
exclusive authority to the State’s four historically Black colleges and universities and 
UMCP to propose and implement a new emerging workforce need program for 90 days. 
Additionally, the enrolled bill applied the new letter of intent process only to public 
institutions of higher education.  
 
After the adoption of the conference committee report by both chambers, a discrepancy 
was discovered regarding the version of amendments that each chamber believed it had 
agreed upon. To resolve this situation, the chairs of the conference committee agreed to a 
new amendment that removed § 11-206.5 of the Education Article and required nonpublic 
institutions of higher education to participate in the letter of intent process. Each member 
of the conference committee signed the revised report, reflecting the legislature’s intent to 
adopt this updated version of House Bill 1244 on Sine Die. 
 
The chairs of the conference committee also wrote a letter to the Secretary of Higher 
Education clarifying the legislature’s intent and requesting that MHEC implement 
House Bill 1244 (later enacted as Chapter 963) in accordance with the revised conference 
committee report. They also outlined plans to pass emergency legislation in the next 
session to align the law with this understanding. This bill conforms statute accordingly and 
makes related process clarifications.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 479 (Delegate Barnes) - Appropriations. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 9/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; 
Morgan 
State 
University; 
St. 
Mary’s 
College 
of 
Maryland;  
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5