START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 67 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 67 
(Senators Simonaire and Jackson) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Occupations Boards - Notation of Veteran Status and Eligibility for 
Benefits 
 
 
This bill authorizes each health occupations board to establish a process to include a 
notation of an individual’s veteran status on a license, certificate, registration, or public 
profile. The bill establishes additional specifications for any process implemented by a 
board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) special fund expenditures may 
increase, likely minimally, to the extent that health occupations boards opt to create the 
process authorized by the bill. The bill is not anticipated to otherwise materially impact 
State operations or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a health occupations board establishes the process authorized by the 
bill, an application for a professional license, certificate, registration, or public profile must 
allow an applicant to indicate consent to (1) having a notation of veteran status on the 
applicant’s credential or public profile and (2) being contacted by appropriate Executive 
Branch agencies about eligibility for State or federal veterans benefits. If an applicant 
submits the appropriate documentation and required consent, the board must include the 
notation of veteran status on the applicant’s license, certificate, registration, or public 
profile. On request from an Executive Branch agency, and in accordance with the Maryland 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 67/ Page 2 
Public Information Act, a board must electronically transmit appropriate information about 
the applicant. Each health occupations board may adopt regulations related to the bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Health Occupations Boards 
 
Within MDH, 20 health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating various 
health professions in the State, as shown in Exhibit 1. Generally, an individual must be 
licensed, certified, registered, or permitted by the appropriate board before practicing; 
licensure, certification, registration, and permit requirements vary by profession but 
typically require, among other things, specified education and experience, passage of a 
national and/or State examination, and a Criminal History Records Check (CHRC). 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Health Occupations Boards in the Maryland Department of Health 
 
Acupuncture 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists 
Chiropractic  
Dental 
Dietetic Practice 
Environmental Health Specialists 
Long-Term Care Administrators (formerly Nursing Home Administrators) 
Massage Therapy 
Morticians and Funeral Directors 
Nursing 
Occupational Therapy 
Optometry  
Pharmacy 
Physical Therapy 
Physicians 
Podiatry 
Professional Counselors and Therapists 
Psychologists 
Residential Child Care Program Professionals 
Social Work 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 67/ Page 3 
Chapters 154 and 155 of 2013 (also known as the Veterans Full Employment Act of 2013) 
require health occupations boards to expedite the licensure, certification, or registration of 
a service member, veteran, or military spouse. The boards must also assign an advisor to 
assist the individual with the application process and provide specified information to assist 
in the licensing, certification, or registration process. MDH must also credit specified 
military training and education completed by a service member toward licensure or 
certification requirements. 
 
If a service member, veteran, or military spouse meets the requirements for licensure, 
certification, or registration, each health occupations board must expedite the process and 
issue the credential within 15 days after receiving a completed application. If a board 
determines that they do not meet the education, training, or experience requirements for 
licensure, certification, or registration, a representative of the board must assist the 
individual in identifying programs that offer relevant education, training or ways of 
obtaining needed experience. 
 
Each health occupations board must publish information on its website related to the 
expedited licensing process and any related assistance and services provided by the board 
to service members, veterans, and military spouses. In addition, each health occupations 
board may allow a licensee or certificate holder who is a member the U.S. Armed Forces 
deployed outside the United States or its territories to (1) renew the license or certificate 
after the expiration of the renewal period without payment of a penalty or reinstatement 
fee if the late renewal is a direct result of the deployment and (2) complete any continuing 
education or continuing professional competency requirements or CHRC required for 
licensure within a reasonable time after renewing the license or certificate. 
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families 
 
The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) exists as a principal 
department of State government and is responsible for, among other duties, delivering 
services and programs to assist the State’s veterans, their families, and survivors in 
obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in recognition for their service. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes, rather than requires, health occupations 
boards to establish a specified process related to veteran status. To the extent that any board 
chooses to implement the process, special fund expenditures may increase by an 
indeterminate, but likely minimal amount. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Boards that opt to create the process authorized by the bill are expected to require upgrades 
to their licensing or software systems to account for the processing and publishing of new 
information related to veteran status; accordingly, such boards may incur programming 
costs. For example, the State Board of Nursing (MBON) estimates a one-time $1,500 cost 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 67/ Page 4 
to update its licensing system (an amount the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
advises is likely absorbable within existing budgeted resources) if the board implements 
the process. The Board of Pharmacy and Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) anticipate 
indeterminate increased expenditures to update their systems; however, neither board is 
able to provide an estimate of such costs. DLS advises that any programming costs are 
likely limited to the initial year of any implementation, which may vary by board. 
 
Some boards also advise of the need for additional staff should they implement the process 
authorized by the bill. For instance, BDE advises of the need to hire one administrative 
specialist, incurring an estimated cost of $53,488 in fiscal 2026 and increasing to 
approximately $69,300 in fiscal 2030. According to BDE, the administrative specialist 
would be responsible for reviewing individual documents to validate veteran information 
as submitted. MBON estimates potential implementation expenditures of approximately 
$124,966 in fiscal 2026 and increasing to $163,954 in fiscal 2030, to account for hiring 
two administrative specialists. According to MBON, should the board implement the 
process authorized under the bill, such staff would be necessary to process the applications 
and communicate with agencies as needed. 
 
While some boards may initially incur minimal administrative costs, such as those 
associated with the development of any process and training staff on implemented 
procedures, DLS disagrees that additional staff are required, as the bill does not create 
extensive, ongoing administrative requirements for the boards that choose to implement 
the process. For example, as outlined in the bill, in order for an applicant to receive a 
veteran status on a credential or profile, the applicant must present documentation 
acceptable to the board; the bill specifies examples of such potential documentation, 
including a certification of veteran status obtained from DVMF or a specified federal form 
certifying veteran status. Thus, DLS assumes that any process implemented by a board can 
require an applicant seeking a veteran status credential to provide standard certification 
that readily identifies an applicant as a veteran, reducing the need for board staff to engage 
in extensive documentation review. DLS also notes that because health occupations boards 
are already required under current law (discussed above) to provide special privileges to 
veterans during the licensing process, it is assumed that board staff have some familiarity 
with relevant documentation that may be presented by a veteran under the bill.  
 
Further, while DLS acknowledges that certain health occupations boards oversee a large 
volume of licensees, it also notes that approximately 321,000 veterans are estimated to live 
in Maryland. This estimate assumes that the number of these veterans who are subject to 
the health occupations boards (and also interested in adding the veteran notation to their 
credential or profile) is limited enough that any additional administrative responsibilities 
generated by the bill are able to be handled by existing staff. DLS also advises that any 
applications for veteran status (and requests for information from Executive Branch 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 67/ Page 5 
agencies) are likely to be staggered in a way that further mitigates any meaningful 
operational or fiscal impact exclusively attributable to the bill. 
 
Additional Impacts 
 
Although the bill’s provisions may facilitate additional veterans applying and being 
deemed eligible for certain benefits, any associated impact is not anticipated to materially 
affect State or local finances or operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5