START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 93 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 93 
(Senator Kramer) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Election Law - Absentee Ballots - Notice to Request Application 
 
 
This bill requires the local boards of elections to send a written notice regarding a request 
for a State-approved absentee ballot application with a specimen ballot and any other 
mailing to voters or eligible voters to further awareness of the option of mail-in voting. A 
local board of elections is not required to send the notice (1) to a voter who has permanent 
absentee ballot status or to a voter more than once per election or (2) for a vote-by-mail 
election.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Absentee (Mail-in) Voting 
 
An individual may vote by absentee (mail-in) ballot except to the extent preempted by 
federal law. An absentee ballot may be requested in writing (there are State and federal 
forms that can be used) or online through the State Board of Elections (SBE) website. The 
voter may choose to receive the ballot by mail, by fax, through the Internet, or by hand at 
a local board of elections office. The voter may return the ballot by (1) mailing it, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 93/ Page 2 
postmarked on or before Election Day; (2) depositing it into a ballot drop box before the 
polls close on Election Day; or (3) delivering it in person to an early voting center or to the 
local board of elections or an Election Day polling place by the close of polls on 
Election Day.  
 
Chapters 56 and 514 of 2021 allow for a voter to request permanent absentee ballot status 
and be placed on a permanent absentee ballot list, in which case a local board of elections 
sends the voter an absentee ballot each time there is an election.  
 
Chapters 56 and 514, in uncodified language, required each local board of elections to, at 
least 60 days before the statewide primary election in 2022 and 2024, send the State 
board-approved absentee ballot application to each eligible voter. A local board of elections 
was not required to send the State board-approved absentee ballot application to a voter 
who had permanent absentee ballot status.  
 
Specimen Ballots 
 
Local boards of elections are required to provide notice of each election in their county by 
either (1) specimen ballot mailed at least one week before the first day of any early voting 
period before the election or (2) publication or dissemination by mass communication 
during the calendar week preceding the election. A specimen ballot must be a facsimile of 
the ballot the voter is entitled to vote in the election. Prince George’s County’s board of 
elections is required by statute to provide notice by mailing specimen ballots (as opposed 
to publication or dissemination by mass communication), for a general election, and SBE 
regulations require all local election directors to mail specimen ballots by nonforwardable 
mail to all registered voters before every general election (other than a special election) as 
part of voter registration list maintenance efforts to determine if registered voters may have 
become ineligible by reason of a change of address to a jurisdiction outside Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 201 (Delegate Wilkins) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 93/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3