START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 48 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 48 
(Senators Simonaire and Jackson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Department of General Services - Identification Cards - Veteran Status Notation 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of General Services (DGS) to include a notation on an 
“identification card” indicating the holder is a veteran if the individual presents specified 
documentation to DGS. DGS may limit the notation to specific categories of identification 
card holders. If DGS provides such an option, DGS must include on the application an 
option for the applicant to (1) indicate that the applicant is a veteran and (2) consent to 
being contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies regarding the individual’s 
eligibility for State or federal veterans’ benefits. Subject to specified provisions of the 
Maryland Public Information Act (PIA) and on request by an Executive Branch agency, 
DGS must transmit to the agency appropriate information about each identification card 
holder who has given consent. DGS may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DGS can create the veteran status notation on identification cards and handle 
any notification duties required by the bill with existing budgeted resources. No effect on 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material effect on local governmental 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Identification card” means a security card issued by DGS to a 
State employee or other individual authorized by the Secretary of General Services, 
including a contractor, regulated lobbyist, media personnel, local government official, or 
volunteer. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 48/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
 
State of Maryland Security Cards 
 
By regulation, the Secretary of General Services must issue a State of Maryland employee 
security card to each State employee, but the Secretary may delegate that responsibility to 
the Maryland Capitol Police (MCP). Security cards may be issued to other individuals, 
including but not limited to contractors, lobbyists, media personnel, local government 
officials, or volunteers. The Secretary of General Services may authorize, and MCP must 
conduct, a security clearance investigation prior to the issuance of a security card to an 
individual other than a State employee. 
 
Generally, in order to be issued a security card, an individual must complete and submit a 
security card application in a form prescribed by the Secretary of General Services. The 
fees established for security cards are $50 for lobbyists and $50 for contractors. 
Replacement fees for security cards are $50 for the first loss, $100 for the second loss, and 
$250 for each successive loss (subject to authorization from DGS). The Secretary of 
General Services may not charge a fee to (1) replace a damaged security card, if the damage 
was unintentional and is surrendered or (2) to issue a security card with updated personal 
or employment information. 
 
Maryland Public Information Act 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. 
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families 
 
The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) delivers services and 
programs to assist Maryland veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining State, 
federal, and local benefits provided by law in recognition for their service. DVMF assures 
the quality 
maintenance of veterans’ cemeteries 
and 
memorials 
to honor 
Maryland veterans. DVMF also manages Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, an assisted living 
and skilled nursing facility for veterans and their eligible spouses who are unable to care 
for themselves due to disability, advancing age, or who require nursing home care. 
Additionally, DVMF engages in public awareness and outreach to veterans, their families, 
and other stakeholders. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 48/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Military Department; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3