START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 57 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 57 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Funeral Establishments, Crematories, and Reduction Facilities - Disposition of 
Unclaimed Remains - Veterans 
 
 
This bill establishes requirements in the Business Regulation Article that conform to those 
already in place in the Health Occupations Article. Accordingly, the bill requires, under 
the Business Regulation Article, a licensed funeral establishment, crematory operator, or 
reduction facility to take specified actions if a veterans service organization does not take 
possession of unclaimed cremains, hydrolyzed remains, or a portion of unclaimed soil 
remains that qualify for a lot in a State veterans’ cemetery. The bill also makes a further 
conforming change to the Health Occupations Article, with regard to unclaimed 
hydrolyzed remains of veterans. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) expenditures 
(general and federal funds) may increase by an indeterminate but minimal amount 
beginning in FY 2026 for any additional burials at State veterans’ cemeteries, as discussed 
below. If so, DVMF federal fund revenues increase by an indeterminate but minimal 
amount beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the Business Regulation Article, if a veterans service organization 
does not take possession of unclaimed cremains or hydrolyzed remains that qualify for a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 57/ Page 2 
lot in a State veterans’ cemetery within 10 days after the licensed funeral establishment or 
crematory permit holder receives notification (as required from that organization about 
eligibility for burial in a veterans’ cemetery), the licensed funeral establishment or permit 
holder must (1) notify DVMF of the status of the cremains or hydrolyzed remains for the 
purpose of appropriate disposition and (2) transfer the cremains or hydrolyzed remains to 
DVMF for appropriate disposition. 
 
Similarly, under the Business Regulation Article, if a veterans service organization does 
not take possession of a portion of unclaimed soil remains that qualifies for a plot in a State 
veterans’ cemetery within 10 days after the reduction facility receives notification (as 
required from that organization about eligibility for burial in a veterans’ cemetery), the 
reduction facility must (1) notify DVMF of the status of the soil remains for the purpose 
of appropriate disposition; (2) transfer the soil remains to DVMF for the purpose of 
appropriate disposition; and (3) if authorized by the cemetery or owner, transfer the balance 
of the soil remains to a cemetery or the owner of a woodland protected under the 
Forest Conservation Act (FCA). 
 
Current Law:  Requirements related to the final disposition of human bodies are 
established under the Health – General Article. Also, in Maryland, cremation is regulated 
either by the Office of Cemetery Oversight (OCO) within the Maryland Department of 
Labor (under the Business Regulation Article) or the State Board of Morticians and Funeral 
Directors within the Maryland Department of Health (under the Health Occupations 
Article), based on ownership of the crematory or reduction facility. Specifically, OCO and 
the board each regulate facilities in which their registrants/permit holders or licensees hold 
majority ownership. As part of their joint oversight of crematories and reduction facilities, 
OCO and the board must adopt identical regulations. 
 
Cremated, Hydrolyzed, and Soil Remains 
 
The Business Regulation and Health Occupations articles generally mirror each other with 
regard to cremated, hydrolyzed, and soil remains. 
 
In general, “cremation” means the disposition of a dead human body by means of 
incineration. A “crematory” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that 
houses the necessary appliances and facilities for cremation or alkaline hydrolysis. 
Cremains are the cremated remains following the process of cremation. 
 
“Hydrolyzed remains” means the bone fragments produced by the completion of alkaline 
hydrolysis. “Alkaline hydrolysis” means the process of reducing human remains using 
water, alkaline chemicals, and heat inside a watertight vessel to accelerate decomposition. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 57/ Page 3 
“Soil remains” means the soil produced at final disposition of a dead human body at a 
reduction facility by completion of natural organic reduction. “Natural organic reduction” 
means the contained accelerated conversion of human remains into soil. “Reduction 
facility” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that houses the necessary 
appliances, containers, and facilities for performing natural organic reduction. 
 
A person may not use or dispose of soil remains produced by natural organic reduction 
(1) on public or private property without the prior permission of the owner of the public 
property, the surviving owners of public record of the private property, or if the decedent 
was sole owner of the property at death, the authorizing agent; (2) by using the soil remains 
to grow food for consumption by humans or livestock; (3) by selling or reselling the soil 
remains to a third party; or (4) by combining or incorporating the soil remains into compost 
offered for sale to consumers or for commercial or agricultural purchasers. Unless a funeral 
establishment or cemetery has otherwise agreed in writing, a reduction facility that 
produces soil remains is responsible for providing for the final disposition and disposal of 
the soil remains in accordance with written direction given by an authorizing agent. 
 
Remains of Veterans 
 
A licensed funeral establishment or crematory in possession of cremated human remains 
or hydrolyzed remains that have been unclaimed for 90 days or more must provide 
identifying information of the unclaimed remains to a veterans service organization in 
order for the organization to determine if the unclaimed remains are those of a veteran or 
an eligible dependent. Within 45 days of receipt of the information, a veterans service 
organization must notify the licensed funeral establishment, crematory permit holder, or 
reduction facility whether the remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent and, 
if so, whether the veteran or eligible dependent is eligible for burial in a veterans’ cemetery. 
If the unclaimed remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent, the licensed 
funeral establishment or crematory may transfer the remains to a veterans service 
organization for the purpose of disposition of the cremains or hydrolyzed remains. 
 
Likewise, a reduction facility in possession of human remains that are being processed by 
natural organic reduction must provide identifying information to a veterans service 
organization within five business days after natural organic reduction is initiated to 
determine if the soil remains are those of a veteran or eligible dependent. This requirement 
does not apply if an authorizing agent directs otherwise, or a reduction facility reasonably 
concludes based on the identifying information or other evidence that a decedent does not 
qualify for disposition benefits associated with veteran status. If the unclaimed soil remains 
are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent, the reduction facility may (1) transfer a 
portion of the soil remains – not exceeding 300 cubic inches in volume – to a veterans 
service organization that grants permission for the purpose of disposition and (2) if 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 57/ Page 4 
authorized by the cemetery owner, transfer the balance of soil remains to a cemetery or the 
owner of a woodland protected under FCA. 
 
These provisions are contained in both the Business Regulation and Health Occupations 
articles. The Health Occupations Article contains additional provisions that require the 
transfer of cremains, hydrolyzed remains, or unclaimed soil remains to DVMF under 
specified circumstances – as established in the Business Regulation Article by this bill. 
 
State Veterans’ Cemeteries 
 
DVMF is authorized to establish one or more cemeteries in the State for the burial of 
veterans and their eligible spouse or dependents as authorized by the Secretary of Veterans 
and Miliary Families. DVMF’s Cemetery Program operates and maintains  
five veterans’ cemeteries to provide for their interment. 
 
DVMF must bury the veteran without charge. To qualify for a plot in the State veterans’ 
cemetery, the applicant must be a veteran who meets the requirements for burial at a 
national veterans’ cemetery or an eligible spouse or dependent of a veteran who meets 
specified requirements. In addition, if the applicant is a veteran, the veteran must also have 
been a resident of the State (1) when the veteran entered the U.S. Armed Forces; (2) when 
the veteran died; or (3) for two years, unless, for a reason that DVMF finds compelling, 
DVMF waives the time period. In a plot that is allotted to a veteran, DVMF must bury the 
veteran and any member of the immediate family who is an eligible spouse or dependent 
of the veteran if the family member can be buried in a space above or below the veteran or 
in the next available plot. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill makes it more likely that unclaimed cremains, hydrolyzed 
remains, or soil remains in the possession of crematories or reduction facilities (those that 
are regulated under the Business Regulation Article) are transferred to DVMF for the 
purpose of appropriate disposition under specified circumstances. DVMF advises that the  
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (USVA) reimburses the department for a plot 
allowance in the amount of $978 for the interment of a veteran. The plot allowance covers 
the cost of the burial and for perpetual care of the cemetery; the plot allowance increases 
annually. USVA does not reimburse for costs associated with the burial of veterans’ 
dependents. 
 
Therefore, DVMF general and federal fund expenditures may increase beginning in 
fiscal 2026 for costs associated with burying additional veterans and veterans’ dependents. 
However, any costs associated with veteran burials are reimbursed by USVA, resulting in 
a corresponding increase in federal fund revenues and no net impact on DVMF. Any costs 
associated with burials for dependents of veterans do not qualify for reimbursement from 
USVA, and result in no corresponding increase in federal fund revenues. The fiscal 2026 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 57/ Page 5 
budget as passed by the General Assembly does not include funds for the interment of 
veterans’ dependents. 
 
The number of unclaimed cremains, hydrolyzed remains, or soil remains transferred to 
DVMF under the bill cannot be readily estimated. However, for illustrative purposes only, 
DVMF estimates that the department could take possession of the unclaimed cremains or 
remains of approximately five veterans and five veterans’ dependents annually. Under this 
assumption, DVMF general fund expenditures would increase by approximately 
$5,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026 to cover the cost of burial for the unclaimed 
cremains or remains of veterans’ dependents. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5