START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 46 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 46 
(Senator Watson, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Real Property - Wrongful Detainer - Time of Hearing and Service of Process 
 
  
This bill alters certain requirements related to wrongful detainer actions, generally by 
(1) requiring a hearing to be held within 10 business days after the complaint is filed and 
(2) altering the requirements for service of process.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, wrongful detainer means to hold 
possession of real property without the right to do so. A wrongful detainer action is not 
available if (1) the person in actual possession of the property has been granted possession 
under a court order; (2) a remedy is available under general landlord/tenant law; or (3) any 
other exclusive means to recover possession is provided by statute or rule. Generally, if a 
person holds possession of a property to which the person is not entitled, a person claiming 
possession (complainant) may file a complaint, in writing, with the District Court. The 
court must immediately summons the person in possession to appear before the court to 
show cause (if any) why restitution of the possession of the property to the complainant 
should not be made. Under the bill, this hearing must be held within 10 business days after 
the complaint is filed. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 46/ Page 2 
Under current law, if the person in actual possession cannot be found, the person authorized 
to serve process under the Maryland Rules must affix an attested copy of the summons 
conspicuously on the property. Under the bill, if, after two good faith attempts on separate 
days, the person in actual possession cannot be found, the person authorized to serve 
process under the Maryland Rules must (1) file an affidavit with the court describing the 
good faith efforts to serve the person in actual possession; (2) mail a copy of the complaint 
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and first-class mail to the last known address of 
the person in actual possession and, if different, to the address of the residential property 
subject to the complaint; and (3) affix an attested copy of the summons conspicuously on 
the property. Service under the bill must be made within four business days after the 
complaint is filed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 560 (Delegate Holmes) - Judiciary., HB 154 (Delegate 
Conaway) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Office of the Public Defender; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2