START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 147 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 147 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Stationary Engineers - Member Appointments - Advice and 
Consent of the Senate 
 
 
This bill requires Senate confirmation for members appointed by the Governor to the State 
Board of Stationary Engineers.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Stationary Engineers consists of eight members 
appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary of the Maryland Department 
of Labor and the Senate. The Senate is not required to consent to the appointments.  
 
The board was established in 2005 to create “a licensing program to ensure that qualified 
individuals provide stationary engineer services to (1) protect the public; (2) provide for 
the safe operation of power plants, plants of machinery, and boilers; and (3) promote high 
professional standards.” Under statute, “[p]rovide stationary engineer services means to 
oversee the operation of a power plant, plant of machinery, or boiler, each generating 
pressure of more than 15 psi and operating at 30 or more horsepower,” but “does not 
include overseeing the operation of a heating boiler.”  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 147/ Page 2 
The board may deny a license to an applicant, revoke or suspend a license, issue a 
reprimand, and impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 for any violation of the stationary 
engineers licensing statute or regulations. Other than licensing, the primary function of the 
board is investigating violations of the stationary engineer licensing code.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Maryland Department of Labor; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2