START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 457

Chapter 457

(Senate Bill 154)

AN ACT concerning

Access to Counsel in Evictions – Task Force ~~Termination~~ and Special Fund

FOR the purpose of ~~making~~ ~~permanent~~ extending a requirement that the Comptroller
distribute a certain amount of certain abandoned property funds to the Access to
Counsel in Evictions Special Fund; ~~making~~ ~~permanent~~ extending a requirement that
the Governor make a certain appropriation from the Access to Counsel in Evictions
Special Fund to the Maryland Legal Services Corporation; ~~terminating~~ altering the
staff and duties of the Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force on a certain date;
and generally relating to the Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund and the
Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 17–317
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section ~~8–901~~ 8–908 and 8–909
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Property~~
~~Section~~ ~~8–908~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2023~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Commercial~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~17–317(a)(5)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2013~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~
~~(As~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act)~~

~~BY~~ ~~renumbering~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Property~~
~~Section~~ ~~8–909~~ ~~through~~ ~~8–911~~
~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~Section~~ ~~8–908~~ ~~and~~ ~~8–910,~~ ~~respectively~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 457 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(2023~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

17–317.

(a) (1) (i) All funds received under this title, including the proceeds of the
sale of abandoned property under § 17–316 of this subtitle, shall be credited by the
Administrator to a special fund.

(ii) The Administrator shall retain in the special fund at the end of
each fiscal year, from the proceeds received, an amount not to exceed $50,000, from which
sum the Administrator shall pay any claim allowed under this title.

(2) After deducting all costs incurred in administering this title from the
remaining net funds the Administrator shall distribute $8,000,000 to the Maryland Legal
Services Corporation Fund established under § 11–402 of the Human Services Article.

(3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the Administrator
shall distribute all unclaimed money from judgments of restitution under Title 11, Subtitle
6 of the Criminal Procedure Article to the State Victims of Crime Fund established under
§ 11–916 of the Criminal Procedure Article to assist victims of crimes and delinquent acts
to protect the victims’ rights as provided by law.

(ii) If a victim entitled to restitution that has been treated as
abandoned property under § 11–614 of the Criminal Procedure Article is located after the
money has been distributed under this paragraph, the Administrator shall reduce the next
distribution to the State Victims of Crime Fund by the amount recovered by the victim.

(4) For fiscal year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, after making the
distributions required under paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, the Administrator
shall distribute $500,000 from the remaining net funds to the Tax Clinics for Low–Income
Marylanders Fund established under § 1–207 of the Tax – General Article.

(5) [For each of fiscal years 2024 through 2027 2028, after] AFTER making
the distributions required under paragraphs (2) through (4) of this subsection, the
Administrator shall distribute $14,000,000 from the remaining net funds to the Access to
Counsel in Evictions Special Fund under § 8–909 of the Real Property Article.

(6) After making the distributions required under paragraphs (2) through
(5) of this subsection, the Administrator shall distribute the remaining net funds not
retained under paragraph (1) of this subsection to the General Fund of the State.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 457

(b) (1) Before making the distribution, the Administrator shall record the
name and last known address, if any, of the owners of funds so distributed and the type of
property which the funds distributed represent.

(2) The record shall be available for public inspection during reasonable
business hours by any person who claims a legal interest in any property held by the
Administrator, provided that the person gives prior notice to the Administrator.

Article – Real Property

8–909.

(a) There is an Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funding to fully implement access to
legal representation in evictions and other related proceedings in the State.

(c) MLSC shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Money received by the Division of Consumer Protection in the Office of
the Attorney General from any final settlement or agreement with or judgment against a
party relating to an investigation or enforcement of the Maryland Consumer Protection Act
for an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice for rental residential property, excluding
any restitution and the costs of the action the Attorney General is entitled to recover;

(2) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(3) Money distributed to the Fund under § 17–317 of the Commercial Law
Article;

(4) Interest earnings of the Fund; and

(5) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(f) The Fund may be used only for:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 457 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Services provided by a designated organization or activity by a
community group to implement the Program as provided in this subtitle, including all costs
associated with required legal representation in any proceeding and any outreach and
education activities;

(2) If a local jurisdiction enacts a program authorized under this subtitle,
services provided by the local jurisdiction to implement access to counsel in eviction
proceedings as provided for in this subtitle, including all costs associated with required
legal representation in any proceeding and any outreach and education activities;

(3) Administrative expenses of MLSC; and

(4) Expenses related to the study and evaluation of:

(i) Services and activities provided under this subtitle; and

(ii) Funding amounts and sources necessary to fully effectuate
access to counsel in eviction proceedings.

(g) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(h) (1) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the
State budget.

(2) For each [of fiscal years 2024 through 2027 2028] FISCAL YEAR, the
Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $14,000,000 from the
Fund to MLSC.

(i) Money expended from the Fund is supplemental to and is not intended to take
the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for civil legal services from any
other source.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Real Property

~~8–901.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~“Community~~ ~~group”~~ ~~means~~ ~~a~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~entity~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~capacity~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~
~~tenant~~ ~~outreach~~ ~~and~~ ~~provide~~ ~~engagement,~~ ~~education,~~ ~~and~~ ~~information.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 457

~~(c)~~ ~~“Covered~~ ~~individual”~~ ~~means~~ ~~an~~ ~~individual~~ ~~who:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~Occupies~~ ~~a~~ ~~residential~~ ~~property~~ ~~under~~ ~~a~~ ~~claim~~ ~~of~~ ~~legal~~ ~~right~~ ~~other~~ ~~than~~
~~owner,~~ ~~including~~ ~~a~~ ~~tenant~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~building~~ ~~owned,~~ ~~operated,~~ ~~or~~ ~~managed~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~public~~ ~~housing~~
~~authority;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Is~~ ~~a~~ ~~member~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~household~~ ~~with~~ ~~an~~ ~~income~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~greater~~ ~~than~~ ~~50%~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~median~~ ~~income,~~ ~~adjusted~~ ~~for~~ ~~household~~ ~~size,~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~as~~ ~~determined~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~United~~
~~States~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~and~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~ ~~or~~ ~~its~~ ~~successor.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~“Designated~~ ~~organization”~~ ~~means~~ ~~a~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~entity~~ ~~designated~~ ~~by~~ ~~MLSC~~ ~~with~~
~~the~~ ~~ability~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~legal~~ ~~representation~~ ~~to~~ ~~covered~~ ~~individuals.~~

~~(e)~~ ~~“Fund”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Access~~ ~~to~~ ~~Counsel~~ ~~in~~ ~~Evictions~~ ~~Special~~ ~~Fund.~~

~~(f)~~ ~~“Legal~~ ~~representation”~~ ~~includes~~ ~~all~~ ~~representation~~ ~~by~~ ~~an~~ ~~attorney~~ ~~beyond~~ ~~brief~~
~~legal~~ ~~advice~~ ~~and~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~limited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~formal~~ ~~entry~~ ~~of~~ ~~appearance~~ ~~in~~ ~~court.~~

~~(g)~~ ~~“MLSC”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Legal~~ ~~Services~~ ~~Corporation.~~

~~(h)~~ ~~“Program”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Access~~ ~~to~~ ~~Counsel~~ ~~in~~ ~~Evictions~~ ~~Program.~~

[(i) “Task Force” means the Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force.]

~~[8–908.~~

(a) There is an Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force.

(b) (1) The Task Force consists of up to 15 members appointed by the ~~Office~~ ~~of~~
the Attorney General SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT and
shall include:

(i) At least two representatives of the Maryland State Bar
Association;

(ii) At least two representatives of tenant advocacy groups or
designated organizations;

(iii) At least two representatives of the Judiciary;

(iv) At least two representatives of community groups;

(v) At least two representatives of landlords;

(vi) Representatives of MLSC; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 457 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(vii) Tenants and other interested citizens.

(2) At least three members of the Task Force must be tenants whose
income does not exceed 50% of the State median income adjusted for household size.

(c) The Attorney General SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

(d) The Office of the Attorney General DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT shall provide staff for the Task Force.

(e) (1) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
A member of the Task Force:

(1) (I) May not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force;
but

(2) (II) Is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard
State Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(2) A MEMBER OF THE TASK FORCE DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION
(B)(2) OF THIS SECTION MAY RECEIVE REASONABLE COMPENSATION, INCLUDING A
STIPEND, AS DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT.

(f) The Task Force shall:

(1) Evaluate the provision of services under this subtitle, including the
performance of designated organizations and community groups;

(2) Study potential funding sources; and

(3) Make recommendations to improve the implementation of this subtitle,
including necessary policy and statutory changes.

(g) On or before January 1, 2022, and each January 1 thereafter 2026, the Task
Force shall report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance
with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

(h) The Task Force may apply for grants from public and private entities to carry
out the duties of the Task Force.]

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~
~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 457

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Commercial~~ ~~Law~~

~~17–317.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(5)~~ ~~After~~ ~~making~~ ~~the~~ ~~distributions~~ ~~required~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraphs~~ ~~(2)~~ ~~through~~
~~(4)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Administrator~~ ~~shall~~ ~~distribute~~ ~~$14,000,000~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~remaining~~
net funds to the Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund under [§ 8–909] § 8–908 of
~~the~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Property~~ ~~Article.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~4.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~Section(s)~~ ~~8–909~~ ~~through~~
~~8–911~~ ~~of~~ ~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Real~~ ~~Property~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~be~~ ~~renumbered~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~Section(s)~~ ~~8–908~~ ~~through~~ ~~8–910,~~ ~~respectively.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~5.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~Sections~~ ~~2,~~ ~~3,~~ ~~and~~ ~~4~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~January~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2026.~~

SECTION ~~6.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, ~~except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~
~~Section~~ ~~5~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ this Act shall take effect ~~October~~ June 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7