START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 181 
(Senator Hettleman, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Correctional Services - Geriatric and Medical Parole 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to the parole process, including (1) altering the factors that 
must be considered in determining whether an individual is suitable for parole and before 
a predetermined parole release agreement is entered into; (2) altering the factors that the 
Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) must consider in determining whether an individual 
is suitable for medical parole; and (3) altering the process for individuals granted medical 
parole to be returned to the custody of the Division of Correction (DOC) or a local 
correctional facility. In addition, the bill (1) establishes a process for MPC to determine 
suitability for geriatric parole for specified individuals; (2) requires MPC to report 
specified information relating to the outcomes of such geriatric parole considerations to the 
Justice Reinvestment Oversight Board (JROB); (3) requires savings realized by the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) as a result of the geriatric 
parole process to be used for specified purposes; and (4) authorizes JROB to recommend 
that a portion of the annual savings from the implementation of the recommendations of 
the Justice Reinvestment Coordinating Council (JRCC) be distributed to MPC for the 
purpose of hiring psychologists to perform risk assessments of candidates for geriatric 
parole under the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $474,500 in FY 2026 for MPC; this 
estimate does not reflect any potential savings in incarceration costs. To the extent the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP) distributes funding to MPC, 
as authorized by the bill, the need for general funds decreases, as discussed below. Future 
year estimates are annualized and reflect inflation. Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
474,500 
575,600 
601,000 
627,600 
654,500 
Net Effect 
($474,500) 
($575,600) 
($601,000) 
($627,600) 
($654,500) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 181/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Parole:  Among other considerations, each hearing examiner and commissioner 
determining whether an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole, and MPC before 
entering into a predetermined parole release agreement, must consider (1) whether, taking 
into account the totality of the circumstances including the age of the incarcerated 
individual, there is reasonable probability that the incarcerated individual, if released on 
parole, will not recidivate (instead of remain at liberty without violating the law) and 
(2) whether release of the incarcerated individual on parole is compatible with public safety 
(instead of the welfare of society). 
 
Medical Parole:  The bill makes the following changes to the medical parole process: 
 
 
an incarcerated individual may be released on medical parole at any time during the 
term of that incarcerated individual’s sentence, without regard to specified 
eligibility standards, if a licensed physician has made specified determinations 
regarding the incarcerated individual’s health; 
 
if a medical evaluation is requested pursuant to current law, the evaluation must 
consist of an in-person examination of the incarcerated individual, and MPC must 
give equal consideration to the findings of the evaluation and any medical condition 
detailed in the evaluation in considering whether to grant medical parole;  
 
the incarcerated individual or the incarcerated individual’s representative may 
request a meeting with MPC, and MPC must grant the request for a meeting for any 
incarcerated individual (1) housed in an infirmary of a correctional facility;  
(2) currently hospitalized outside a correctional facility; or (3) who has been 
frequently housed in an infirmary of a correctional facility or hospitalized outside a 
correctional facility in the preceding six months. However, MPC may, at its 
discretion, grant the request for a meeting for any incarcerated individual who does 
not meet these requirements; 
 
MPC may require as a condition of release on medical parole that the parolee agree 
to placement for a definite or indefinite period of time under the care of a medical 
provider, as specified (instead of in a hospital or hospice); 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 181/ Page 3 
 
if a licensed physician makes specified determinations regarding an individual 
granted medical parole, the parolee must be returned to the custody of DOC or the 
local correctional facility from which the parolee was released; 
 
“imminent death,” as it pertains to provisions of current law regarding victim 
notification and opportunity to be heard, is defined to mean death that is likely to 
occur within six months; and 
 
the requirement for MPC to transmit to the Governor a decision to grant medical 
parole to an incarcerated individual sentenced to life imprisonment is repealed. 
 
Geriatric Parole:  The following provisions apply only to an incarcerated individual who 
is at least age 65, has served at least 20 years of incarceration, is not a specified sex 
offender, is serving a term of confinement for which all sentences being served (including 
any life sentence) are with the possibility of parole, and has had no category 1A disciplinary 
infractions (the most serious category for correctional facility rule violations) within the 
previous 3-year period. On an ongoing basis, DPSCS must submit to MPC the name of 
each incarcerated individual who meets those qualifications, and within 60 days after 
receipt of such a name, MPC must order a risk assessment for the incarcerated individual 
if the individual is serving sentences for multiple crimes of violence with an aggregate term 
of confinement of 40 years or more. MPC may also order a risk assessment for any other 
incarcerated individual eligible for parole under these provisions. MPC must conduct a 
parole release hearing by a hearing examiner or a commission panel, as provided under 
current law, for each individual whose name is submitted under these provisions and 
determine whether the incarcerated individual is suitable for parole. The hearing must be 
conducted as soon as possible, if no risk assessment is ordered, or on completion of any 
risk assessment ordered.  
 
Generally, an incarcerated individual who has been denied parole under these provisions 
may not have a subsequent parole hearing for five years; however, if MPC determines that 
extraordinary and compelling circumstances justify the subsequent parole hearing, the 
incarcerated individual may have a subsequent parole hearing at any time. 
 
In addition to factors specified under current law for an MPC hearing examiner and 
commissioner in determining whether an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole, each 
MPC panel determining whether an incarcerated individual is suitable for parole must 
consider and give significant weight to the incarcerated individual’s age and the impact 
that the incarcerated individual’s age has on reducing the risk that the incarcerated 
individual will recidivate. 
 
Any savings realized by DPSCS as a result of these provisions must be used for conducting 
risk assessments, conducting parole hearings, and providing prerelease and reentry case 
management and resources for incarcerated individuals released on parole. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 181/ Page 4 
Every year, MPC must report to JROB on the outcomes of parole considerations made 
under these provisions, including (1) the number of incarcerated individuals who are 
subject to these provisions who are denied parole and released on parole; (2) the reason for 
each decision to release an incarcerated individual on parole; (3) the reason for each 
decision to deny parole to an incarcerated individual; (4) of the number of incarcerated 
individuals who are released on parole, the number of individuals who are convicted of an 
offense committed after release; (5) the average time between when an incarcerated 
individual becomes eligible for parole consideration under these provisions and when the 
incarcerated individual receives the first required parole hearing; and (6) the average time 
between parole hearings for incarcerated individuals subject to these provisions. 
 
MPC must adopt implementing regulations, as specified. 
 
The bill repeals existing provisions authorizing geriatric parole for individuals serving a 
sentence for a crime of violence under specified circumstances. 
 
In addition, the bill requires MPC to make efforts to prioritize conducting parole hearings 
and issuing recommendations for individuals eligible for medical and geriatric parole. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Parole 
 
Powers and Duties:  MPC has the exclusive power to authorize the parole of an 
incarcerated individual in State correctional facilities. The Patuxent Board of Review 
(PBR) has the exclusive power to recommend an incarcerated individual of the Patuxent 
Institution for parole to the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services or the 
Governor. The parole of any person serving a parole-eligible term of life in either a State 
correctional facility or the Patuxent Institution requires the approval of the Governor. 
 
Each hearing examiner and commissioner determining whether an incarcerated individual 
is suitable for parole, and MPC before entering into a predetermined parole release 
agreement, must consider several specified factors, including, among others, (1) the 
circumstances surrounding the crime; (2) the physical, mental, and moral qualifications of 
the incarcerated individual; (3) the progress of the incarcerated individual during 
confinement, as specified; (4) whether there is reasonable probability that the incarcerated 
individual, if released on parole, will remain at liberty without violating the law; and 
(5) whether release of the incarcerated individual on parole is compatible with the welfare 
of society. 
 
Parole Eligibility:  A person sentenced to a term of incarceration of six months or more is 
entitled to a parole hearing after having served one-fourth of the term or consecutive terms. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 181/ Page 5 
A person serving a sentence for a crime of violence is not entitled to a parole hearing until 
after having served one-half of the term. Certain persons are not eligible for parole while 
serving a mandatory minimum sentence. A person sentenced to life imprisonment is not 
eligible for parole consideration until that person has served 15 years. Under specified 
circumstances, a person sentenced to life imprisonment for first-degree murder is not 
eligible for parole consideration until that person has served 25 years. With the exception 
of a person registered as or eligible to register as a sexual offender, offenders who are 
age 60 or older who have served at least 15 years of a sentence for a subsequent crime of 
violence may apply for and be granted geriatric parole. An incarcerated individual 
sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole is not eligible for parole 
consideration and may not be granted parole at any time during the incarcerated 
individual’s sentence. This does not restrict the authority of the Governor to pardon or 
remit any part of a sentence. 
 
Medical Parole:  Chapter 299 of 2008 established medical parole as a form of release from 
incarceration in a State or local correctional facility for incapacitated incarcerated 
individuals who, as a result of a medical or mental health condition, disease, or syndrome, 
pose no danger to public safety. A parolee must be returned to the custody of DOC or the 
local correctional facility from which the incarcerated individual was released if MPC has 
reason to believe that the parolee is no longer so debilitated or incapacitated as to be 
physically incapable of presenting a danger to society. A parole hearing for a parolee 
returned to custody must be held promptly to consider whether the parolee remains 
incapacitated. A parolee returned to custody under these circumstances must remain in 
custody if the incapacitation is found to no longer exist. However, the individual may be 
considered under other parole provisions discussed above. 
 
Chapter 515 of 2016 requires that, beginning October 1, 2017, if MPC decides to grant 
medical parole, the decision be transmitted to the Governor. The Governor is then required 
to disapprove a recommendation for medical parole within 180 days of the decision by 
MPC. If the Governor does not disapprove the decision within that timeframe, the decision 
to grant parole becomes effective. 
 
Medicaid may reimburse covered health care costs for parolees who are moved to hospitals 
or nursing facilities. However, among other requirements, such individuals must be placed 
in medical institutions that are generally available to the public and not operated primarily 
or exclusively to care for those involved with the criminal justice system. Medicaid 
payment is only available when an incarcerated individual is an inpatient in a medical 
institution not under the control of the correctional system. 
 
Governor Approval:  Chapter 623 of 2011 provided that if MPC or PBR decides to grant 
parole to an incarcerated individual sentenced to life imprisonment who has served 
25 years without application of diminution of confinement credits, the decision must be 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 181/ Page 6 
transmitted to the Governor, who may disapprove the decision in writing within 180 days. 
However, if the Governor does not disapprove the decision within that timeframe, the 
decision to grant parole becomes effective. For individuals whose parole recommendation 
was pending approval by the Governor on October 1, 2011, and who had served 25 years 
without consideration for diminution credits, the Governor had 180 days after that date to 
disapprove the recommendation or the parole became effective. Chapter 30 of 2021 
eliminated the requirement that the parole of a person serving a parole-eligible life sentence 
in a State correctional facility or the Patuxent Institution, subsequent to a recommendation 
for that parole by MPC or PBR, be approved by the Governor. 
 
Crimes of Violence – § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of violence” as  
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, except 
involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; (9) robbery;  
(10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree sexual 
offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of violence, 
except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; (13) child 
abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified circumstances; 
(15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; (17) an attempt to 
commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual conduct with a 
child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, rape, rob, or 
commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
Justice Reinvestment Act 
 
Chapter 42 of 2015 established JRCC within GOCPP. JRCC was required to use a 
data-driven approach to develop a statewide policy framework for sentencing and 
corrections policies to further reduce the State’s incarcerated population, reduce spending 
on corrections, and reinvest in strategies to increase public safety and reduce recidivism. 
The council and its subcommittees met numerous times in 2015 to analyze criminal justice 
data and review relevant research. Based on its findings, JRCC developed a comprehensive 
set of recommendations intended to focus prison resources on serious and violent 
offenders, strengthen community supervision efforts, improve and enhance release and 
reentry practices, support local corrections systems, and ensure oversight and 
accountability. 
 
Chapter 515, the Justice Reinvestment Act, generally implemented many of the 
recommendations of JRCC by altering provisions relating to sentencing, corrections, 
parole, and offender supervision. In addition, the Justice Reinvestment Act, among other 
things, provided for the reinvestment of savings from changes in incarceration policies. 
Chapter 515 also established the Performance Incentive Grant Fund, a special fund 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 181/ Page 7 
intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of the Justice Reinvestment 
Act to provide grants for specified programs and services, including providing for pretrial 
risk assessments, services to reduce pretrial detention, specialty courts, and ensuring that 
the rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced. 
 
JROB is required to annually recommend that the savings identified from the 
implementation of the Act be distributed as follows:  (1) up to 50% of the savings must be 
placed in the Performance Incentive Grant Fund; and (2) generally, the remaining savings 
must be used for additional services identified as reinvestment priorities in JRCC’s final 
report. JROB may recommend that a portion of the remaining savings be used for the 
development and implementation of a post-secondary education and work force training 
program for each correctional institution in DOC that provides incarcerated individuals 
with the requisite training certifications, and experience to obtain careers in in-demand job 
sectors. (For fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2025 as passed by the General Assembly authorizes the use of up to 
$1.0 million of the fund to support the agency operations of Office of the Correctional 
Ombudsman.) 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $11.2 million for the 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $474,494 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring three psychologists and one administrative officer to perform the required risk 
assessments for candidates for geriatric parole under the bill and to submit the required 
reports to JROB. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. DPSCS advises that DOC currently has 245 individuals that are 
eligible to be considered for a risk assessment under the bill. DPSCS further advises that 
each risk assessment takes a significant amount of time to conduct. In addition, given the 
complexity of the required reports, existing staff cannot handle the additional workload 
stemming from the reporting requirement. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$445,019 
Operating Expenses 
    29,475 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$474,494 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any potential savings that may be realized as of result of the 
bill; reliable estimates regarding those effects cannot be made at this time. For contextual 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 181/ Page 8 
purposes, however, currently, the average total cost to house a State incarcerated individual 
in a DOC facility, including overhead, is estimated at $5,339 per month. Excluding 
overhead, the average cost of housing a State incarcerated individual (including health care 
costs) is about $1,268 per month. Excluding all health care (which is a fixed cost under the 
current contract), the average variable costs total $312 per month. 
 
As noted above, any savings realized by DPSCS due to the bill’s provisions relating to 
geriatric parole must be used for conducting risk assessments, conducting parole hearings, 
and providing prerelease and reentry case management and resources for incarcerated 
individuals released on parole. 
 
DPSCS can handle the required submission of names to MPC, on an ongoing basis, with 
existing resources. 
 
MPC can prioritize conducting parole hearings and issuing recommendations for 
individuals eligible for geriatric and medical parole with existing resources. 
 
Although this analysis assumes that general funds are used to cover MPC’s costs (as 
estimated above), the bill authorizes JROB to recommend that a portion of the annual 
savings from the implementation of the recommendations of JRCC be distributed to MPC 
for the purpose of hiring psychologists to perform risk assessments of candidates for 
geriatric parole. To the extent MPC secures funding from GOCPP from the Performance 
Incentive Grant Fund for this purpose, the need for general funds decreases, and less 
funding is available for other authorized uses of the Performance Incentive Grant Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 128 and HB 118 of 2024; HB 157 and SB 98 of 2023; and SB 562 and 
HB 600 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 190 (Delegate Bartlett, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 181/ Page 9 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9