START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 162 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Agriculture - Departmental Authority Over Identification, Inspection, and Sale 
of Cantaloupes - Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals Title 10, Subtitle 9 of the Agriculture Article, which generally governs the 
regulation of cantaloupes by the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State finances or operations. Despite the existence 
of statutory provisions related to cantaloupes, MDA advises that it does not currently 
regulate or inspect cantaloupes in the State. Rather, the regulation of cantaloupes is handled 
at the federal level. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Title 10, Subtitle 9 of the Agriculture Article (Cantaloupes) 
 
Under Title 10, Subtitle 9 of the Agriculture Article, the Secretary of Agriculture is 
authorized to adopt and enforce any rule or regulation necessary to secure uniformity in 
the enforcement of the subtitle and the proper marking of closed containers for cantaloupes. 
Among other things, the subtitle establishes (1) standards related to cantaloupes offered for 
sale; (2) prohibitions on the sale of uninspected cantaloupes and the purchase, sale, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 162/ Page 2 
shipment, or transportation of immature cantaloupes in closed containers; (3) provisions 
related to prosecutions for violations of the subtitle; and (4) provisions related to the 
applicability of the subtitle. 
 
Regulation of Cantaloupes at the Federal Level 
 
Federal regulation of cantaloupes primarily falls under the jurisdiction of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service is responsible for ensuring the safety 
of meat, poultry, and egg products, while FDA oversees the safety of other food products, 
including cantaloupes. 
 
FDA enforces regulations to ensure cantaloupes are safe to consume, particularly under the 
Food Safety Modernization Act. This Act focuses on preventing contamination through 
regulations such as the Produce Safety Rule – which establishes science-based minimum 
standards for the safe growing, harvesting, packing, and holding of fruits and vegetables 
(including cantaloupes) – and the Preventive Controls for Human Foods Rule – which 
requires food facilities to have a food safety plan in place that includes an analysis of 
hazards and risk-based preventive controls to minimize or prevent the identified hazards. 
 
USDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service oversees grading standards for cantaloupes under 
the U.S. Standards for Grades of Cantaloupe. These standards establish uniform criteria for 
quality, such as size, color, and condition, to ensure consistency in the marketplace. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
Health; U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2