START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 182 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 182 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program - Eligibility - Family Members of 
Veterans 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program to include 
an “eligible family member” (a spouse or dependent of an eligible veteran) and makes 
conforming changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing discretionary 
program funds may be used. The Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) 
can handle any administrative changes with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 416 of 2017 established the Maryland Veterans Service Animal 
Program and Fund. The program is designed to refer eligible veterans to selected nonprofit 
training organizations to be paired with “service dogs” or “support dogs” and facilitate 
their training. DVMF must select at least one nonprofit training entity that meets specified 
qualifications to carry out elements of the program. Chapter 465 of 2019 expanded the 
program to include nonprofit training entities that use trained therapy horses for interaction 
with veterans.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 182/ Page 2 
The fund consists of donations collected by DVMF, money appropriated to the fund in the 
State budget, and any other money accepted for the benefit of the fund. Revenue from the 
fund may be used only to pay a nonprofit training entity and for administrative costs of the 
program. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State 
budget.  
 
In fiscal 2025, MDVF issued nine $21,500 grants to nonprofit training entities in  
eight different jurisdictions to provide either equine-assisted therapy or trained service dogs 
to Maryland veterans. The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$211,930 in general funds for the Maryland Veterans Service Animal Program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans and Military Families; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2