START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 114 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 114 
(Senators Simonaire and Jackson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Maryland Department of Labor - Licenses - Notation of Veteran Status and 
Eligibility for Benefits 
 
 
This bill authorizes each unit in the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) to 
establish a process to include a notation indicating veteran status on an occupational 
license. The bill establishes additional specifications for any process implemented by a unit 
of MD Labor. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill is authorizing, to the extent that any unit of MD Labor opts to 
create this process, general fund expenditures increase minimally on a one-time basis as 
early as FY 2026 to modify licenses to include a veteran status notation. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a unit of MD Labor establishes the process authorized by the bill, an 
application for an initial or renewal license must allow an applicant to (1) request that a 
notation of the applicant’s veteran status be included on the license and (2) consent to being 
contacted by appropriate Executive Branch agencies about eligibility for State or 
federal veterans’ benefits. If an applicant submits specified appropriate documentation, a 
unit must include the notation on the applicant’s license. On request from an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 114/ Page 2 
Executive Branch agency and in accordance with the Maryland Public Information Act, a 
unit must electronically transmit – to that agency – appropriate information about the 
applicant. 
 
Current Law:  The Veterans Full Employment Act of 2013 facilitates professional 
licensing for active military personnel, veterans, and their spouses. The Act applies to the 
State’s major licensing agencies, including MD Labor. Under the Act, as amended by 
Chapter 312 of 2019 and Chapter 177 of 2020, occupational and professional licensing 
units within MD Labor must issue expedited standard licenses, registrations, or certificates 
to military service members, veterans, and military spouses if specified education, training, 
and experience conditions are met. One of the conditions is that the applicant holds a 
valid license in good standing from another state and has held that equivalent valid license 
for at least one year. 
 
If the applicant has held that license for less than one year, an expedited temporary license 
may be issued instead, so long as the issuance does not pose a risk to public health, welfare, 
or safety. The temporary license allows the individual to perform regulated services while 
completing additional requirements for licensure in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent a unit of MD Labor elects to establish the process 
specified under the bill, general fund expenditures increase by a minimal amount on a 
one-time-only basis (up to $12,000 for all MD Labor licensing units) as early as fiscal 2026 
to modify MD Labor licenses to include a veteran notation. 
 
This analysis assumes that MD Labor units, should the process be established, could 
electronically transmit appropriate information to Executive Branch agencies (such as the 
Department of Veterans and Military Families) about an applicant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that units of MD Labor elect to establish the process 
specified under the bill and veteran licensees opt for that designation upon license renewal, 
those small business licensees may incur minimal expenses. MD Labor advises that, should 
veteran notations be implemented, an eligible veteran who applies for the notation on their 
license at renewal would receive a new license number. Some licensees, such as home 
improvement contractors, include their license numbers on their vehicles and marketing 
materials. Thus, a veteran licensee who opts for the notation and receives a new license 
number may need to change their vehicle markings and marketing materials. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 114/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military Families; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Military Department; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3