START OF PAGE 1
 
                   
  SB 109 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 109 
(Senator Feldman) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law - School Boards - Compliance Certification 
 
 
This bill requires that, by October 1 of each year, school boards in the State certify to the 
State Ethics Commission (SEC) that they are in compliance with the Maryland Public 
Ethics Law regarding conflicts of interest and financial disclosure statements for 
(1) members of the school board and (2) officials and employees of the school system, if 
applicable. Additionally, the bill clarifies that the definition of “school board” includes the 
Baltimore City Board of School Commissioners.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. Local school boards can update their ethics policies, as needed, with 
existing resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law sets out requirements, prohibitions, and procedures that 
affect officials in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of government for the 
purpose of maintaining people’s trust in government and protecting against the improper 
influence and the appearance of improper influence of government. The Maryland Public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 109/ Page 2 
Ethics Law is administered by SEC with the Joint Committee on Legislative Ethics and the 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities.  
 
Among the requirements, prohibitions, and procedures of the Maryland Public Ethics Law 
are provisions regarding conflicts of interest and financial disclosure statements.  
 
School Board Conflict of Interest and Financial Disclosure Statement Provisions 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law requires local boards of education to adopt conflict of 
interest and financial disclosure provisions for members of the school board. These 
provisions must be equivalent to or exceed the State provisions for officials and employees. 
The law also authorizes local boards of education to adopt conflict of interest regulations 
for officials and employees of the school system, which must be similar to State 
requirements. If a school board does not adopt its own conflict of interest and financial 
disclosure requirements, the comparable provisions enacted by the county apply to officials 
and employees of that school system.  
  
Conflict of Interest 
 
The conflict of interest provisions of the Maryland Public Ethics Law apply to ALL State 
employees, regardless of grade or years of service. Examples of the conflict of interest 
provisions include, but are not limited to:   
 
 
an employee or official may not intentionally use the prestige of his or her office for 
personal gain or that of another;  
 
an official or employee may not participate in an official action, decision or matter 
in circumstances where the official or employee has an interest or where certain 
relatives of the official or employee have an interest;  
 
an official or employee may not hold any employment relationship that would 
impair his or her impartiality or independence of judgment;  
 
an official or employee may not disclose or use for personal economic benefit, or 
that of another, confidential information acquired by reason of his or her public 
position;  
 
a former official or employee may not assist or represent anyone other than the State 
for compensation in a case, contract, or other specific matter involving the State, if 
that matter is one in which he or she significantly participated as an official or 
employee; and 
 
employees may not solicit gifts for themselves or others, and generally may not 
accept gifts from lobbyists or those regulated by or doing (or seeking to do) business 
with the employee’s agency.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 109/ Page 3 
Financial Disclosure Statements  
 
Under current law, public officials, State officials, and candidates for office as a State 
official must file financial disclosure statements with SEC. Statements generally must 
disclose (1) interests in real property; (2) interests in corporations and partnerships; 
(3) interests in and employment by business entities doing business with the State; (4) debts 
owed to entities doing business with or regulated by an individual’s governmental unit; 
(5) family members employed by the State; (6) sources of earned income; and (7) gifts, as 
specified. A filer must disclose an interest held by (1) a spouse or child of an individual, if 
the interest was controlled, directly or indirectly, by the individual at any time during the 
applicable period; (2) a business entity in which the individual held a 10% or greater 
interest at any time during the applicable period; or (3) a trust or estate in which, at any 
time during the applicable period, the individual held a reversionary interest, was a 
beneficiary, or was a settlor, if a revocable trust.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; State Ethics 
Commission; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - January 30, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3