START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 154 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 154 
(Senators Hettleman and Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation and Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations and Judiciary 
 
Access to Counsel in Evictions - Task Force and Special Fund 
 
 
This bill extends through fiscal 2028 the requirements for (1) the Comptroller to distribute 
$14.0 million annually from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to the Access to Counsel 
in Evictions (ACE) Special Fund and (2) the Governor to include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $14.0 million from the ACE Special Fund to the Maryland Legal 
Services Corporation (MLSC). The bill also (1) alters the staffing and appointment 
authority of the Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force from the Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG) to the Department of Housing and Community Development 
(DHCD) and (2) authorizes certain members of the task force to be compensated by DHCD. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $14.0 million in FY 2028, reflecting the 
continued distribution of proceeds from unclaimed property to the ACE Special Fund. 
Special fund revenues to the ACE Special Fund increase correspondingly. Special fund 
expenditures increase by $14.0 million in FY 2028, reflecting the bill’s continued 
mandated appropriation. DHCD can handle the bill’s changes related to the task force with 
existing budgeted resources. This bill continues a mandated distribution and related 
mandated appropriation through FY 2028.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
($14.0) 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$14.0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$14.0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
($14.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 154/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force 
 
Chapter 746 of 2021 established the Access to Counsel in Evictions Task Force. The task 
force consists of up to 15 members appointed by OAG. The task force is required to 
(1) evaluate the provision of services provided under the Access to Counsel in Evictions 
Program (as discussed below), including the performance of designated organizations and 
community groups; (2) study potential funding sources; and (3) make recommendations to 
improve implementation of the provisions of the program, including necessary policy and 
statutory changes.  
 
For a detailed overview of the task force’s activities, see the 2025 Access to Counsel in 
Evictions Task Force Annual Report.  
 
Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund 
 
Chapter 746 also established the ACE Special Fund, a special, nonlapsing fund that is 
administered by MLSC. The fund is authorized to be used for specified purposes related to 
the Access to Counsel in Evictions Program (also administered by MLSC), which was 
created to organize and direct services and resources in order to provide individuals 
meeting certain criteria with access to legal representation in specified judicial or 
administrative proceedings to evict or terminate a tenancy or housing subsidy. Chapter 746 
further required that access to legal representation be phased in over time as MLSC 
determines appropriate, with the goal of full implementation before October 1, 2025. 
Chapter 746 did not include a funding mechanism for this legal representation, and access 
to legal representation under its provisions is subject to the availability of funding.  
 
Chapters 20 and 21 of 2022 altered the funding sources of the ACE Special Fund to include 
funds received by the Consumer Protection Division in OAG from any final settlement, 
agreement, or judgment related to an investigation or enforcement action of the Maryland 
Consumer Protection Act for an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice regarding 
residential rental property. The Acts exclude from the fund any restitution and costs 
incurred by OAG to bring the action.  
 
Additional funding was also provided under Chapter 40 of 2022, which required, for 
fiscal 2024 only, the Comptroller to distribute $14.0 million from the State’s Unclaimed 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 154/ Page 3 
Property Fund to the ACE Special Fund. It also required the Governor include in the annual 
budget bill for fiscal 2024 an appropriation of $14.0 million from the ACE Special Fund 
to MLSC. Chapter 641 of 2023 extended the funding structure provided in Chapter 40 
through fiscal 2027.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill extends the annual distribution of $14.0 million from 
unclaimed property funds to the ACE Special Fund through fiscal 2028. Accordingly, 
annual special fund revenues of $14.0 million for the ACE Special Fund continue through 
fiscal 2028, reflecting that revenue distribution. Because net proceeds from unclaimed 
property are distributed to the general fund (after administrative costs and certain required 
distributions are made), annual general fund revenues correspondingly decrease. The bill 
also extends the requirement for the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $14.0 million from the ACE Special Fund to MLSC. Accordingly, ACE 
Special Fund expenditures continue to correspondingly increase by $14.0 million through 
fiscal 2028. Identical funding mechanisms were established for fiscal 2024 only by 
Chapter 40 and for fiscal 2025 through 2027 by Chapter 641.  
 
DHCD advises that the change in responsibilities related to the administration of the task 
force, including the authorization to provide reasonable compensation for certain members 
of the task force (tenants whose income does not exceed a specified minimum threshold), 
can be handled with existing budgeted resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 103 (Delegate Rosenberg) - Appropriations and Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3