START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 103 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Boating Accidents - Reporting Requirement - Property Damage 
 
 
This bill specifies that for purposes of an existing reporting requirement for accidents 
involving vessels on State waters, property damage to a vessel includes damage to 
navigational aid markers, lights, or identifiers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
Under current law, if any vessel that is subject to the State Boat Act (Title 8, Subtitle 7 of 
the Natural Resources Article) is involved in an accident while on the waters of the State 
and the accident results in the death, disappearance, or injury of any person or in property 
damage of $2,000 or more, or there is complete loss of the vessel, the operator must file a 
report with the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that includes a full description of 
the accident, including any information DNR requires by regulation. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 103/ Page 2 
Under current law, the report must be made within 48 hours if the accident caused a death 
or a disappearance, or if a person receives medical treatment beyond first aid. Any other 
accident involving personal injury or property damage must be reported within 10 days. 
 
Under the bill, for purposes of the 10-day reporting requirement, property damage includes 
damage to navigational aid markers, lights, or identifiers. 
 
Required Contents of Report (Not Altered by the Bill) 
 
Pursuant to DNR regulations (COMAR 08.04.07.01), the report must be dated upon 
completion, signed by the person who prepared it, and provide extensive specified 
information about the accident, including a description of all property damage and vessel 
damage with an estimate of the cost of all repairs. 
 
Accidents on Out-of-state Waters (Not Altered by the Bill) 
 
If any vessel numbered in the State is involved in an accident on waters outside of the State, 
and the accident results in the death, disappearance, or injury of any person or in property 
damage of $2,000 or more, the operator or owner must file a complete report with DNR 
within 30 days. 
 
Evidentiary Provisions (Not Altered by the Bill) 
 
A boating accident report may not be referred to during any judicial proceeding and is not 
subject to subpoena or admissible as evidence in any proceeding. However, information 
contained in a boating accident report and any statistical information based on the report 
may be provided to the U.S. Coast Guard on request for official purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 103/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - February 27, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3