START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 172 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Veterans Trust - Board of Trustees - Membership 
 
 
This bill expands the membership of the Board of Trustees of the Maryland Veterans Trust 
to include the Secretary of Disabilities, ex officio, or the Secretary’s designee.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering the composition of the Board of Trustees does not materially affect 
government finances. The Secretary of Disabilities (or their designee) can serve on the 
Board of Trustees with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 742 of 2009 established the Maryland Veterans Trust and the 
Maryland Veterans Trust Fund (MVTF) to provide monetary and other assistance to 
veterans and their families and public and private programs that support veterans and their 
families. Generally, MVTF consists of (1) gifts and grants; (2) contributions from the sale 
of tickets from instant ticket lottery machines, donations from video lottery facility players, 
designated fees from specified special registration plates, and specified civil penalties 
related to persons providing veterans benefits and veterans benefits appeals services; and 
(3) the net proceeds from contributions under a State income tax checkoff. 
 
Generally, the Board of Trustees of the trust oversees and solicits funds for MVTF. The 
board consists of 11 members, including the secretaries of Aging, Labor, Health, and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 172/ Page 2 
Human Services, ex officio (or their designees), with the Secretary of Veterans and Military 
Families, ex officio (or their designee) serving as chair. The Department of Veterans and 
Military Families must provide staff, supplies, and office space for the trust. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Department of Veterans 
and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - February 28, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2