START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 123 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Boating Accidents - Duty to Stop at the Scene, Render Assistance, and Provide 
Information - Penalties 
 
 
This bill requires the operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other casualty 
that results in bodily injury to or the death of another person to immediately stop the vessel 
as close as possible to the scene of the collision, accident, or casualty for the operator to 
comply with existing statutory requirements to render assistance and provide specified 
information. The bill establishes criminal penalties for failure to stop as required and 
establishes a specific criminal penalty for failure to comply with the existing duty to render 
aid and provide identifying information at the scene of a boating accident. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other casualty 
that results in bodily injury to another person must immediately stop the vessel as close as 
possible to the scene of the collision, accident, or other casualty to comply with existing 
statutory requirements to render assistance and provide identifying information at the scene 
of a boating accident. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment 
for up to one year and/or a $3,000 maximum fine. However, a person is guilty of a felony 
punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine if the 
person (1) failed to stop as required; (2) knew or reasonably should have known that the 
event might result in “serious bodily injury” to another person; and (3) serious bodily injury 
actually occurred to another person. “Serious bodily injury” means an injury that creates a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 123/ Page 2 
substantial risk of death or causes serious permanent or serious protracted 
(1) disfigurement; (2) loss of the function of any body part, organ, or mental faculty; or 
(3) impairment of the function of any body part or organ. 
 
The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other casualty that results in 
the death of another person must immediately stop as close as possible to the scene of the 
collision, accident, or casualty to comply with the existing statutory requirements to render 
assistance and provide identifying information at the scene of a boating accident. Violators 
are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or a 
$5,000 maximum fine. However, a person is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment 
for up to 10 years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine if the person (1) failed to stop as 
required; (2) knew or reasonably should have known that the event might result in the death 
of another person; and (3) death actually occurred to another person. 
 
The bill also establishes a specific criminal penalty for a violation of the existing statutory 
requirement that the operator of a vessel involved in an accident, collision, or other casualty 
(1) render all practical and necessary assistance to affected persons, as specified and 
(2) give specified identifying information to any person injured and to the owner of any 
property damaged. Under the bill, a person who fails to comply with this requirement is 
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to two months and/or a 
$500 maximum fine. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Boat Act – Boating Accidents 
 
In addition to any other duties imposed by law, the operator of a vessel involved in a 
collision, accident, or other casualty must render all practical and necessary assistance to 
affected persons in order to save the persons from danger caused by the accident to the 
extent that the operator can do so without serious danger to the operator’s own vessel or 
persons aboard. The operator must also give their name, their address, and identification of 
the vessel to any person injured and to the owner of any property damaged. A person who 
complies with this requirement or who gratuitously and in good faith renders (or attempts 
to render) assistance to any vessel in distress on any water of the State without objection 
from an assisted person, is not liable for any civil damage as the result of any act or 
omission by the person in rendering assistance unless the act or omission amounts to gross 
negligence. 
 
The operator of a specified vessel (or in limited circumstances the vessel owner) must 
report to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) a full description of specified 
accidents, including any information DNR requires by regulation, as follows: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 123/ Page 3 
 
if the accident occurred on State waters and caused the death or disappearance of 
any person or a person to receive medical treatment beyond first aid, the report must 
be made within 48 hours; 
 
if the accident occurred on State waters and results in any other injury or property 
damage of at least $2,000, the report must be made within 10 days; and 
 
if any vessel numbered in the State is involved in an accident outside of State waters 
and the accident results in the death, disappearance, or injury of a person or in 
property damage of at least $2,000, the report must be made within 30 days. 
 
The specified reports may not be referred to during any judicial proceeding and are not 
subject to subpoena or admissible as evidence in any proceeding. However, information 
contained in a boating accident report and any statistical information based on the report 
may be provided to the U.S. Coast Guard on request for official purposes. 
 
Applicable Penalties 
 
Unless another penalty is specifically provided elsewhere, any person who violates any 
provision of the State Boat Act is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a maximum 
penalty of (1) for a first conviction, a $500 fine or (2) for a second or subsequent conviction 
within two years of any prior violation of the State Boat Act, one year imprisonment and/or 
a $1,000 fine. In either instance, costs are imposed in the discretion of the court. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 585 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 676 (Delegate Schmidt, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore and Garrett counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 123/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4