START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 163 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health – General Article – References to Mental Health 
 
 
This bill generally replaces remaining references to “mental hygiene” with “mental health” 
in the Health-General Article. Uncodified language requires the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH), by July 1, 2027, to review departmental regulations and replace any 
remaining references to “mental hygiene” with “mental health.” As soon as practicable, 
MDH must update all public-facing electronic materials accordingly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The impact is small enough that it can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 214 of 2017 renamed the Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene to be the Maryland Department of Health and renamed the Secretary of Health 
and Mental Hygiene to be the Secretary of Health. 
 
Limited mentions of “mental hygiene” remain in the code, including the Mental Hygiene 
Community-Based Services Fund and the Maryland Mental Hygiene Law, among other 
miscellaneous references. Several references to “mental hygiene” remain in Maryland 
regulations, most significantly in COMAR 10.21 – Mental Hygiene Regulations. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH notes that other State agencies still use the term “mental 
hygiene” in their regulations, though the bill only requires MDH to update its regulations. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 163/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2