START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 271 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 271 
(Senator Jackson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act - Employees of an Office of a Sheriff 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “State personnel” under the Maryland Tort Claims Act 
(MTCA) to include an employee of the office of a sheriff of a county or Baltimore City. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund expenditures for the State Insurance Trust 
Fund (SITF) for tort claims involving sheriffs’ employees, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal decrease in local expenditures for tort claims involving sheriffs’ 
employees, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some 
local officials and nonprofit organizations. While MTCA generally defines “State 
personnel” as a State employee or official who is paid in whole or in part by the Central 
Payroll Bureau in the Office of the Comptroller of the Treasury, sheriffs and deputy sheriffs 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 271/ Page 2 
of a county or Baltimore City are specifically included as State personnel for purposes of 
the Act. 
 
Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own common law (sovereign) immunity on 
a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or omissions, including State constitutional 
torts, by State personnel performed in the course of their official duties, so long as the acts 
or omissions are made without malice or gross negligence. Under MTCA, the State 
essentially “waives sovereign or governmental immunity and substitutes the liability of the 
State for the liability of the state employee committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline,  
384 Md. 245, 262 (2004). Lawsuits filed under MTCA typically proceed against the State 
as the named defendant, not the State employee. 
 
In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the scope of the public 
duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the State’s color of 
authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. 
 
The State does not waive its immunity for punitive damages. Attorney’s fees are included 
in the liability cap under MTCA. Under MTCA, attorneys may not charge or receive a fee 
that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 25% of a judgment. 
 
Chapters 610 and 611 of 2024 – Tort Claims Involving Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs  
(Not Amended by the Bill) 
 
Sheriffs and deputy sheriffs perform local functions as the principal law enforcement 
entities in some counties and State functions expressly assigned to sheriffs in Maryland 
common law and statute. In general, counties are liable for the law enforcement and 
detention center activities of sheriffs and deputy sheriffs, and the State is liable for all other 
sheriff and deputy sheriff functions (e.g., courthouse security, service of process, and 
personnel and administrative functions). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 271/ Page 3 
Chapters 610 and 611 clarify the responsibilities of the State and local governments and 
establish related procedures for claims filed in State court under MTCA against a sheriff 
or deputy sheriff engaged in a “detention center function” or “law enforcement function.” 
“Detention center function” includes (1) operating and administering a detention center 
and (2) supervising personnel who perform those functions. “Law enforcement function” 
includes conducting patrol, making stops and arrests, investigating criminal offenses, and 
supervising personnel who perform those functions. 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 610 and 611, special provisions apply to a tort claim filed in State 
court against a sheriff, a deputy sheriff, or the State claiming tortious conduct by a sheriff 
or a deputy sheriff arising out of activities related to the performance of a law enforcement 
function or a detention center function. These types of tort claims must be considered 
defended, settled, and paid in the same manner as any other claim filed against a county. 
The State is the proper defendant in these tort claims, and the county may not be named as 
a defendant in these tort claims. 
 
Liability for this type of tort claim may not exceed the State’s waiver of immunity under 
MTCA, and the State Treasurer is not liable for this type of tort claim under provisions that 
address property loss or damage. The duties, responsibilities, and liabilities of the State 
under MTCA for this type of tort claim must be assumed by the applicable county. 
 
Chapters 610 and 611 also amended Section 9-108 of the State Finance and Procurement 
Article, which applies to a sheriff or deputy sheriff engaged in specified activities, 
including law enforcement functions and detention center functions. Section 9-108  
authorizes a county or Baltimore City to obtain insurance to provide the coverage and 
defense necessary under MTCA. If a county or Baltimore City does not obtain adequate 
insurance coverage to satisfy the coverage and defense necessary under MTCA, an 
assessment for coverage and for payment of any litigation expenses, other than for 
compensation for the time spent by any State employee working for the Attorney General, 
must be set off from (1) any tax that has been appropriated in the State budget to the county 
or Baltimore City or (2) the subdivision’s share of any income tax collected by the State 
Comptroller. 
 
Chapters 610 and 611 also specify that it is the intent of the General Assembly that: 
 
 
counties bear responsibility for all matters related to the performance by sheriffs and 
deputy sheriffs of a county or Baltimore City for law enforcement functions and 
detention center functions; 
 
the list of activities included within the definitions of law enforcement functions and 
detention center functions are illustrative and not exhaustive; and 
 
the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the State Treasurer work 
cooperatively with the Maryland Association of Counties (MACo), the counties, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 271/ Page 4 
and the counties’ respective insurers when disputes arise regarding the allocation of 
responsibility for these types of tort claims. 
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act 
 
The Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA) establishes that a local government is 
liable for tortious acts or omissions of its employees acting within the scope of 
employment, so long as the employee did not act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA 
prevents local governments from asserting a common law claim of governmental immunity 
from liability for such acts or omissions of its employees. 
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). Higher liability 
limits apply to claims involving law enforcement officers that arise on or after July 1, 2022, 
and claims involving child sexual abuse. 
 
State Expenditures:  Claims under MTCA are paid out of SITF, which is administered by 
the State Treasurer’s Office (STO). Agencies pay premiums to SITF that are comprised of 
an assessment for each employee covered and SITF payments for torts committed by the 
agency’s employees. An agency’s loss history, consisting of settlements and judgments 
incurred since the last budget cycle, comprises part of the agency’s annual premium. 
 
The bill increases the pool of claims filed under MTCA and paid by SITF but does not 
identify a source to assess premiums for these MTCA claims. Thus, special fund 
expenditures increase minimally for SITF payments of tort claims involving sheriffs’ 
employees. This estimate assumes that STO can investigate applicable tort claims with 
existing budgeted resources. OAG, which is involved in MTCA litigation, advises that the 
bill minimally impacts OAG. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local government expenditures decrease minimally for litigation 
and payments of tort claims involving sheriffs’ employees and potentially decreased 
insurance premiums. MACo advises that the bill may result in minimal savings for any 
jurisdiction that is currently assuming the liability and representation of civilian employees 
of a sheriff’s office. 
 
Baltimore City advises that its sheriff’s office has 120 nonlaw enforcement employees, 
68 of which are court security officers. The court security officers perform functions 
related to court security and judicial protection; the remaining employees are tasked with 
various responsibilities, including records management, process serving, fleet 
management, human resources, and finance. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 271/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced during the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1507 (Delegate Toles) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Washington County; Maryland State Treasurer’s 
Office; Maryland Association of Counties; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - February 14, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5