START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 285 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 285 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Office of the 
Attorney General) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Maryland Protecting Opportunities and Regional Trade (PORT) Act - Reports of 
Attorney General - Frequency 
 
 
This bill reduces, from once a month to every six months, the frequency by which the 
Attorney General must report to the General Assembly on the status of pursuing and 
recovering economic damages arising from the closure of the Port of Baltimore and the 
collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The alteration to the reporting requirement does not affect State 
finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Among other emergency provisions enacted in response to the March 2024 
collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge, Chapters 2 and 3 of 2024 (“Maryland Protecting 
Opportunities and Regional Trade (PORT) Act”) require the Attorney General to pursue 
all available options, including filing actions against the applicable parties, to recover for 
the State all possible economic damages arising from the collapse of the Francis Scott Key 
Bridge and related closure of the Port of Baltimore. The Acts further require the 
Attorney General to report to the General Assembly on a monthly basis beginning 
July 1, 2024, on the status of pursuing and recovering the economic damages, until all 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 285/ Page 2 
available options pursued are exhausted or resolved. The Attorney General’s January report 
on the status of these efforts can be found here. 
 
Background:  On September 24, 2024, the Attorney General, on behalf of the State and 
all its agencies, filed a lawsuit against the owners of the motor vessel Dali for causing the 
allision with the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024, which destroyed the bridge 
and resulted in the death of six men and injuries of two others. The full complaint can be 
found here. As detailed in the complaint, the resulting wreckage from the allision fell into 
the Patapsco River, blocking the Fort McHenry Channel and interrupting all commercial 
vessel traffic into or out of the Port of Baltimore. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2