START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 207 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 207 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Drunk and Drug-Impaired Driving and Failure to Remain at the Scene - 
Revocation of Driver's License 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the list of circumstances under which the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA) is required to revoke an individual’s driver’s license to include 
convictions for specified drunk or drugged driving offenses resulting in the death or 
life-threatening injury of another person and failure to remain at the scene of an accident 
resulting in death or serious bodily injury. If an individual’s license is revoked under such 
circumstances, the individual must wait until five years after the revoked license is 
surrendered to and received by MVA to file a reinstatement application. However, if MVA 
finds that the five-year waiting period would cause undue hardship or extenuating 
circumstances exist, the individual may file a reinstatement application after two years. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be handled by MVA with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 207/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
License Revocation 
 
The bill requires MVA to revoke the license of any individual who has been convicted of 
any of the following offenses: 
 
 
driving while under the influence of alcohol or alcohol per se, impaired by alcohol, 
impaired by any drug, impaired by any combination of drugs, impaired by a 
combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, or impaired by a controlled 
dangerous substance (CDS), if the person’s driving contributed to an accident that 
resulted in the death or life-threatening injury of another; or 
 
failing to remain at the scene of an accident that resulted in the death or serious 
bodily injury of another. 
 
License Reinstatement 
 
Generally, an individual whose license is revoked due to committing one of the preceding 
offenses is prohibited from filing a reinstatement application until five years after the 
revoked license is surrendered and received by MVA. However, if MVA finds that not 
allowing an individual to file a reinstatement application would cause undue hardship or 
extenuating circumstances exist, the individual may file a reinstatement application 
two years after their revoked license is surrendered to and received by MVA. In the case 
of an individual who does not have a license issued under State law, the individual must 
wait five years from the effective date of revocation to file a reinstatement application, or 
two years from that date if MVA makes the finding described above. 
 
If a timely application for reinstatement is filed, MVA is authorized to reinstate an 
individual’s license, unless otherwise prohibited. 
 
Current Law: 
 
License Revocation and Suspension (§ 16-205 of the Transportation Article) 
 
MVA must revoke the license of any individual who has been convicted of homicide by 
motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, impaired by alcohol, impaired by a 
drug, any combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, or 
impaired by a CDS. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 207/ Page 3 
MVA may, but is not required to, revoke the license of an individual who is convicted of 
driving or attempting to drive while (1) under the influence of alcohol, under the influence 
of alcohol per se, or impaired by a CDS or (2) impaired by alcohol or impaired by a drug, 
any combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol and who was 
previously convicted of two or more specified drunk or drugged driving violations within 
a three-year period. 
 
MVA may suspend for up to 60 days the license of an individual who is convicted of 
driving while impaired by alcohol or while impaired by any drug, combination of drugs, 
or combination of one or more drugs and alcohol. In addition, MVA may impose a 
suspension for up to one year if an individual is convicted more than once within a 
five-year period of any combination of drunk or drugged driving offenses. These 
suspensions are concurrent with any other suspension or revocation imposed by MVA 
arising out of circumstances of the conviction. 
 
Assessment of Points (§§ 16-402 and 16-404 of the Transportation Article) 
 
MVA assesses points against a driver who is convicted of any moving violation, including 
a drunk or drugged driving crime. A conviction for any drunk or drugged driving homicide 
or life-threatening injury results in the imposition of 12 points. A conviction for driving 
under the influence of alcohol, under the influence of alcohol per se, or while impaired by 
a CDS carries with it 12 points. A conviction for failure to stop or immediately return to 
and remain at the scene after an accident that results in the death of or bodily injury to 
another person is subject to 12 points. MVA is required to revoke the license of an 
individual who accumulates 12 points within a two-year period. A revocation continues 
indefinitely until the driver applies for and is approved by MVA for reinstatement. A 
conviction for driving while impaired by alcohol, while impaired by a drug, a combination 
of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, or within 12 hours after an 
arrest for a drunk or drugged driving offense carries with it 8 points. MVA is required to 
suspend the license of an individual who accumulates 8 points within a two-year period. 
MVA determines the duration of a suspension, which is subject to specified time limits. 
 
MVA may modify a suspension and issue a restrictive license that limits the purposes for 
which the person may drive, (e.g., for work or education purposes). MVA also is 
specifically authorized to modify a post-conviction drunk driving license suspension or 
revocation for purposes of a person’s participation in the Maryland Ignition Interlock 
System Program. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 207/ Page 4 
License Reinstatement (§ 16-208 of the Transportation Article) 
 
An individual whose license or privilege to drive has been revoked may apply for 
reinstatement according to the following schedule: 
 
 
any time after a first revocation;  
 
one year following a second revocation;  
 
18 months following a third revocation; and 
 
two years following a fourth or subsequent revocation.  
 
In general, MVA is authorized to reinstate an individual’s license upon submission of a 
timely reinstatement application or, in the case of a first revocation, six months after the 
application. However, if an individual’s license or privilege has been refused, revoked, 
suspended, or canceled under any other provision of the Maryland Vehicle Law, the license 
or privilege may not be reinstated. Under certain circumstances (including some of the 
circumstances to which the bill applies), MVA may only reinstate a license if, after 
conducting an investigation of an individual’s habits, MVA is satisfied that it would be 
safe to do so. 
 
Background:  According to data from the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, nationally, the percentage of highway fatalities associated with alcohol 
impairment has hovered around 30% from 1995 through 2021. In 2022, the latest year for 
which national data is available, there were 42,514 traffic fatalities nationally, of which 
13,524 of those fatalities, or 32%, involved a driver with a blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) of 0.08 or higher. For the same period in Maryland, out of a total of  
564 traffic fatalities, 207, or 37%, involved a driver with a BAC of 0.08 or higher. 
 
According to MVA, extending the length of revocation in the circumstances addressed by 
the bill takes into consideration the nature of and safety issues associated with vehicular 
offenses that result in fatalities or life-threatening injuries.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 70 (Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Transportation) - Judiciary. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 207/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; National Highway Traffic Safety Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 207/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Drunk and Drug-Impaired Driving and Failure to Remain at the 
Scene - Revocation of Driver’s License 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 207 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill will have no or minimal economic impact on small businesses.  The number of 
individuals whose ability to request to reinstate their license would be extended is small, 
but this bill could limit the ability of small businesses to employ these individuals 
because of the individual’s potential transportation issues. 
 

END OF PAGE 6