START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 415

Chapter 415

(Senate Bill 228)

AN ACT concerning

Limited Line Credit Insurance – Qualification of Applicants

FOR the purpose of altering certain requirements relating to programs of instruction for
applicants for certain limited lines credit insurance licenses; and generally relating
to programs of instruction for limited line credit insurance.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 10–104 and 10–105
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

10–104.

(a) This section applies to:

(1) a license to act as an insurance producer for insurance other than life
insurance, health insurance, or annuities;

(2) a limited lines license to act as an insurance producer for limited line
credit insurance other than credit life insurance or credit health insurance; and

(3) a limited lines license to act as an insurance producer for a line of
insurance described in §§ 10–122 through 10–125 of this subtitle.

(b) To qualify for a license to which this section applies, an individual applicant
must meet the requirements of this section.

(c) An applicant must be of good character and trustworthy based on the
standards of § 10–126 of this subtitle.

(d) An applicant must be at least 18 years of age.

(e) An applicant may not have committed any act that the Commissioner finds
would warrant denial of a license under § 10–126 of this subtitle.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 415 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) (1) In the case of an applicant for a limited lines license to act as an
insurance producer for limited line credit insurance, the applicant shall complete
successfully a program of instruction that is:

[(1)] (I) provided by an insurer that sells, solicits, or negotiates limited
line credit insurance; and

[(2)] (II) [approved by the Commissioner] DESIGNED TO PROVIDE A
COMPREHENSIVE AND ACCURATE EXPLANATION OF THE PRODUCT.

(2) (I) THE INSURER THAT PROVIDES THE PROGRAM OF
INSTRUCTION SHALL RETAIN RECORDS RELATING TO THE PROGRAM OF
INSTRUCTION WHILE IN USE AND FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 5 YEARS AFTER ITS
LAST USE.

(II) THE RECORDS SHALL INCLUDE:

1. COPIES OF THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS; AND

2. A LIST OF THE APPLICANTS AND PRODUCERS WHO
HAVE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED THE PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION.

(III) THE INSURER SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE
COMMISSIONER THE RECORDS RELATING TO THE PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION AT
THE REQUEST OF THE COMMISSIONER.

(g) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the applicant must pass an
examination given by the Commissioner under this subtitle.

(h) An applicant for a limited lines license to act as an insurance producer for
limited line credit insurance need not meet the examination requirements of subsection (g)
of this section.

(i) An applicant may be licensed as to any particular kind or kinds of insurance.

10–105.

(a) To qualify for a license as an insurance producer for life insurance, health
insurance, annuities, nonprofit health service plans, dental plan organizations, health
maintenance organizations, or fraternal benefit societies an individual applicant must meet
the requirements of this section.

(b) An applicant must be of good character and trustworthy based on the
standards of § 10–126 of this subtitle.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 415

(c) An applicant must be at least 18 years of age.

(d) An applicant may not have committed any act that the Commissioner finds
would warrant denial of a license under § 10–126 of this subtitle.

(e) (1) In the case of an applicant for a limited lines license to act as an
insurance producer for credit life insurance or credit health insurance, the applicant shall
successfully complete a program of instruction that is:

[(1)] (I) provided by an insurer that sells, solicits, or negotiates limited
line credit insurance; and

[(2)] (II) [approved by the Commissioner] DESIGNED TO PROVIDE A
COMPREHENSIVE AND ACCURATE EXPLANATION OF THE PRODUCT.

(2) (I) THE INSURER THAT PROVIDES THE PROGRAM OF
INSTRUCTION SHALL RETAIN RECORDS RELATING TO THE PROGRAM OF
INSTRUCTION WHILE IN USE AND FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 5 YEARS AFTER ITS
LAST USE.

(II) THE RECORDS SHALL INCLUDE:

1. COPIES OF THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS; AND

2. A LIST OF THE APPLICANTS AND PRODUCERS WHO
HAVE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED THE PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION.

(III) THE INSURER SHALL MAKE THE RECORDS RELATING TO
THE PROGRAM OF INSTRUCTION AVAILABLE TO THE COMMISSIONER AT THE
REQUEST OF THE COMMISSIONER.

(f) Before taking a written examination, an applicant shall pay the application
fee required under § 2–112(a)(6)(vi) of this article.

(g) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the applicant must
pass an examination given by the Commissioner under this subtitle.

(2) The following applicants are not required to take an examination:

(i) an applicant for a license to act as an insurance producer only for
selling credit life insurance or credit accident and health insurance or both to a borrower of
money or buyer of goods in connection with a loan or credit transaction;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 415 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) an applicant for a license to act as an insurance producer for a
dental plan organization if the applicant for compensation solicited, procured, or negotiated
contracts for dental plan organizations continuously from July 1, 1988, to June 30, 1989;

(iii) an applicant for a license to act as an insurance producer for a
nonprofit health service plan if the applicant for compensation solicited, procured, or
negotiated contracts for nonprofit health service plans continuously from July 1, 1988, to
June 30, 1989; or

(iv) an applicant for a license to act as an insurance producer for a
health maintenance organization if the applicant for compensation solicited, procured, or
negotiated contracts for health maintenance organizations continuously from July 1, 1988,
to June 30, 1989.

(h) An applicant may be licensed as to any particular kind or kinds of insurance.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4