START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 200 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Teachers and State Employees 
Supplemental Retirement Plans) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental 
Retirement Plans - Renaming 
 
 
This departmental bill renames the State Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and 
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans to be the State Board of Trustees of the 
State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Renaming the board does not affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental 
Retirement Plans (MSRP) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small 
business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The various plans under MSRP are administered by a board of trustees, as 
established in Title 35 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article. The board has 
responsibility over four plan options:  401(k) and 457(b) plans for State employees; 
403(b) plans for employees of State educational institutions; and a 401(a) State matching 
plan that was relaunched in fiscal 2024. MSRP staff supports the board of trustees’ work 
in selecting investment options and overseeing operations. MSRP staff also provides 
educational programs and information to State employees and human resources personnel. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 200/ Page 2 
MSRP finances operations through a fee imposed on members’ accounts based on a 
percentage of assets in the plans and a flat-rate monthly charge. The board fee is currently 
composed of a 0.0425% asset fee and a monthly per account charge of $0.50 on every 
account with at least $500 (except for 401(a) match plan accounts). The board contracts 
with Nationwide Retirement Solutions, Inc. (Nationwide) for plan administration. The 
Nationwide contract requires a management fee of 0.0775% of assets. Therefore, the 
reported total participant fee is 0.11% of plan assets and a $0.50 charge on specified 
accounts. 
 
Background:  The board’s name includes “teachers” because teachers who work for local 
school systems are eligible to participate in the 403(b) plan administered by the board. 
However, no teachers currently participate as local school systems offer their own 
supplemental retirement plans. According to the board, the inclusion of “teachers” has 
caused confusion among State employees, as some are not sure if they are eligible to 
participate in the board’s plans because they are not teachers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 144 (Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement Plans) - 
Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental 
Retirement Plans; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 200/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Board of Trustees of the Maryland Teachers and State Employees 
Supplemental Retirement Plans - Renaming 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 200 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Teachers and State Employees Supplemental Retirement 
Plans 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
None 
 

END OF PAGE 3