START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 250 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 250 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Environment) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of the Environment - Fees, Penalties, Funding, and Regulation 
 
 
This departmental bill increases several fees and penalties that support various programs 
and special funds within the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). The bill 
also, among other things, (1) authorizes MDE to establish new fees for specified programs; 
(2) alters and enhances the State’s regulatory framework governing dams and establishes 
a related special fund; and (3) makes various administrative, clarifying, and technical 
changes. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2025, but provisions affecting the 
Maryland Clean Air Fund take effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues from fees may increase minimally in FY 2025 and 
increase by an estimated $5.0 million in FY 2026. The bill effectuates contingent language 
in the FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly; as a result, special fund 
expenditures increase by $6.7 million in FY 2026. Future years reflect ongoing fee 
revenues, costs, and inflation. Other effects are discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$5.0 
$7.2 
$7.3 
$7.4 
$7.4 
SF Expenditure 
$6.7 
$6.4 
$6.4 
$6.5 
$6.5 
Net Effect 
($1.7) 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.9 
$0.9 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Any increase in costs for local governments to pay new or increased fees 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time but are not anticipated to be significant, as 
discussed below. Local revenues are not materially affected. This bill may impose a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 250/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDE has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Broadly, the bill makes various changes to MDE’s 
regulatory authority, the special funds it uses to carry out its statutory duties, and the fees 
that generate revenue for those special funds. Changes to the Maryland Clean Air Fund 
take effect June 1, 2025; the bill’s other changes take effect July 1, 2025. Generally, the 
bill: 
 
 
effective June 1, 2025, makes the following changes to the Maryland Clean Air 
Fund:  (1) expands the purpose of the fund; (2) repeals the requirement that when 
the fund balance is at least $2.0 million, any additional money received by MDE for 
the fund must be deposited into the general fund; and (3) increases the cap on the 
emissions-based air quality operating permit fees set by MDE; 
 
alters and enhances the regulatory framework governing the construction, 
reconstruction, repair, removal, modification, and operation of dams by, among 
other things, (1) requiring dam owners to annually register with MDE and 
(2) establishing a new special fund and related fees; 
 
authorizes MDE to charge specified fees related to on-site sewage disposal system 
(septic system) permits and individual well construction permits under specified 
circumstances; 
 
increases the per-barrel oil transfer fee that supports the Maryland Oil Disaster 
Containment, Clean-up and Contingency Fund (Oil Fund) for fiscal 2026 through 
2030; and 
 
requires MDE to include additional information in the factors used to calculate the 
annual fees that must be paid by a generator of coal combustion by-products (CCB) 
(which accrue to the State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund) and, 
consequently, requires additional entities to pay the fee. 
 
A more detailed discussion of each of these changes, as well as relevant current law, is 
discussed below. 
 
Maryland Clean Air Fund 
 
Under current law, the Maryland Clean Air Fund must be used to conduct activities related 
to identifying, monitoring, and regulating air pollution in the State and to provide grants to 
local governments to supplement funding for programs that are consistent with ambient air 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 250/ Page 3 
quality control. When the fund equals or exceeds a maximum limit of $2.0 million, 
additional money received for the fund by MDE must be deposited into the general fund. 
 
Under the bill, effective June 1, 2025: 
 
 
the purpose of the fund is expanded to include mitigating and reducing air pollution 
in the State; 
 
additional money received for the fund when the fund balance equals or exceeds 
$2.0 million is no longer required to be deposited into the general fund; 
 
the maximum amount of the emissions-based fee that MDE may establish for 
air quality permits to operate is increased from $50 per ton of regulated emissions 
to $200 per ton of regulated emissions; and 
 
a clarifying change is made regarding MDE’s ability to adjust the emissions-based 
fee to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), regardless of 
federal authorization. 
 
Water Appropriation and Use (Including the Regulation of Dams) 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 5 of the Environment Article governs the appropriation or use of waters, 
reservoirs, and dams in the State. In order to conserve, protect, and use water resources in 
accordance with the best interests of the people of Maryland, it is the policy of the State to 
control, so far as is feasible, the appropriation or use of surface waters and groundwaters 
of the State. Generally, a permit must be obtained from MDE to appropriate or use, or to 
construct any structure that may appropriate or use any waters of the State. Permits must 
also be obtained from MDE to construct, reconstruct, or repair any reservoir, dam, or 
waterway obstruction; and to construct, reconstruct, change, or make an addition to any 
conduit, pipeline, wire cable, trestle, or other device, structure, or apparatus in, under, 
through, or over the bed or waters of the Potomac River, as specified. 
 
Under current law, in addition to being subject to an injunctive action, a person who 
violates any provision of Title 5, Subtitle 5 of the Environment Article relating to water 
appropriation and use, or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under any 
such provision is liable for a civil penalty up to $5,000 per violation. Each day is a separate 
violation. Additionally, a person who violates any provision of Title 5, Subtitle 5 of the 
Environment Article or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under the subtitle is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to fines, 
imprisonment, and enjoinment, as specified under § 9-343 of the Environment Article. 
 
Pursuant to Title 5, Subtitle 5, MDE’s Dam Safety Program is responsible for regulating 
the design, construction, operation, and maintenance of dams in Maryland to prevent dam 
failures and the consequences of that failure. To that end, MDE conducts inspections based 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 250/ Page 4 
on hazard classes of dams; evaluates downstream hazard conditions; issues permits for 
construction, repairs, and modifications; conducts construction inspections; and works 
with dam owners and emergency management professionals to develop and exercise an 
emergency action plan in the event of a dam failure. Under specified circumstances, MDE 
may take emergency actions necessary to protect life, property, or the environment. 
 
The bill alters and enhances the regulatory framework related to the construction, 
reconstruction, repair, removal, modification, and operation of dams in the State; however, 
the bill may not be construed to expand the definition or scope of what is considered a dam 
under State law and regulation. Specifically, the bill: 
 
 
establishes a Private Dam Repair Fund to provide financial assistance for the repair, 
upgrade, or removal of private dams, as discussed in more detail below; 
 
requires “dam safety permit” applicants to pay a dam safety permit fee, which is 
paid into the Private Dam Repair Fund; 
 
requires dam owners (as defined by the bill), beginning January 1, 2027, to annually 
register their dams with MDE and pay a registration fee, which is also paid into the 
Private Dam Repair Fund; 
 
requires MDE to (1) notify affected dam owners about the registration fee by 
October 1, 2025, and by October 1, 2026, and (2) establish criteria to fully or 
partially waive the registration fee due to financial hardship, as specified; 
 
expands the scope of an existing civil penalty applicable to violations of the water 
appropriation and use provisions of Title 5, Subtitle 5 (which are paid to the 
Maryland Clean Water Fund) to apply to any violation of Title 5, Subtitle 5 and 
increases the maximum civil penalty from $5,000 to $10,000 per violation; 
 
applies specified existing criminal penalties applicable to violations of Title 5, 
Subtitle 5 to the bill’s provisions governing dam regulation; and 
 
specifies that funds collected from any such penalties relating to an unsafe 
condition, as defined, must be paid into the Private Dam Repair Fund. 
 
Private Dam Repair Fund:  The Private Dam Repair Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund 
administered by the Maryland Water Infrastructure Financing Administration within MDE. 
Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. The 
fund consists of dam safety permit fees, dam owner registration fees, loan repayments, 
specified penalties, funds appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
The fund may be used only for (1) providing direct financial assistance to private dam 
owners for MDE-directed upgrades, repairs, or removals; (2) making loans in accordance 
with the bill; (3) funding emergency repairs and removals of private dams performed by 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 250/ Page 5 
MDE; and (4) reimbursing the administrative cost to MDE of processing and issuing dam 
safety permits and performing its other duties related to dam regulation. 
 
Beginning July 1, 2028, MDE may provide loans from the fund to owners of private dams 
for the purpose of repairing or removing private dams deemed to be in an unsafe condition 
by MDE. MDE may establish criteria for awarding loans, and the bill establishes various 
provisions regarding eligibility, applications, loan terms and amounts, and loan 
repayments, among other things. MDE must adopt regulations to implement the loan 
program. 
 
The bill also establishes a reporting requirement for MDE related to the fund. 
 
Dam Safety Permits and Related Fees:  The bill establishes that a permit issued under 
§ 5-503 of the Environment Article to construct, reconstruct, repair, remove, or modify a 
dam is called a “dam safety permit.” Under the bill, MDE must collect a dam safety permit 
fee prior to issuing such a permit. The application for a dam safety permit must include the 
estimated project construction cost; the dam safety permit fee must be based on the 
estimated project construction cost and may not exceed 3% of the estimated project 
construction cost. As noted above, dam safety permit fees are paid into the Private Dam 
Repair Fund. 
 
These provisions do not apply to a reservoir, dam, waterway obstruction, or small pond 
that is exempt from obtaining a dam safety permit under current law. 
 
Dam Registration and Related Fees:  Except as specified, beginning January 1, 2027, all 
“dam owners,” as defined in the bill, must register their dams annually with MDE. To 
register, a dam owner must submit a specified application to MDE and pay a registration 
fee. The registration fee is $200 for a low hazard lass dam, $500 for a significant hazard 
class dam, or $1,000 for a high hazard class dam. MDE must establish criteria to fully or 
partially waive the registration fee due to financial hardship; the waiver criteria must 
prioritize individual homeowners. As noted above, registration fees are paid into the 
Private Dam Repair Fund. 
 
The registration provisions apply to a dam that is included in the Maryland Dam Inventory 
and is not owned by the federal government. The provisions do not apply to a reservoir, 
dam, waterway obstruction, or small pond that is exempt from obtaining a dam safety 
permit under current law. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 250/ Page 6 
Maryland Clean Water Fund and New Fee Authority for Septic System and Well 
Construction Permits 
 
Under current law, the Maryland Clean Water Fund consists of all application fees, permit 
fees, renewal fees, funds, and civil and administrative penalties collected under specified 
water pollution control laws. MDE must use the Maryland Clean Water Fund for specified 
activities and purposes that, broadly speaking, address water quality and wastewater 
treatment. In determining the use of money from the fund, priority must be given to 
activities relating to the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries. 
 
Under the bill, if MDE processes and issues septic system or individual well construction 
permits, MDE may charge a fee for processing and issuing the permits if a licensed 
environmental health specialist reviews and approves the permits. The fee may not exceed 
$575; however, MDE may annually increase the fees for inflation, as specified. In adjusting 
the fees for inflation, MDE may not annually increase the fees by more than 3%. Fees 
collected by MDE under these provisions must be deposited into the Maryland Clean Water 
Fund. The bill also expands the committees of the General Assembly that must receive a 
related annual enforcement report from MDE. 
 
The Maryland Oil Disaster Containment, Clean-up and Contingency Fund and the Oil 
Transfer Fee 
 
The Oil Fund was established in 1986 to provide funding to MDE’s oil pollution prevention 
programs, such as permitting, enforcement, and oil spill response. A fee was imposed on 
each barrel of oil transferred into the State. The fee has been increased and extended 
multiple times since its establishment. Under current law, the fee is 5.0 cents per barrel. 
 
Pursuant to current law, costs incurred by the State from the Oil Fund are required to be 
reimbursed by responsible parties; reimbursements are also deposited into the fund. When 
the fund balance exceeds $5.0 million, monthly oil transfer fees are suspended until the 
balance is $4.0 million, or until there is evidence that the balance could be significantly 
reduced by recent discharges. 
 
The bill (1) expressly requires the licensee that owns the oil when the oil is first transferred 
into the State to pay the per-barrel fee and (2) increases the per-barrel fee from 5.0 cents 
per barrel to 9.0 cents per barrel from July 1, 2025, to June 30, 2030. (Under the bill, 
beginning July 1, 2030, the fee returns to 5.0 cents per barrel.) 
 
State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund 
 
Chapter 480 of 2009 established a CCB Management Fund comprising fees collected by 
MDE on each ton of CCBs generated. The money generated from the fee must be used to 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 250/ Page 7 
administer and implement programs to control the disposal, use, beneficial use, recycling, 
processing, 
handling, 
storage, 
transport, 
or 
other 
requirements 
related 
to 
CCB management. 
 
Under current law, MDE is required to, by regulation, establish and collect a fee to be paid 
by a generator of CCBs based on a per ton rate of CCBs generated by the generator 
annually. MDE must base the fees on the following factors:  (1) the total annual tonnage 
of CCBs that the generator generates; (2) the type and volume of CCBs generated by the 
generator; (3) whether the generator uses or disposes of the CCBs; (4) to the extent that the 
CCBs are used rather than disposed of, the types of the uses; (5) whether the CCBs are 
transported for use or disposal out-of-state; and (6) other factors MDE considers 
appropriate. 
 
Current regulations establish that the initial base fee for each ton of CCBs generated is 
$1.15, but the fee is adjusted annually to ensure that fee revenues approximate the cost of 
regulatory activities as required in statute. Statute prohibits the fee from being imposed on 
CCBs that are (1) beneficially used, as determined by MDE or (2) used for mine 
reclamation in accordance with MDE regulations or regulations of the receiving state. 
Regulations also exclude generators that generated less than 10,000 tons of CCBs per year 
from the fee. In any fiscal year, if the fee schedule established by MDE generates revenues 
that exceed program costs, MDE must reduce the fees in the following fiscal year. 
 
The bill establishes additional factors MDE must use when calculating the annual fees that 
must be paid by a generator of CCBs. Specifically, in addition to the existing factors, MDE 
must base the fees on the volume of CCBs that have been disposed of and remain in 
landfills or other storage units in the State that are subject to inspection and monitoring, 
not including CCBs that have been (1) added to cement products; (2) used in coal mine 
reclamation; or (3) beneficially reused in a manner acceptable to MDE. 
 
Background:  MDE advises that several of the fees affected by the bill have not been 
increased since the 1990s or early 2000s, and that fee increases are needed to provide 
additional funding for many of its programs where, in recent years, fees have not generated 
sufficient revenue to offset program costs. This has resulted in an increasing reliance on 
general funds. 
 
Regarding the bill’s regulatory framework governing dams, MDE advises that the State 
has approximately 557 active dams and, of this total, 107 are classified as high hazard, and 
137 are classified as significant hazard to downstream communities, infrastructure, and the 
environment. Moreover, the aging dam infrastructure is likely to result in more dams being 
characterized as “unsafe” due to poor conditions or inadequate capacity since most of these 
active dams are more than 50 years old. MDE advises that the bill is intended to provide 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 250/ Page 8 
MDE with the information, authority, and funding to require and assist with repairs as 
needed. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Overview of the Bill’s Effect on State Revenues and Expenditures 
 
An overview of the bill’s effect on State finances is provided here. More detailed 
information on the various programs and special funds affected is provided below. 
 
Special Fund Revenues:  Overall, MDE’s special fund revenues from fees increase by 
approximately $5.0 million in fiscal 2026, increasing to $7.4 million by fiscal 2030, as 
shown in Exhibit 1. Special fund revenues may increase minimally in fiscal 2025 due to 
the increase in specified fees that take effect June 1, 2025, and may increase further 
beginning in fiscal 2026 due to any increase in civil penalties collected under the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Special Fund Revenue Increases under the Bill 
FY 2026-2030 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Maryland Clean Air Fund 
$1.9 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.1 
$2.1 
State CCB Management Fund 
0.0 
1.0 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
Private Dam Repair Fund 
0.4 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
Oil Fund 
2.7 
3.6 
3.6 
3.6 
3.6 
Total 
$5.0 
$7.2 
$7.3 
$7.4 
$7.4 
 
CCB:  Coal Combustion By-Product 
Oil Fund:  Maryland Oil Disaster Containment, Clean-up and Contingency Fund 
 
Note:  Totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Special Fund Expenditures:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes approximately $6.7 million in special funds for various MDE programs contingent 
on the enactment of legislation that establishes or increases specified fees, which this bill 
effectuates. As a result, special fund expenditures increase by approximately $6.7 million 
in fiscal 2026, as shown in Exhibit 2. Future year estimates assume ongoing special fund 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 250/ Page 9 
expenditures based on either the contingent special fund appropriation included in the 
fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly or available special fund revenues, 
as discussed in more detail below. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Estimated Special Fund Expenditure Increases 
FY 2026-2030 
 
Program 
FY 2026* 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2020 
Air Quality 
$2,250,000 
$1,977,695 
$2,031,369 
$2,076,106 
$2,120,013 
CCB Management 
200,000 
204,000 
208,080 
212,242 
216,486 
Dam Safety 
618,000 
618,100 
618,100 
618,100 
618,100 
Oil Fund 
3,600,000 
3,580,000 
3,580,000 
3,580,000 
3,580,000 
Total SF Exp. Increases 
$6,668,000 
$6,379,795 
$6,437,549 
$6,486,447 
$6,534,599 
 
CCB:  coal combustion by-product 
SF:  special fund 
Oil Fund:  Maryland Oil Disaster Containment, Clean-up and Contingency Fund 
 
* Included in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly, contingent on the enactment of legislation 
establishing/increasing specified fees. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Air Quality Program and the Maryland Clean Air Fund 
 
MDE advises that the maximum emissions-based fee as set in statute ($50 per ton of 
regulated emissions) was originally set in the mid-2000s and has since been repeatedly 
adjusted for inflation, as provided by current law. The current fee is $75.92 per ton. By 
increasing the maximum fee to $200 per ton, special fund revenues to the Maryland Clean 
Air Fund increase by approximately $1.9 million in fiscal 2026, increasing to $2.1 million 
by fiscal 2030. This estimate assumes that the fee: 
 
 
applies to 15,300 tons of emissions annually, equally distributed throughout the 
year; and 
 
is adjusted for inflation annually each January 1, beginning January 1, 2026, 
(halfway through fiscal 2026). 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 250/ Page 10 
Additionally, due to the bill’s June 1, 2025 effective date for these provisions, special fund 
revenues may increase minimally in fiscal 2025. 
 
Although the bill repeals the requirement that when the fund balance is at least $2.0 million, 
any additional funds received by MDE must be deposited into the general fund, this 
provision has no effect on general fund revenues. In the absence of the bill, the fund balance 
is not anticipated to meet this threshold. 
 
Because the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $2.25 million 
in special funds for MDE contingent on the enactment of legislation to increase clean air 
emission fees, special fund expenditures for the program increase by $2.25 million in 
fiscal 2026. In future years, it is assumed that special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly to the estimated increase in special fund revenues each year. 
 
DLS advises that it is likely that MDE does not have sufficient special fund revenues or 
fund balance in fiscal 2026 to cover the contingent special fund appropriation included in 
the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly. Thus, a general fund deficiency 
appropriation may be needed in fiscal 2026 to cover those costs; any such effect has not 
been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
Dam Regulation and the Private Dam Repair Fund 
 
Fee and Penalty Revenues:  Based on information provided by MDE, which is predicated 
on historic permitting data, the dam safety permit fee is anticipated to generate 
approximately $380,000 annually in special fund revenues beginning in fiscal 2026. In 
addition, the dam registration fee generates an estimated $238,100 annually in special fund 
revenues beginning in fiscal 2027. The registration fee estimate is based on information 
provided by MDE regarding the number of dams in each hazard category; specifically, the 
estimate assumes that owners register 313 low hazard dams (at $200 annually), 
137 significant hazard dams (at $500 annually), and 107 high hazard dams (at 
$1,000 annually). Accordingly, special fund revenues for the Private Dam Repair Fund 
increase by $380,000 in fiscal 2026 and by approximately $618,100 annually thereafter. 
To the extent any registration fees are fully or partially waived, fee revenues are lower. 
 
Special fund revenues may increase further to the extent that any civil penalties are assessed 
for specified violations in any given fiscal year; however, any such impact cannot be 
predicted. The application of existing criminal penalties to these provisions is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
 
Budgeted Funding and Ongoing Costs:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $618,000 in special funds for MDE contingent on the 
enactment of legislation to establish dam safety registration and permit fees. Thus, this 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 250/ Page 11 
analysis reflects a special fund expenditure increase of $618,000 in fiscal 2026. Although 
estimated special fund revenues in fiscal 2026 are not sufficient to cover this appropriation, 
MDE advises that it does not intend to expend the full amount authorized under the 
contingent appropriation. In future years, it is assumed that special fund expenditures 
increase correspondingly to the increase in special fund revenues each year 
($618,100 annually) – at least until any additional revenues from loan repayments are 
available (discussed below). 
 
More detail regarding anticipated spending, including administrative costs, loan issuances, 
and other spending, is discussed below. 
 
Administrative Costs:  MDE requires additional staff to administer the enhanced regulatory 
framework and to provide loans from the Private Dam Repair Fund. Specifically, MDE 
needs to hire one budget specialist (starting July 1, 2026) and one underwriter (starting 
July 1, 2027) to (1) conduct outreach and provide required notice to dam owners that need 
to begin registering with MDE annually beginning January 1, 2027; (2) develop related 
regulations; and (3) establish and issue loans from the Private Dam Repair Fund. 
Associated administrative expenditures total $98,302 in fiscal 2027, $198,232 in 
fiscal 2028, $200,262 in fiscal 2029, and $208,778 in fiscal 2030. These estimates reflect 
full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Loan Issuance and Repayment:  Beginning in fiscal 2029, MDE begins to issue loans from 
the Private Dam Repair Fund; special fund revenues increase in future years (likely beyond 
the scope of this analysis) as loans are repaid. 
 
Other Spending from the Fund:  In addition to providing direct financial assistance/loans 
to private dam owners, the fund may also be used for funding emergency repairs and 
removals of private dams performed by MDE. 
 
General Fund Interest Earnings:  Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the 
new special fund remain in the fund, the bill does not amend § 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 
(the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024), which requires, notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, that interest earnings from special funds (with certain 
exceptions) accrue to the general fund from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund 
revenues may increase minimally from any interest earnings of the new special fund 
through fiscal 2028. The fund is exempted from a similar requirement under § 6-226(a)(2) 
of the State Finance and Procurement Article that applies from fiscal 2029 forward. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 250/ Page 12 
Maryland Clean Water Fund 
 
Authority to Establish Specified Permit and Certification Fees:  The bill authorizes MDE 
to establish by regulation a fee for processing and issuing septic system permits and 
individual well construction permits under specified circumstances. Pursuant to the bill, 
such fees are paid into the Maryland Clean Water Fund. 
 
MDE advises that the authority to establish a fee for processing and issuing septic system 
permits and individual well construction permits is enabling in nature and is not anticipated 
to affect special fund revenues at this time. MDE currently delegates the existing statutory 
permitting authority to local government entities who generally manage the process and 
collect permit fees. However, MDE advises that should it be required to assume these 
regulatory duties directly in the event of an emergency, it does not have the authority to 
charge a fee to cover its costs. 
 
Water Appropriation and Use Penalties:  As discussed earlier, the bill doubles the 
maximum civil penalty for a violation of the water appropriation and use provisions of 
Title 5, Subtitle 5 of the Environment Article (from $5,000 to $10,000) and expands it to 
apply to any provision under Title 5, Subtitle 5. Other than specified violations of 
provisions governing dams (as provided by the bill), such penalties are deposited into the 
Maryland Clean Water Fund. Thus, special fund revenues to the Maryland Clean Water 
Fund may increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 due to these changes. 
 
The Maryland Oil Disaster Containment, Clean-up and Contingency Fund 
 
MDE advises that approximately 90 million barrels of oil are transferred in the State 
each year. Additionally, MDE advises that the oil transfer fee is paid to MDE at a delay of 
one quarter, meaning that even though the 4.0-cent fee increase on each barrel of oil 
transferred in the State takes effect July 1, 2025, MDE does not realize these increased 
revenues until October 1, 2025. Thus, special fund revenues for the Oil Fund increase by 
an estimated $2.7 million in fiscal 2026 and by $3.6 million annually from fiscal 2027 
through 2030 due to the increase in the fee from 5.0 cents per barrel to 9.0 cents per barrel. 
(Special fund revenues increase by $900,000 in fiscal 2031 as well due to the delay in the 
collection of the fee revenues.) 
 
The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $3.6 million in 
special funds for MDE’s Land and Materials Administration contingent on the enactment 
of legislation to increase the oil transfer fee; thus, special fund expenditures increase by 
$3.6 million in fiscal 2026. In future years, it is assumed that special fund expenditures 
increase correspondingly to the estimated increase in special fund revenues each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 250/ Page 13 
Based on the delay in collections discussed above, DLS advises that it is likely that MDE 
does not have sufficient special fund revenues or fund balance in fiscal 2026 to cover the 
contingent special fund appropriation included in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly. Thus, a general fund deficiency appropriation may be needed in 
fiscal 2026 to cover those costs; any such effect has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund 
 
Recent History and Authorized Changes Under the Bill:  MDE advises that special fund 
expenditures from the State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund have been 
relatively consistent and that, under current law, its fees are set to fully cover those costs. 
However, DLS notes that the current fee, based exclusively on CCBs produced, has been 
applicable to fewer generators over the years, as CCBs produced in the State have 
decreased. MDE advises that with the last coal-fired power plant being slated to cease 
burning coal in calendar 2025, there will be no generators that meet the threshold to pay 
the fee, resulting in a deficit for the program of approximately $1.0 million annually. The 
bill’s changes allow MDE to apply the fee to former generators. Consistent with current 
law, MDE plans to set the fee at a level to cover its costs. 
 
Timing and Amount of Special Fund Revenues:  CCB generators report annual tonnage 
amounts on a calendar year basis. MDE sets proposed annual generator fee rates based on 
these reports and then sends the proposed rates to the General Assembly for approval 
before finalizing and billing CCB generators. As a result, there is a lag between the time 
that CCBs are generated and when the generators are billed. This means that there is also 
a delay in the collection of the increased fees under the bill. As a result, there is no impact 
on special fund revenues in fiscal 2026 despite the July 1, 2025 effective date of these 
provisions. 
 
Based on information provided by MDE, special fund revenues for the State CCB 
Management Fund increase by $1.0 million in fiscal 2027, increasing to $1.1 million by 
fiscal 2030, accounting for inflation. 
 
Special Fund Expenditures and the Potential Need for a General Fund Deficiency 
Appropriation in Fiscal 2026:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $200,000 in special funds for MDE contingent on the enactment of legislation to 
raise a CCB fee, which this bill effectuates. Thus, special fund expenditures increase by 
$200,000 in fiscal 2026. Future year estimates assume that special fund expenditures 
increase by 2% annually. 
 
Based on the timing of anticipated fee collections under the bill, as discussed above, it is 
likely that MDE does not have sufficient special fund revenues or fund balance in 
fiscal 2026 to cover the contingent special fund appropriation included in the fiscal 2026 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 250/ Page 14 
budget as passed by the General Assembly. Thus, a general fund deficiency appropriation 
may be needed in fiscal 2026 to cover those costs; any such effect has not been accounted 
for in this analysis. 
 
In future years, because the increase in special fund revenues exceeds the estimated 
special fund expenditures (once fee revenues are collected beginning in fiscal 2027), 
additional special fund revenues are available that could be brought into the budget via 
budget amendment.  
 
Payment of Fees by State Agencies 
 
State expenditures (all/multiple funds) increase to the extent that any State agencies are 
required to pay any of the fees established or increased by the bill. A reliable estimate of 
any such increase in expenditures cannot be made, as the number of affected agencies and 
the amount of any fees paid under the bill are unknown. For example: 
 
 
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) advises that it owns some dams that 
are likely required to pay the registration fee established by the bill and may also be 
required to pay the dam safety permit fee established by the bill; however, DNR was 
unable to provide information on the number of dams it owns;  
 
the Maryland Department of Transportation notes that some of its stormwater 
management and other embankments likely fall under the definition of a dam and 
that Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increase to pay the dam safety permit 
fee under the bill; however, DLS notes that small ponds (a category into which many 
of these stormwater management ponds likely fall) are typically exempt from the 
requirement to obtain an MDE dam safety permit under § 5-503 of the 
Environment Article; and 
 
some State agencies are likely subject to the increased emissions-based air quality 
fee. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local expenditures increase to the extent that local governments are 
required to pay any of the fees established or increased by the bill. Although a reliable 
estimate of the increase in local expenditures cannot be made at this time, any such impact 
is not anticipated to be significant. Most notably: 
 
 
MDE advises that some locally owned landfills, wastewater treatment plants, and 
correctional facilities pay the emissions-based fees that are increased by the bill, but 
their emissions generally fall within the range of 5 to 40 tons per year, resulting in 
a range of added expenses of only $650 to $5,200 annually; 
 
some local governments own dams and are required to pay the registration fee 
established by the bill; however, even though the total number of dams owned by 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 250/ Page 15 
local governments is unknown, given the estimated total annual revenues 
anticipated by MDE, the impact on any one local government is not anticipated to 
be significant; and 
 
any local governments that own dams may also be subject to the dam safety permit 
fee established by the bill. 
 
The bill’s penalty provisions are not anticipated to materially affect local finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last 
three years. See HB 245 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal 
League; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s 
Office; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Commerce; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Natural Resources; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Stadium Authority; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - April 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - April 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 23, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 250/ Page 16 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Department of the Environment - Fees, Penalties, Funding, and 
Regulation 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 250 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Gabrielle Leach 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
      WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Air Operational Permit: 
 
Some permitted air sources subject to emissions-based fees are also small 
businesses, most notably crematories. Their emissions are very small, only around 
one ton per year. Therefore, they would only pay around $130 per year under this 
bill. 
 
On-Site Sewage Disposal: 
 
While this does not have a direct impact on small business, if the Department were 
to take back the delegation and process well and septic permits for counties where 
there are deficiencies, it will likely improve permit turnaround times. 
 
Responsible Personnel: 
 
Minimal. Anyone acting as the responsible personnel for a developer on a 
construction project that requires an approved erosion and sediment control plan 
would be impacted. This includes the building industry, local jurisdictions, and 
private property owners. Small business owners that provide the on site construction 
services requiring the certification will be required to pay the certification fee. 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
SB 250/ Page 17 
Wetlands and Waterways: 
 
Minimal. Small businesses subject to the increased fee (engineering firms, home 
builders, etc.) already pay an application fee; the increase is intended to bring the 
existing fees in line with CPI since the time of the last adjustment. 
 
Additional staff and resources provided by the increased fees will result in faster 
permitting for small businesses. Some small businesses serving as environmental 
consulting firms would be affected positively by charging higher rates. 
 
Dams: 
 
Some private dam owners may be small businesses. The bill will require these dam 
owners to register with the Department annually and pay a dam owner registration 
fee. The bill will also require small business owners who apply for a dam safety 
permit to pay a dam safety permit fee. While it is a loan program, the bill will create 
a source of funding to assist private owners with dam repairs or removal that did not 
exist before. 
 
Voluntary Cleanup: 
 
Minimal. If a small business is the owner of an eligible property, the proposed 
$4,000 increase in the application fee would be a very small percentage of the cost 
to assess, remediate, and redevelop a contaminated property. 
 
Lead: 
 
Increasing the registration renewal fee from $30 to $120 per unit biannually would 
increase the annual costs by $30 per unit for property owners, which will have a 
minor financial impact. 
 
Coal Combustion Byproducts: 
 
None. 
 
Non-Coal Surface Mining: 
 
The impact would be minimal to small operators. Large companies would have an 
increase in fees that is commensurate with the staff time required to review permit 
documentation and inspect existing sites. The current fee structure has a cap of 
$1,000.00. This benefits any operation with more than 83.5 acres permitted. The 
largest companies are realizing the benefit. 
 
The new fee schedule would be equitable across all operations. 
 
Oil Control: 
 
Minimal. The oil transfer fee is typically paid by major petroleum companies 
licensed to transfer oil into the State. To the extent that there are small businesses 
that hold oil transfer licenses, they would be subject to 8 cent per barrel oil transfer 
fee. 

END OF PAGE 17