START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 228 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Limited Line Credit Insurance - Qualification of Applicants 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals the requirement that the Insurance Commissioner approve 
certain instructional programs that must be completed to obtain an insurance producer 
license for limited line credit insurance, credit life insurance, or credit health insurance. 
Instead, the bill requires the instructional programs to be designed to provide a 
comprehensive and accurate explanation of the insurance product. The bill also requires 
insurers that administer the instructional programs to maintain, and make available, records 
of the program, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes may result in efficiencies, but expenditures are not 
materially affected. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Insurers that provide a program of instruction for insurance producers 
under the bill must retain records relating to the program of instruction and maintain those 
records for at least five years after the program’s last use. Those records must include 
copies of the instructional materials and a list of the applicants and producers who have 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 228/ Page 2 
successfully completed the program of instruction. Further, those records must be made 
available to the Insurance Commissioner upon request. 
 
Current Law:  To act as an insurance producer in the State, a person must generally obtain 
a license from MIA. To obtain an insurance producer license as an individual (as opposed 
to a business), the individual must meet specified requirements, including that the applicant 
(1) be trustworthy and of good character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) pass a written 
examination related to the type of insurance for which the license is being requested; and 
(4) pay the initial license fee. 
 
Chapters 873 and 874 of 2024 modified requirements so that an applicant to become an 
insurance producer for limited line credit insurance, credit life insurance, or credit health 
insurance must successfully complete a program of study approved by the Insurance 
Commissioner (rather than established or approved by the Commissioner). Accordingly, 
an insurer that sells, solicits, or negotiates limited line credit insurance must provide a 
program of instruction to those applicants. 
 
Background:  MIA advises that current law does not provide enough guidance regarding 
training program approval standards for limited line insurance producers, leaving 
significant uncertainty for MIA, insurance companies, and applicants for a limited line 
insurance producer license. According to MIA, removing the requirement that the 
Insurance Commissioner approve training courses and allowing insurance companies to 
develop training independently better serves insurers and the people of Maryland who 
utilize their services because the insurers are the true experts in the insurance products 
being sold. MIA plans to review the courses developed by insurers during its normal insurer 
market conduct examinations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 30 (Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Insurance Administration) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 228/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 21, 2025 
Third Reader - February 7, 2025 
 
js/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 228/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL 
Limited Line Credit Insurance – Qualification of Applicants 
BILL NUMBER:  
SB 228 
PREPARED BY:  
Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The Maryland Insurance Administration does not expect that the proposed bill would have any 
economic impact on small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4