START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 231 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 231 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Public Employee Relations Board) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
State Government - Public Employee Relations Act - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters provisions of the Public Employee Relations Act (PERA) by 
requiring the Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) to appoint up to three deputy 
directors who are attorneys, as specified by the bill, instead of three deputy directors that 
have specialized responsibilities. The bill repeals the condition of a public health concern 
for an exclusive representative to meet with a new employee by video or similar 
technology. The bill repeals the minimum requirement of 10 days of voting for in-person 
voting for an exclusive representative of a bargaining unit, so PERB may designate the 
time period for in-person voting after consulting with the public employer and the 
employee organizations on the ballot. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill creates operational efficiencies and may create potential future cost 
savings, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  PERB has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill eliminates the requirement that deputy directors have knowledge 
and experience with the subject matter area associated with their position. Any deputy 
director instead of the appropriate deputy director can perform specified job duties. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 231/ Page 2 
Current Law: 
 
Exclusive Representative Meeting with New Employees 
 
Public employers must allow an exclusive representative to (1) meet with a new employee 
in a bargaining unit represented by the exclusive representative within the first full pay 
period of the new employee’s start date or (2) attend and participate in a new employee 
program that includes one or more employees who are in a bargaining unit represented by 
the exclusive representative. A meeting between the new employee and exclusive 
representative must be in person unless an exclusive representative chooses to meet by 
video or similar technology if public health concerns necessitate meeting remotely. 
 
Deputy Directors 
 
PERB must appoint three deputy directors (one primarily responsible for Executive Branch 
labor relations, one primarily responsible for public school labor relations, and one 
primarily responsible for public higher education labor relations). The deputy directors 
must have knowledge of and experience with labor issues and their respective subject 
matter area. 
 
Elections 
 
Generally, PERB must conduct an election for an exclusive representative of a bargaining 
unit if a valid petition is filed and the bargaining unit is determined to be appropriate. PERB 
must conduct the election by secret ballot and in whole or in part by in-person voting, mail, 
or an electronic voting system. PERB may designate the time period for in-person voting 
only after consulting with the public employer and the employee organization on the ballot, 
but PERB must allow at least 10 days of voting for an election, unless the employee 
organization requests an extension. If the voting system is inoperable, PERB may extend 
the time period for voting. 
 
Background:  Chapter 114 of 2023, PERA, established PERB to oversee collective 
bargaining for all public employees. Prior to PERA, the collective bargaining rights of 
State employees, employees of public institutions of higher education, employees of 
community colleges, or public school employees, including teachers, were administered 
by one of three labor relations boards, depending on the nature of the employees’ employer:  
the State Labor Relations Board (SLRB); the State Higher Education Labor Relations 
Board (SHELRB); and the Public School Labor Relations Board (PSLRB). PERA 
consolidated different collective bargaining laws that apply to different employees into 
one set of rules and procedures for public employees. The Act also repealed SLRB, 
SHELRB, and PSLRB, and instead established PERB to oversee collective bargaining for 
all the previously mentioned public employees. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 231/ Page 3 
In addition to consolidating three labor boards into one, the Act consolidated different 
collective bargaining laws into one law, including provisions regarding employee access, 
unfair labor practices, management and employee rights, prohibited employer and 
employee actions, designation of bargaining units, elections, and certification of exclusive 
representatives. 
 
PERB notes that of the 10 representation petitions filed with PERB since its inception, 
none of the petitioners has requested in-person elections. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill creates operational efficiencies and potential future cost 
savings by authorizing PERB to hire up to three deputy directors instead of requiring PERB 
to hire three deputy directors that specialize in specific subject matter areas. 
 
PERB has hired two deputy directors for fiscal 2026 but has not yet filled the third deputy 
director position. Since the bill authorizes up to three deputy director positions, instead of 
requiring three positions, PERB could realize cost savings from not hiring a third deputy 
director if it chooses to do so. However, since the bill does not diminish the job 
responsibilities of the deputy directors, it is likely that PERB may still need three deputy 
directors. To the extent that no longer having the deputy directors specialize in subject 
matter areas increases work productivity, the bill produces cost savings of more than 
$120,000 on an annual basis if the third deputy director position is no longer needed. 
 
PERB notes that the minimum 10-day requirement for in-person voting required under 
current law poses a staffing challenge if a petitioner were to ask for in-person voting; thus, 
eliminating the minimum 10-day requirement eases potential staffing burdens. 
 
The Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) notes that it has the authority to hear matters 
relating to PERB, so OAH may need to train administrative law judges on substantive 
aspects of the bill, which it can do with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 266 (Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Employee Relations Board) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Employee Relations Board; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; 
Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 231/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 231/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Government - Public Employee Relations Act - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 231 
 
PREPARED BY:  Michael J. Hayes & Erica L. Snipes 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
OR 
 
 
         WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
This proposed legislation will have little to no economic impact on small businesses 
in Maryland because the bill has mostly to do with internal staffing operations of the Public 
Employee Relations Board, which only has jurisdiction over public employers, public 
employees, and unions that represent those employees. 
 

END OF PAGE 5