START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 204 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 204 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Property Tax - Deadline to Set County and Municipal Corporation Tax Rates - 
Alteration 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the date by which county and municipal governments must set 
their property tax rates for the upcoming fiscal year by moving the date up from July 1 to 
June 20. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is not anticipated to have any direct impact on local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment 
does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  County and municipal governments must set their property tax rates for 
the upcoming fiscal year by July 1. Information on county and municipal property tax rates 
can be found in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the most recent report 
is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
Background:  A well-defined statutory relationship exists between the State and local 
governments in the administration of the property tax system. While property tax revenues 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 204/ Page 2 
are a relatively minor revenue source to the State, the State has assumed responsibility for 
the valuation and assessment of property. Local governments, on the other hand, levy and 
collect property taxes. 
 
SDAT reports that property tax rates must be set by local jurisdictions before SDAT is able 
to calculate the homeowners’ tax credits for affected property tax bills and before the 
department can create tax billing files to send to the local jurisdictions for billing purposes. 
The department advises that the July 1 date for setting tax rates can cause delays for 
calculating the homeowners’ property tax credits, if jurisdictions send tax rate information 
to SDAT late, which may delay the creation of the tax billing files for local jurisdictions. 
This could then result in delays for mailing tax bills by the local jurisdictions, or in some 
cases, mailing revised bills to some homeowners. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 101 (Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Montgomery County; Wicomico County; 
Maryland Municipal League; cities of College Park, Frostburg, and Rockville; 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 204/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Property Tax - Deadline to Set County and Municipal Corporation 
Tax Rates – Alteration 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 204 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Joshua Greenberg 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
   X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
         WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 3