START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 253 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 253 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Commerce) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Controlled Hazardous Substance Facility Permit - Research Facilities - Chemical 
Warfare Material Requirements 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to 
issue a research, development, and demonstration (RDD) permit and establishes 
requirements for such permits. Subject to the RDD permit provisions, the bill exempts the 
incineration of chemical warfare materials at a “research facility” from specified State 
controlled hazardous substances (CHS) statutory and regulatory requirements related to the 
incineration of chemical warfare materials if the incineration is done for research, 
development, or demonstration purposes. The bill further specifies that nothing under  
§§ 7-239.2 through 7-239.5 of the Environment Article (which include the exemptions and 
the RDD permit provisions established by the bill) limits MDE’s authority to apply 
regulations adopted under Subtitle 2 of Title 7 of the Environment Article, which governs 
CHS, to a chemical warfare material that is a CHS. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. MDE can 
implement the bill with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect local governmental operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Commerce has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 253/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definitions and Findings Regarding Chemical Warfare Materials 
 
Under current law and the bill, “chemical warfare material” is any one of nine listed 
substances; the term includes any substance that has chemical warfare material as an active 
or principal ingredient or ingredients and degradation products of chemical warfare 
material. Under the bill, a “research facility” is defined as a facility designated by the  
U.S. Department of Defense for the research, development, and demonstration of 
technologies related to chemical warfare materials. 
 
Under current law and the bill, statute establishes that the State of Maryland finds that 
chemical warfare materials were designed for warfare, specifically the destruction of 
human beings, and for no legitimate civilian industrial use. Thus, the State recognizes the 
need to dispose of these chemical warfare materials as safely as possible, ensuring the 
health and safety of State residents by the regulation of their release into the environment. 
 
Incineration of Chemical Warfare Materials and Applicability of Controlled Hazardous 
Substance Standards 
 
Under current law, statute further provides that since these chemical warfare materials are 
highly toxic or carcinogenic, in addition to any other applicable requirements at law, the 
State must require without exemption or waiver that an applicant for the treatment by 
incineration of chemical warfare materials shall comply with all statutory and regulatory 
requirements for CHS. Under the bill, the phrase “without exemption or waiver” is 
repealed, and instead, the provision specifies that an applicant for the treatment by 
incineration of chemical warfare materials must comply with all applicable statutory and 
regulatory requirements for CHS. Under current law and the bill, a chemical warfare 
material that is a solid waste is a CHS.  
 
Under current law, in addition to the standard CHS requirements, there are additional 
requirements specific to the incineration of chemical warfare materials. More specifically, 
MDE may not issue a permit to construct, materially alter, or operate a CHS facility that 
will be used for the treatment of the incineration of a chemical warfare material unless the 
permit applicant can demonstrate to MDE’s satisfaction that the following requirements 
have been met: 
 
 
the proposed incinerator technology has consistently met all applicable federal and 
State performance standards in an operational and comparable facility for a period 
of time and under conditions acceptable to MDE; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 253/ Page 3 
 
emissions and monitoring data from a comparable facility demonstrate compliance 
with State toxic air pollutant standards; 
 
a destruction and removal efficiency of at least 99.9999% is achievable for each 
chemical warfare material to be incinerated at the facility; 
 
the applicant has made plans to adequately fund the development of a plan to 
remove, shelter, and protect persons from the largest area at risk from a worst-case 
release, as defined by MDE; 
 
an emergency preparedness plan has been developed with adequate public 
participation and has been presented at public meetings in counties at risk from a 
worst-case release;  
 
MDE finds that the applicant has fully evaluated all reasonable alternative methods 
for treatment or disposal in order to create less risk of release or harm to the general 
public or the environment; and 
 
the local governing body of each jurisdiction included in the worst-case release has 
a reasonable opportunity to review and provide comment on the permit application 
and the emergency preparedness plan. 
 
Under the bill, subject to the bill’s RDD permit provisions, the incineration of chemical 
warfare materials at a research facility is exempt from these incineration-specific standards 
if the incineration is done for research, development, or demonstration purposes.  
 
Under current law, statute establishes several permit restrictions that must be in place in 
order for MDE to issue a CHS facility permit for the incineration of a chemical warfare 
materials. More specifically, MDE must require, as a condition of operation of a 
CHS facility to be used for the incineration of a chemical warfare material, that (1) the 
incineration of chemical warfare material be monitored on a continuous basis; 
(2) monitoring data be reviewed by an MDE-selected qualified independent third party; 
and (3) both the data and reviews be reported to MDE in a manner and frequency 
determined by the department. Further, MDE may only issue a CHS facility permit for a 
specifically identified quantity of chemical warfare material. A permit may only be 
renewed or extended for good cause and to complete the incineration. However, a permit 
may not be modified as to the amount of CHS material to be destroyed. In addition to 
CHS facility permit fee, an applicant must pay for the independent third party with whom 
MDE is authorized to contract for the review of application materials and monitoring data. 
Under the bill, subject to the bill’s RDD permit provisions, the incineration of chemical 
warfare materials at a research facility is exempt from these requirements if the incineration 
is done for research, development, or demonstration purposes.  
 
Under current law, after the chemical warfare materials are destroyed, the incinerator must 
be disassembled and disposed of in accordance with all applicable federal and State 
performance standards and in a time period established in the permit. Under the bill, subject 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 253/ Page 4 
to the bill’s RDD permit provisions, the incineration of chemical warfare materials at a 
research facility is exempt from this requirement if the incineration is done for research, 
development, or demonstration purposes.  
 
Controlled Hazardous Substances Facility Permits 
 
Under current law and the bill, Subtitle 2 of Title 7 of the Environment Article establishes 
the standards for CHS, which include requirements for facility permitting and 
transportation restrictions. Among other things, MDE has the general authority to issue, 
modify, or revoke permits to install, modify, or operate a disposal system or any part of a 
disposal system and to require proper maintenance and operation of a disposal system. 
CHS facility permit application fees are established in regulation and range from $2,000 to 
$10,000 per application. Regulations also establish the method by which permit fees are 
calculated. 
 
Treatability Studies and Research, Development, and Demonstration Permits 
 
The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) defines a “treatability study” as a study in 
which a hazardous waste is subjected to a treatment process to determine whether the waste 
is amenable to the treatment process, what pretreatment, if any, is required, the optimal 
process conditions needed to achieve the desired treatment, the efficiency of a treatment 
process for a specific waste or wastes, or the characteristics and volumes of residuals from 
a particular treatment process. A person conducting a qualifying treatability study, and the 
laboratories or testing facilities that are conducting those treatability studies, are exempt 
from specified portions of State CHS regulations.  
 
COMAR also authorizes the Secretary of the Environment to issue an RDD permit for any 
hazardous waste treatment facility that proposes to utilize an innovative and experimental 
hazardous waste treatment technology or process for which permit standards have not been 
adopted in COMAR 26.13.05, which establishes standards for owners and operators of 
hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities. The RDD permit must include 
terms and conditions that assure protection of human health and the environment and other 
specified provisions.  
 
Under the bill, MDE is authorized to issue an RDD permit for the incineration of chemical 
warfare materials at a research facility. The bill establishes numerous requirements relating 
to such permits, which are in addition to any general requirements for RDD permits, 
including general requirements related to public participation in the permitting process. 
Specifically, a permit issued pursuant to the bill must: 
 
 
limit the duration of the permit in accordance with MDE regulations; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 253/ Page 5 
 
provide for the receipt and treatment by the research facility of only those types and 
quantities of chemical warfare materials that MDE considers necessary for purposes 
of determining the efficacy and performance capabilities of the incineration 
technology or process; and 
 
include requirements MDE considers necessary to protect human health and the 
environment, as specified. 
 
Further, under the bill, MDE may not issue an RDD permit for the incineration of chemical 
warfare materials at a research facility unless the applicant demonstrates to MDE’s 
satisfaction, prior to the issuance of the permit, that:  
 
 
the applicant has made adequate provisions to support and fund the development of 
a plan that demonstrates the capability of evacuating, sheltering, and protecting 
persons from the largest area at risk from a “maximum credible event” (i.e., a 
hypothetical, worst-case explosion, fire, or toxic agent release that is realistically 
possible), as determined by MDE;  
 
an emergency preparedness plan has been developed that enumerates the training, 
coordination, and equipment necessary for State and local emergency response 
personnel and community members to respond to a release of a chemical warfare 
material from the research facility; and  
 
the emergency preparedness plan has been developed with adequate public 
participation and presented at public meetings in each county potentially impacted 
by a maximum credible event.  
 
MDE also may not issue such a permit unless the local governing body of each county and 
municipality included in the maximum credible event has a reasonable opportunity to 
review and comment on the permit application and the emergency preparedness plan.  
 
Under the bill, in developing permit requirements, MDE must (1) require continuous  
near-real time air emissions monitoring, as specified, and (2) consider the need for soil and 
water pollution monitoring. 
 
Under the bill, MDE is authorized to order an immediate termination of all incineration 
operations at a research facility if MDE determines that termination is necessary to protect 
human health or the environment.  
 
Under the bill, MDE must require a research facility that receives an RDD permit to (1) at 
least once annually, report to MDE on operations under the permit, as specified, and (2) at 
least once every two years, conduct and submit an assessment to MDE of incineration 
activities conducted under the permit on local ecosystems, public health, and air quality. 
Further, MDE must (1) review all reports and assessments submitted pursuant to the bill; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 253/ Page 6 
(2) make all such reports and assessments available on its website (to the extent doing so 
is consistent with specified provisions of the Public Information Act); and (3) submit all 
such reports and assessments to specified committees of the General Assembly. On the 
basis of a report or assessment submitted under the bill, MDE is authorized to modify or 
revoke an RDD permit.  
 
Background:  According to Commerce, the existing restrictions on the incineration of 
chemical warfare materials dates to 1993, when the U.S. Chemical Stockpile Elimination 
Program was planning the destruction of chemical weapon stockpiles stored in 
nine locations around the United States, including 1,818 mustard-filled ton containers at 
Aberdeen Proving Ground (APG). The language was written to ensure the Army had 
sufficient technical data and performed necessary emergency response planning with the 
local communities to facilitate the safe incineration of APG’s stockpile. The Army instead 
decided in 1998 to use chemical neutralization in lieu of incineration to destroy APG’s 
stockpile. This effort was completed in 2006.  
 
APG-Edgewood Area is home to the U.S. Army Chemical Biological Center (CBC) and 
its Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, and Explosives partners. The facility is a 
national asset for the research, development and demonstration of technologies to defend 
our nation against and combat chemical and biological warfare threats. CBC is evaluating 
at least four new thermal destruction technologies to support warfighters’ requirements to 
destroy chemical and biological agents in tactical environments; Commerce indicates that 
these evaluations are at risk for delay due to the permitting requirements. The licensing 
process in current law essentially prohibits such activity, as it requires prospective 
permittees to supply extensive amounts of data that are not available for the novel 
technologies proposed.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 62 (Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Commerce) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Anne Arundel, Cecil, and Frederick 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 253/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - April 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 253/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Controlled Hazardous Substance Facility Permit - Research Facilities 
- Chemical Warfare Material Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 253 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Troy Wittek 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposed bill would modify language in the Environmental Article to enable 
development, testing, and evaluation of chemical weapon treatment systems at Aberdeen 
Proving Ground’s Edgewood Area. The current licensing process prohibits such activity, 
as it requires prospective permittees to supply extensive amounts of data that are not 
available for the novel technologies detailed in legislative proposal.  
 
Allowing this type of R&D activity has important public health and national security 
implications. However, the proposed bill would have minimal or no impact on Maryland’s 
small businesses. The extremely specific technologies and sensitive subject matter 
involved suggest that a very limited number of firms, let alone small enterprises, would be 
affected by the legislation.  

END OF PAGE 8