START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 215 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 215 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Cannabis Administration) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Cannabis Reform - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill makes various changes to provisions that govern the cannabis 
industry. Among other things, the bill (1) repeals the authorization for the Maryland 
Cannabis Administration (MCA) to issue on-site consumption licenses during the second 
round of licensing; (2) authorizes an on-site consumption licensee to engage in specified 
activities; (3) extends the authorization for a licensed dispensary to deliver medical 
cannabis and alters dispensary supply requirements; (4) clarifies the applicability of certain 
zoning provisions that relate to the location of licensed dispensaries; (5) authorizes the sale 
of a cannabis license through an employee stock ownership plan; and (6) explicitly 
specifies that a “cannabinoid beverage” is not a “food” for purposes of the sales and use 
tax provisions in the Tax – General Article. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The repeal of the authorization to issue on-site consumption licenses during 
the second round of licensing may result in a delay in special fund revenues from 
application and licensing fees, but it is unclear if MCA would have issued any such licenses 
in the absence of the bill, as discussed below; accordingly, this analysis does not quantify 
any possible revenue loss. The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State 
operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MCA has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.)  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 215/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use 
cannabis industry in the State by, among other things, (1) establishing MCA as an 
independent unit of State government that is responsible for the regulation of adult-use and 
medical cannabis; (2) creating a licensing framework for the regulated sale of cannabis, 
including licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, incubator spaces, and on-site 
consumption; (3) requiring all medical cannabis licensees to either convert to adult-use 
cannabis businesses or cease operating by July 1, 2023; and (4) establishing a 9% sales and 
use tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis.  
 
On-site Consumption Establishments 
 
On-site Consumption Licenses – Issuance and Fees:  Under current law and the bill, MCA 
is authorized to issue up to 50 (total) on-site consumption licenses. MCA must establish 
licensing and renewal fees for on-site consumption licenses, which, for on-site 
consumption licenses, must be reduced by at least 50% relative to the fees that apply to 
standard licensees. Standard license fees for initial licenses may not exceed $50,000, and 
fees for renewal may not exceed the lesser of 10% of the licensee’s annual gross revenue 
or $50,000. The application fee for an on-site consumption license is $5,000. 
 
MCA was not authorized to issue any on-site consumption licenses during its initial round 
of cannabis licensing. Under current law, beginning May 1, 2024, MCA must begin issuing 
second round licenses in an amount that does not exceed the specified maximum number 
of licenses allowed for each license type. MCA must consult with the State’s designated 
Minority and Business Enterprise certification agency (the Maryland Department of 
Transportation), the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Businesses Affairs, 
the General Assembly, and the Office of the Attorney General to determine whether or not 
a disparity study demonstrates a strong basis in evidence of business discrimination against 
firms owned by minorities and women in the cannabis market. Under current law, if the 
specified discrimination is present, MCA, in issuing second round licenses, must  
(1) apply minimum licensing qualifications and employ remedial measures consistent with 
constitutional requirements and (2) award licenses through a lottery process that employs 
remedial measures (if a lottery system employing remedial measures established in 
accordance with the disparity study can be conducted consistent with constitutional 
requirements). Under current law, if the specified discrimination is not present, MCA must 
enter each applicant that meets the minimum established qualifications into a lottery. Under 
the bill, if specified discrimination is not present, application submissions for on-site 
consumption licenses are limited to social equity applicants, as is the case under current 
law for micro licenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 215/ Page 3 
The bill repeals MCA’s authorization to issue up to 15 on-site consumption licenses during 
the second round of licensing. Under current law and the bill, MCA may issue additional 
cannabis licenses up to the maximum limit authorized per statute based on the results of a 
market demand study. Future applications for licenses may be limited to social equity 
applicants and employ remedial measures based on the results of the disparity study.  
 
On-site Consumption Licenses – Authorizations and Restrictions:  Under current law, 
MCA may issue on-site consumption licenses that authorize an entity to operate a licensed 
premises in which cannabis may be consumed, but not smoked indoors, in accordance with 
relevant statute and regulations. Additionally, under current law, an on-site consumption 
license authorizes an entity to distribute cannabis or cannabis products for on-site 
consumption. The bill clarifies that on-site consumption establishments are able to offer 
cannabis products to be consumed on premises. 
 
Under the bill, an on-site consumption license authorizes an entity, for the purposes of 
on-site consumption, to (1) distribute cannabis or cannabis products; (2) acquire cannabis 
or cannabis products from a cannabis licensee, as specified; (3) repackage cannabis or 
cannabis products to create single-serving products; and (4) process single-serving 
products. The bill defines a “single-serving product” to mean an edible cannabis product 
that (1) is individually packaged for retail sale; (2) does not exceed the serving limits 
established by MCA regulations; and (3) is intended for immediate consumption. The term 
includes a cannabinoid beverage.  
 
Current law specifies that an on-site consumption license does not authorize the holder to 
cultivate cannabis, process cannabis or cannabis-infused products, or add cannabis to food 
prepared or served on the premises. However, a business that has average daily receipts 
from the sale of bakery goods that are at least 50% of the average daily receipts of the 
business may apply for a license to operate an on-site consumption establishment. Under 
the bill, only the restriction against cultivating cannabis is retained. The remainder of these 
restrictions are repealed. 
 
Under current law, an on-site consumption establishment is also prohibited from allowing 
an activity on the premises that would require an additional license under provisions of 
State law governing medical and adult-use cannabis, including growing, processing, or 
dispensing. Under the bill, the prohibition against processing is repealed. 
 
Under the bill, additional prohibitions are established preventing an on-site consumption 
establishment from (1) allowing the consumption of cannabis or cannabis products on the 
premises that were not obtained from the on-site consumption establishment; (2) allowing 
the removal of cannabis or cannabis products from the premises; and (3) selling or 
distributing cannabis or cannabis products to an individual that are intended as more than 
a single-serving product. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 215/ Page 4 
Under the bill, an on-site consumption establishment is authorized to also operate as a food 
service facility, as defined under the Health – General Article, as specified. Before 
operating as a food service facility, the on-site consumption establishment must obtain all 
necessary approvals for operating a food service facility from the political subdivision in 
which the establishment is located, as specified. The relevant current law relating to food 
service facilities is discussed below. 
 
Under current law, statute establishes laboratory testing, packaging, and labeling standards 
for cannabis products. The bill explicitly states that an on-site consumption establishment 
must comply with those standards.  
 
Under current law and the bill, an on-site cannabis establishment must educate consumers 
by providing informational materials regarding the safe consumption of cannabis. The 
educational materials must be based on requirements established by the Cannabis Public 
Health Advisory Council. 
 
Local Authority to Regulate On-site Cannabis Establishments:  Under current law and the 
bill, an on-site consumption establishment may not operate in a location unless the political 
subdivision affirmatively authorizes the operation by issuing a permit or license. Subject 
to specified zoning provisions, a political subdivision may (1) prohibit the operation of 
on-site consumption establishments; (2) prohibit or restrict the smoking or vaping of 
cannabis at on-site consumption establishments; or (3) adopt zoning and planning 
requirements for on-site consumption establishments. Under the bill, a political subdivision 
may also establish hours of operation for on-site consumption establishments. 
 
Other Relevant Definitions:  Under current law and the bill, “cannabis products” means 
products that are composed of cannabis, cannabis concentrate, cannabis extract, or other 
ingredients, and are intended for use or consumption. Under current law, “cannabis 
products” include edible products, oils, and tinctures. Under the bill, “cannabis products” 
also includes “cannabinoid beverages.” “Cannabinoid beverage” is defined by the bill as a 
beverage intended for human consumption by oral ingestion that (1) is suitable for beverage 
purposes; (2) contains five milligrams (mg) or less of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC); (3) is 
contained as a single-serving product; (4) is lawfully produced by a cannabis licensee; and 
(5) complies with specified existing laboratory testing, packaging, and labeling standards.  
 
Licensed Dispensaries  
 
Deliveries:  Under current law, while it is generally prohibited for a cannabis licensee to 
deliver cannabis, the holder of a dispensary license that was issued by the 
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission and was converted to a cannabis 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 215/ Page 5 
business license issued by MCA may continue to deliver medical cannabis to qualifying 
patients until July 1, 2025. The bill extends this authorization by one year – to July 1, 2026. 
 
Supply Requirements:  Under current law and the bill, a cannabis licensee that is operating 
a dispensary must (1) ensure that it has adequate supply for qualifying patients and 
caregivers and (2) set aside operating hours or dedicated service lines to serve only 
qualifying patients and caregivers. Additionally, under current law, a licensee operating a 
dispensary must ensure that at least 25% of cannabis and cannabis products in the 
dispensary are from social equity licensees and growers and processors that do not share 
common ownership with the dispensary. This requirement still applies under the bill, but 
only as supply becomes available (as determined by MCA).  
 
Zoning Restrictions Applicable to Dispensaries:  Under current law and the bill, under  
§ 36-410 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, in general, a licensed 
dispensary may not be located within 500 feet of (1) a pre-existing primary or secondary 
school in the State or a licensed child care center or registered family child care home or 
(2) a pre-existing playground, recreation center, library, public park, or place of worship. 
A dispensary also may not be located within 1,000 feet of another licensed dispensary. 
These distance requirements do not apply to a medical dispensary licensee that converted 
to a cannabis business licensee and was properly zoned and operating before July 1, 2023. 
 
Under current law and the bill, in general, a political subdivision may adopt an ordinance 
reducing (but not increasing) these distance requirements. However, a political subdivision 
may by ordinance increase the statutory distance limitation between dispensaries to no 
more than one-half mile. Under the bill, if a political subdivision does not adopt an 
ordinance as authorized under this provision by July 1, 2025, the political subdivision is 
subject to the standard distance requirements described above.  
 
Under current law and the bill, a political subdivision may not adopt an ordinance 
establishing zoning requirements for licensed dispensaries that are more restrictive than 
zoning requirements for a retail dealer licensed under the Alcoholic Beverages and 
Cannabis Article. 
 
Under current law and the bill, a political subdivision may (1) by ordinance, establish a 
distance limitation for dispensaries of up to 100 feet from an area zoned for residential use 
or (2) apply to dispensaries the distance limitation for licensed alcoholic beverage retailers 
from an area zoned for residential use. 
 
Under current law and the bill, a political subdivision must grant a waiver to an ordinance 
that provides a distance requirement for dispensaries under these provisions for a licensed 
dispensary that was in operation before April 1, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 215/ Page 6 
Cannabis License Transfers 
 
Under current law and the bill, to transfer ownership or control of a cannabis license, a 
licensee must first submit to MCA an application and fee, as specified by MCA. However, 
a cannabis licensee (including a converted licensee) may not transfer ownership or control 
of the license for at least five years following licensure, with limited exceptions and not 
including the time period that a business is considered to be in a preapproved licensure 
status. In addition, a cannabis licensee may not surrender a license and apply for a new 
license in the same or similar category. The specified limitations do not apply to  
(1) transfers as a result of the disability, incapacity, or death of the owner of a cannabis 
license, bankruptcy or receivership in accordance with a lending agreement of a cannabis 
licensee, or court order or (2) a transfer of ownership  that is the subject of a legally binding 
settlement agreement from litigation commenced on or before January 1, 2023. Under the 
bill, the specified limitations also do not apply to the sale of a cannabis licensee to the 
licensee’s employees through an employee stock ownership plan, as specified.  
 
Sales and Use Tax Provisions under the Tax – General Article 
 
Under current law and the bill, the State sales and use tax rate is 6%, except for the sale of 
alcoholic beverages and cannabis/cannabis products, which are taxed at a rate of 9%. The 
sales and use tax is generally not imposed on food and beverages sold by a substantial 
grocery or market business unless it falls within the definition of food for immediate 
consumption or consumption on the premises of the buyer or a third party. Sales of food 
and beverages made by other entities are subject to the sales and use tax. Under provisions 
that relate to the applicability of the sales and use tax on food, “food” means food for 
human consumption, and includes specified foods (including beverages) and their 
products. “Food” does not include an alcoholic beverage, a soft drink or beverage, or candy 
or confectionary.  
 
Under the bill, “food” also does not include a cannabinoid beverage as defined in the bill. 
(This clarifies that cannabinoid beverages are subject to the sales and use tax on cannabis.) 
 
Relevant Food Service Facility Provisions under the Health – General Article 
 
Under current law and the bill, generally speaking, a food service facility is a place where 
food or drink is prepared for sale or service on the premises or elsewhere or any operation 
where food is served or provided to the public, regardless of whether there is a charge. A 
food service facility is a type of food establishment regulated under the Health – General 
Article. A person may not operate a food establishment unless licensed (by the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) or a local health department (LHD)) or exempt from the 
licensure requirements. Each food establishment must be separately licensed. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 215/ Page 7 
Under current law and the bill, “food” – under these provisions in the Health – General 
Article – means (1) any substance that is used as food or drink for human beings or as a 
component of food or drink for human beings or (2) chewing gum or any substance that is 
used as a component of chewing gum.  
 
The federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act prohibits the manufacture or sale of any food 
that is adulterated or misbranded. The Food Additives Amendment to the act authorizes 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to regulate food ingredients. MDH 
implements the Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, which conforms to the federal 
act.  
 
FDA manages a Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) database and Food Additive List 
to approve intentionally added food ingredients that have been adequately tested and 
deemed safe. According to MDH, cannabis and cannabinoids are not GRAS. 
 
Under current law and the bill, a food establishment licensee that violates any law or 
regulation relating to food establishments is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or up to 90 days imprisonment for a first violation. 
For a second violation, the maximum penalty is a $2,500 fine and/or one year 
imprisonment. In addition, a violator is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000, to be 
collected by the District Court for any county and may be enjoined from continuing the 
violation. Each day is a separate violation. 
 
In practice, the licensing, inspection, and enforcement of statutory provisions related to 
food service facilities are delegated to LHDs. Each food establishment must be separately 
licensed. A representative of MDH (including an appropriate LHD) may enter any food 
establishment at a reasonable time to conduct inspections. 
 
Edible Cannabis Products 
 
Under current regulations, “edible cannabis product” means a cannabis product intended 
for human consumption by oral ingestion, in whole or in part, and includes a cannabis 
product that dissolves or disintegrates in the mouth. A “liquid edible product” is a type of 
edible cannabis product that is a liquid beverage or liquid food-based product for which 
the intended use is oral consumption. A “liquid edible product” excludes a tincture. 
 
Under current law, statute establishes laboratory testing, packaging, and labeling standards 
for cannabis products as well as maximum potency limits for cannabis products sold in the 
State. Current regulations establish the regulatory framework for the oversight of the 
processing, distribution, and sale of edible cannabis products. Among other things, before 
processing an edible cannabis product, a processor must obtain a permit from MCA. 
Permittees must comply with all applicable food safety regulations. There is a 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 215/ Page 8 
$1,000 application fee and a $500 annual permit fee for an edible cannabis product permit. 
Additionally, unless expressly authorized by MCA, an edible cannabis product may not 
contain more than 10 mg of THC per serving and 100 mg of THC per package. 
 
For additional information and current law and information on the State’s cannabis 
industry, see the Appendix – Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis. 
 
Background:  Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, MCA was required to conduct a study 
on the on-site consumption of cannabis and cannabis products at retail premises. According 
to that required report, a “cannabis café” model for on-site consumption sites is likely the 
only viable model of on-site cannabis consumption establishment that would maintain the 
General Assembly’s intent to prohibit indoor smoking. The “cannabis café” model was 
originally popularized by the Netherlands and is characterized by establishments where 
consumers may consume cannabis and purchase freshly made food and non-alcoholic 
drinks, such as coffee. 
 
MCA notes that, while the “cannabis café” model is broadly consistent with current law 
standards for on-site consumption establishments, there are certain statutory provisions that 
hinder licensees from establishing a “cannabis café” type establishment. The primary 
limitation is that businesses are prohibited from preparing and selling food products that 
contain cannabis and from conducting any activity on the licensed premises that requires 
an additional license (such as a processor license). According to MCA, the intent of the bill 
is to establish options to help on-site consumption establishments be more viable and to 
allow Maryland licensees to follow this café model. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under current law, MCA is required to hold a second round of 
cannabis licensing and is authorized to issue up to 15 on-site consumption licenses during 
that round. However, MCA is not required to issue any on-site consumption licenses during 
the second round of licensing. According to MCA, the current law business model for 
on-site consumption licenses is not viable and, for that reason, it is unclear whether MCA, 
in the absence of the bill’s changes that create a café model, would issue any on-site 
consumption licenses during the second round of licensing. Accordingly, DLS 
acknowledges that the bill may result in a decrease in special fund revenues for MCA from 
foregone application and licensing fees (which otherwise could have been realized in 
fiscal 2026, 2027, and 2028 under current law), but this analysis does not quantify any 
possible revenue loss.  
 
The bill is not otherwise anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. MCA 
and the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission can implement and enforce the bill’s 
changes with existing resources, and the bill is not anticipated to materially affect the 
amount of cannabis sales and use tax revenue collected. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 215/ Page 9 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 132 (Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Cannabis Administration) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; City of Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland Cannabis Administration; Comptroller’s 
Office; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 215/ Page 10 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC); 
(2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit of 
State government that is responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis; 
(3) creating a licensing framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all 
medical cannabis licensees to either convert to adult-use cannabis businesses or cease 
operating by July 1, 2023; and (5) establishing a 9% sales and use tax on the sale of 
adult-use cannabis. As required under Chapters 254 and 255, in June 2023, ATCC and 
MCA entered into a memorandum of understanding providing that both parties agree to 
collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis operations in the State. 
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. MCA adopted permanent regulations 
governing the cannabis industry in the State that went into effect July 22, 2024. (See DLS 
Control No. 24-019P). 
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. A person at least age 21 may use and 
possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
MCA is responsible for the State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make 
medical cannabis available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a 
framework to certify health care providers, qualifying patients, and their caregivers to 
provide qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written 
certification. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 215/ Page 11 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
The Office of Social Equity (OSE) is an independent office functioning within MCA, 
established to promote and encourage full participation in the regulated cannabis industry 
by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on 
drugs in order to positively impact those communities. OSE has several responsibilities in 
furtherance of its purpose, including consulting with other agencies, providing 
recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting businesses to obtain financing 
through the Capital Access Program, and managing the Social Equity Partnership Grant 
Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships between operational licensees and 
social equity licensees). 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, incubator spaces, and 
on-site consumption. Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, 
and dispensaries. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and range from 
$5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard grower 
licenses. Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, medical licensees (growers, processors, and 
dispensaries) were required to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross revenues 
for calendar 2022 to convert to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees of the 
same type. Essentially all medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 96 dispensary 
licensees) converted to cannabis business licensees. 
 
First- and Second-round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with 
at least 65% ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain 
criteria, such as living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area 
(i.e., determined to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis 
possession charges). MCA conducted its first-round lottery on March 14, 2024, and a 
second-round lottery on June 28, 2024, awarding a total of 205 (174 in round one and 31 in 
round two) social equity cannabis business licenses across the micro and standard grower, 
processor, and dispensary categories. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 215/ Page 12 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by OSE, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly and (2) study and make recommendations on a 
number of issues related to the medical and adult-use cannabis industry in the State. The 
advisory board began meeting in May 2024, and has established three subcommittees:  
Federal, Medical Cannabis, and Adult-use Cannabis. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
In the first year of adult-use cannabis sales (July 1, 2023, through June 30, 2024), total 
cannabis sales topped $1.0 billion, with adult-use sales making up $709 million of the total. 
Retail sales of adult-use cannabis are subject to a 9% sales and use tax rate and generated 
approximately $63.8 million in sales and use tax revenues during the first year of sales. 
Adult-use cannabis sales and use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2025 totaled 
$18.3 million.  
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision,” defined as a county or municipality, is authorized to establish 
zoning requirements for cannabis businesses, allocate cannabis tax revenues, and adopt 
ordinances that reduce statutory requirements related to specified location restrictions for 
cannabis businesses. However, a political subdivision is prohibited from taking certain 
actions specific to cannabis businesses, including imposing a tax on cannabis and 
establishing restrictions related to transporting cannabis within the political subdivision or 
fees or requirements on cannabis businesses that are more burdensome than for other 
businesses. 
 
Additionally, an on-site consumption establishment may not operate in a location unless 
the political subdivision affirmatively authorizes the operation by issuing a permit or 
license. The political subdivision may also place restrictions on or prohibit the operation 
of on-site consumption establishments. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council was established to study and report its 
findings and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts 
of cannabis legalization. CPHF was also established to generally support the council’s 
work. The fund receives 5% of the tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis.  
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 215/ Page 13 
Cannabis-related Special Funds 
 
CREF is administered by MCA to cover its operating costs and the costs to administer and 
enforce the Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages and 
Cannabis Article. The fund generally consists of fees collected by MCA (including 
application and registration fees) and tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis 
sufficient to defray the entire cost of operating the administration. 
 
CRRF is administered by the Comptroller to provide funds to community-based 
organizations that serve communities determined by OSE (in consultation with Office of 
the Attorney General to have been the most impacted by disproportionate enforcement of 
the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022. The fund receives 35% of the tax revenues 
from the sale of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 
CBAF is administered by the Department of Commerce (in consultation with OSE) to assist 
small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses entering the adult-use cannabis 
industry through the award of grants and loans. The fund receives 5% of the tax revenues 
from the sale of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 215/ Page 14 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Cannabis - On-Site Consumption Establishments and Cannabis Events 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 215 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Andrew Garrison, Chief of the Office of Policy and Government Affairs – 
Maryland Cannabis Administration  
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  X      WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Many, if not all, of the newly licensed on-site consumption establishments would meet the 
definition of a small business in the State. This proposal will provide an opportunity for these 
licensees to operate in a manner that would be more likely to succeed than the business model 
currently in State. Additionally, many of the event registrants authorized under this bill would also 
likely be considered small businesses, who may be able to expand and diversify their event 
offerings under this proposal. Lastly, many of the other cannabis businesses in the State are also 
considered to be small businesses, and through the authorization of on-site consumption and event 
registrations, have expanded market access to further increase their revenue options.  
 

END OF PAGE 14