START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 284 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 284 
(Senator McCray) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Hours of Operation Violations - Civil 
Penalties 
 
 
This bill establishes penalties that the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners 
must impose on a holder of an alcoholic beverages license for the offense of operating 
outside of the hours of operation specified in statute for the license without first obtaining 
an exemption from the board. For a first offense, the board must impose a fine of at least 
$1,000 or suspend the license or both. For a second or subsequent offense, the board must 
impose a fine between $2,000 and $20,000 or suspend the license or both. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase beginning in FY 2026 to the extent fines 
are imposed under the bill. Baltimore City expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, a licensed premise must end all operations, including the serving 
of alcoholic beverages and food and providing entertainment, at the closing hour for that 
class of licensed premises. The board may grant an exemption for remaining open after 
hours to a holder of a Class B restaurant license, only for serving food to patrons seated for 
dining, a pharmacy that fills prescriptions, or a holder of a Class D beer, wine, and liquor 
license that operates a restaurant, if (1) it is used only for serving food to patrons seated in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 284/ Page 2 
a dining room that is not adjacent to a bar and (2) the restaurant is located in the 
46th legislative district in the Legislative Districting Plan of 2022. 
 
A hotel that holds a Class B license and that serves food to seated customers or for private 
functions or guest rooms may continue to provide food service. Additionally, the board 
may waive the requirement that a dining room not be adjacent to a bar. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2