START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 305 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 305 
(Senators Beidle and Hettleman) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Financial Institutions and Activities - Virtual Currency Kiosks - Registration and 
Regulation 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory framework for “virtual currency kiosks” and their 
operators to do business in the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by an estimated $84,000 annually beginning 
in FY 2026; revenues may vary to the extent the number of kiosk operators and kiosks 
varies from current estimates. The Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) can otherwise 
implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
$84,000 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful for virtual currency kiosk operators. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Virtual currency” means a digital representation of value that is used as a medium of 
exchange, unit of account, or store of value and is not currency, as specified. 
“Virtual currency” does not include: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 305/ Page 2 
 
a digital representation of value that can be redeemed for (1) goods, services, 
discounts, or purchases, as specified or (2) digital units in another customer affinity 
or reward program, as specified; or  
 
a digital representation of value issued by or on behalf of a publisher, as specified. 
 
“Virtual currency kiosk” means a stand-alone automated platform through which a 
consumer may deposit or receive cash or use a credit or debit card to obtain virtual currency 
services. “Virtual currency kiosk” does not include an automated teller machine. 
 
“Virtual currency kiosk operator” or “operator” means a person who owns or operates a 
virtual currency kiosk in the State. 
 
“Virtual currency service” means the conversion of a virtual currency to another form of 
virtual currency or the purchase, sale, exchange, swap, or transfer of virtual currency by 
any means. Virtual currency service includes any other activity that the Commissioner of 
Financial Regulation identifies as a virtual currency service by regulation. Virtual currency 
service does not include money transmission, as specified. 
 
“New user” means a person that is transacting with a virtual currency kiosk operator for 
the first time or any time in the 72 hours immediately following the person’s 
first transaction with the virtual currency kiosk operator. 
 
“Experienced user” means a person that is not a new user. 
 
 
License and Registration of a Virtual Currency Kiosk 
 
Beginning January 1, 2026, a virtual currency kiosk operator must register a kiosk with the 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation to operate in the State. The registration application 
must include (1) the name and address of the virtual currency kiosk operator; (2) unique 
identifying information for the virtual currency kiosk, as specified; (3) if the virtual 
currency kiosk operator intends to operate the virtual currency kiosk from any fixed 
location for more than 30 days in a calendar year, each physical address where the virtual 
currency kiosk will be operated; (4) if the virtual currency kiosk operator intends to operate 
the virtual currency kiosk at any location for 30 days or less in a calendar year, the 
geographic area where the licensee intends to operate the virtual currency kiosk; and 
(5) any other information the commissioner requires by regulation. 
 
The operator must renew a license annually and may be responsible for paying a 
renewal fee. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 305/ Page 3 
The bill authorizes the Commissioner of Financial Regulation to adopt and enforce 
(1) registration procedures, including the use of the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing 
Systems (NMLS); (2) registration fees, including fees for the use of the NMLS, to be paid 
directly by the operator; (3) procedures and fees for renewing an operators registration, 
including fees for the renewed use of the NMLS, to be paid directly by the operator; 
(4) regulations regarding the lighting and safety of a virtual currency kiosk; and 
(5) regulations regarding appropriate signage to clearly identify a kiosk as a virtual 
currency kiosk. 
 
Virtual Currency Transactions 
 
A virtual current kiosk operator must ensure that a virtual currency kiosk does not accept 
or dispense in a single day an amount of cash, including value downloaded through prepaid 
access, as specified, or the equivalent in credit that exceeds $2,000 for a new user or 
$10,500 for an experienced user. An operator may not collect a fee more than $5.00 or 15% 
of the amount of each virtual currency transaction, whichever is greater. A virtual currency 
kiosk operator must refund any fee imposed on a transaction that is verified as fraudulent 
in a manner established by the commissioner through regulation. 
 
Operators must collect specified information from a person before accepting cash or credit 
in connection with a virtual currency transaction, including the person’s (1) name; (2) date 
of birth; (3) mailing address; (4) email address; (5) phone number; and (6) a copy of the 
persons government-issued identification card. 
 
A virtual currency kiosk operator must ensure that the virtual currency kiosk operates 
solely for the purpose of virtual currency services and does not operate as an automated 
teller machine. 
 
At the end of a virtual currency transaction, the virtual currency kiosk operator must 
provide or display a receipt that includes information relating to the transaction, as 
specified, including a toll-free number for customer support. 
 
Required Disclosure Statements 
 
An operator must display on-screen disclosures before each virtual currency service 
transaction for a minimum amount of time, as established by the commissioner through 
regulation, before a customer may advance in the transaction. The disclosure must, in clear 
and conspicuous language, discuss all material risks generally associated with virtual 
currency and any other information the commissioner requires. Additionally, the bill 
requires operators to include in their disclosures a schedule of fees and charges a person 
may be assessed, the current exchange rates for each type of virtual currency eligible to be 
sold or purchased at the virtual currency kiosk, and the following two statements: 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 305/ Page 4 
 
Virtual currency is not money or legal tender and is not backed or insured by the 
government. Virtual currency accounts and value balances are not subject to any 
protections from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union 
Administration, or Securities Investor Protection Corporation; and 
 
WARNING:  Losses due to fraudulent or accidental virtual currency transactions 
may not be recoverable and transactions in virtual currency are irreversible. 
Virtual currency transactions may be used by scammers impersonating loved ones, 
threatening jail time, and insisting you withdraw money from your bank account to 
purchase virtual currency. 
 
The operator is responsible for ensuring the disclosures require a person to acknowledge 
and accept each disclosure before they can receive virtual currency services. 
 
Customer Support Requirements 
 
A virtual currency operator must maintain live customer support that is, at a minimum, 
reachable by telephone at a toll-free number and available Monday through Friday between 
8 a.m. and 6 p.m. 
 
Investigative, Enforcement, and Punitive Powers of the Commissioner 
 
The bill requires the commissioner to adopt regulations to carry out the bill. Moreover, the 
bill authorizes the commissioner to (1) use investigative and enforcement powers granted 
in State law to enforce the requirements of the bill; (2) impose penalties established in State 
law for violations of the bill’s provisions, with certain limitations; and (3) assess a 
maximum civil penalty of $1,000 for each knowing and willful violation of the bill’s 
provisions, with each day a violation occurs to be considered a separate violation.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Automated teller machine” means any electronic information processing device located 
in this State which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or 
convenience account. “Currency” means currency and coin of the United States or any 
other country. “Money transmission” means engaging in the business of selling or issuing 
payment instruments or prepaid access or receiving currency, funds, or other value that 
substitutes for currency and transferring currency, funds, or other value that substitutes for 
currency to another person or a location within or outside the United States by any means, 
including electronically, through the Internet, through a mobile application, through a 
network of persons, or through an informal value transfer system. “Money transmission” 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 305/ Page 5 
includes any other activity that the commissioner identifies as money transmission by 
regulation. 
 
Powers of the Commissioner 
 
OFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in 
Maryland. These include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, 
trust companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as well as nondepository 
entities such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance 
companies, installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, credit 
services businesses, debt management services providers, debt settlement services 
providers, consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. The activities of the office 
are set out in Titles 1 through 7, 11, and 12 of the Financial Institutions Article. In addition, 
the office supervises certain activities found in Title 12 and Title 14 of the 
Commercial Law Article and Title 7 of the Business Regulation Article. 
 
OFR may undertake investigatory examinations to determine whether a person has violated 
any law, regulation, rule, or order over which the office has jurisdiction. The office has 
authority to enforce the laws and regulations against individuals and entities that are 
licensed by the office, as well as those unlicensed persons that engage in an activity 
requiring licensure. The office may suspend or revoke a license, issue a cease-and-desist 
order, and impose a fine. 
 
OFR regulates and licenses sellers of money orders and traveler’s checks and those who 
receive money for transmission to others, known as money transmitters, operating in 
Maryland. Under Title 12, Subtitle 4 of the Financial Institutions Article, money transmitter 
services include bill payer services, accelerated mortgage payment services, informal 
money transfer systems outside the conventional financial institutions system, and money 
transmissions conducted over the Internet. First enacted in Maryland in 1959, the laws 
regulating money transmitters were updated in 2002 to more effectively regulate the 
industry. Legislation enacted in 2021 updated money transmitter regulation to include 
emerging forms of payment such as virtual currencies. 
 
Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System 
 
Maryland uses the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry, universally 
known as “NMLS,” for licensing and renewal of money transmitters. In fiscal 2021, there 
were 248 money transmitters licensed to conduct business in Maryland. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill authorizes OFR to impose a registration fee on virtual currency 
kiosk operators and on each kiosk, as specified. The Maryland Department of Labor 
(MD Labor) assumes, based on activity in other states regarding virtual currency kiosk 
licensing, that 12 companies and 300 kiosks require registration. The registration/renewal 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 305/ Page 6 
fee for kiosk operators is $2,000 (the same fee currently charged to money transmitters) 
and $200 per kiosk. As all operators and kiosks must be registered by January 1, 2026, total 
revenues are estimated to increase by $84,000 in fiscal 2026. Registrations must be 
renewed annually, so OFR’s revenue is estimated to remain constant at $84,000 in each of 
the out-years. To the extent that the number of operators and kiosks varies from this 
estimate, revenues also vary. 
 
OFR can adopt regulations with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business operating a virtual currency kiosk incurs 
registration and renewal fees. MD Labor advises the registration/renewal fee an operator 
is $2,000, and that the registration fee for each kiosk is $200. In addition, NMLS has a 
$120 registration fee, which applies to operators who are not otherwise licensed money 
transmitters, and a fee of $25 per kiosk. A small business may also incur costs associated 
with operating a customer support service, as required by the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6