START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 341 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 341 
(Senator McCray) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Baltimore City - Raffles - Organizations Affiliated With a Professional Major 
League Baseball Team 
 
 
This bill authorizes an organization located in Baltimore City that is affiliated with a 
professional major league baseball team that plays its home games in Baltimore City to 
conduct raffles. The organization must spend a majority of its funds in Baltimore City for 
fraternal, civic, or charitable purposes, or for purposes related to a veterans’ hospital or 
amateur athletics. Before conducting a raffle, an organization must obtain a written permit 
from a designated Baltimore City government agency. A raffle ticket may be sold and 
received in-person or on an electronic device within a specified area of Baltimore City, and 
raffle tickets must be sold and received no earlier than one hour before the official start of 
the baseball game and no later than the seventh inning of that baseball game. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. While the bill may potentially decrease lottery revenues due to 
substitution effects in FY 2025 and FY 2026, the impact is small enough that State finances 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances. The 
Baltimore City Police Department can issue permits in FY 2025 and FY 2026 using 
existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 341/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Before issuing the permit, the designated Baltimore City government 
agency must ascertain the character of the applicant to determine if the permit should be 
issued. The agency may issue a single permit to an organization to hold raffles at multiple 
professional major league baseball games played in Baltimore City, and there is no limit 
on the number of raffles that an organization may conduct in conjunction with professional 
major league baseball games played in Baltimore City. A permit expires at the end of the 
calendar year in which the permit is issued.  
 
The organization conducting a raffle may set the price of raffle tickets and award prizes in 
any amount in money or in merchandise. The organization conducting a raffle may not 
allow an individual or group of individuals to benefit financially from the raffle or receive 
any of the raffle’s proceeds for personal use or benefit.  
 
An organization conducting a raffle must use a geofence to ensure that raffle tickets sold 
and received on an electronic device are sold and received within a specified area in 
Baltimore City. A raffle ticket may only be sold using age-verification measures to ensure 
that the buyer is at least 18 years old. 
 
An organization conducting a raffle is not subject to the prohibition of accepting credit 
under current law as long as an individual does not purchase more than $50 worth of tickets 
or make more than one credit transaction each day. 
 
A person may not knowingly conduct or attempt to conduct a raffle in violation of the bill, 
and a person who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a 
maximum of one year in prison and/or a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
Current Law:  In Baltimore City, qualified organizations may conduct gaming events  
(i.e., a carnival, bazaar, or raffle) for the benefit of a religious, fraternal, civic, or charitable 
organization; a veteran’s hospital; or an amateur youth athletic organization. An 
organization conducting a gaming event must be located in Baltimore City and spend a 
majority of the organization’s funds in Baltimore City for specified purposes (e.g., fraternal 
or charitable purposes). There is no limit on the amount of merchandise or prize money 
that may be awarded at a gaming event. A permit holder may conduct no more than 
12 raffles per year. 
 
An individual or group of individuals may not benefit financially from the event, and the 
event must be personally managed by the members of the organization. An organization 
must obtain a permit from the Baltimore City Police Department before operating a gaming 
event. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 341/ Page 3 
A person may not knowingly conduct or attempt to conduct a bazaar or raffle in violation 
of the law, and a person who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to a maximum of one year in prison and/or a maximum fine of $1,000. 
 
An organization that operates an authorized gaming event may not accept credit from a 
person to allow that person to play a gaming device at the gaming event. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 399 (Delegate Edelson) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Comptroller’s Office; Department of State 
Police; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3