START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 338 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 338 
(Baltimore County Senators) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Baltimore County - Speed Monitoring Systems - Interstate 695 and Interstate 83 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Highway Administration (SHA) to place and use up to 
six speed monitoring systems (speed cameras) on Interstate 83 in Baltimore County and 
eight speed monitoring systems on Interstate 695 in Baltimore County, subject to certain 
requirements and limitations. Fines collected from the speed cameras must be remitted to 
the Comptroller for distribution to SHA, to then be used to (1) recover SHA’s 
administrative costs to implement and administer the speed camera program and (2) assist 
in covering the cost of roadway and safety improvements on Interstate 695 and 
Interstate 83 in Baltimore County. Fines distributed pursuant to the bill’s authorization are 
supplemental to (and not intended to take the place of) funding that would otherwise be 
appropriated for the same purposes. The bill terminates June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent speed cameras are placed as authorized, Transportation Trust 
Fund (TTF) revenues increase, potentially significantly, from FY 2026 through 2030; 
TTF expenditures increase correspondingly for administrative costs and for roadway and 
safety improvements. General fund expenditures increase by approximately $12,200 in 
FY 2026 only for reprogramming. 
  
Local Effect:  Although Baltimore County may benefit from the roadway and safety 
improvements on Interstate 695 and Interstate 83, local finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 338/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill incorporates the authorization for SHA to place and use speed 
cameras on Interstate 695 or Interstate 83 in Baltimore County within current statutory 
provisions governing the use of speed cameras in specified locations throughout the State. 
Notably, and consistent with the requirements governing most other speed cameras used in 
the State:   
 
 
before activating a speed camera, SHA must take specified steps to notify the 
general public of the placement of the speed camera; 
 
SHA must ensure there is specified signage notifying motorists that a speed camera 
is in use; 
 
SHA must designate an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions 
and concerns about the speed camera program, as specified; 
 
speed cameras used by SHA must undergo an annual calibration check, as specified; 
and 
 
SHA must report certain information annually to the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission for inclusion in the commission’s annual report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on speed cameras in the State. 
 
The bill includes additional specifications that apply exclusively to SHA and speed 
cameras placed and used by SHA under the authority granted by the bill. Notably, the bill: 
 
 
requires the speed cameras to be used only at locations SHA identifies as being at 
high risk for motor vehicle crashes that result in death or serious bodily injury;  
 
prohibits the placement and use of a speed camera within five miles of another speed 
camera operating in the same direction; 
 
requires SHA, for the first 30 days that a speed camera is in use, to mail warning 
notices instead of citations for violations recorded by the camera; and 
 
requires SHA to submit a report on the speed camera program to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by June 1, 2029. 
 
The report must include specified information about the program, including citations 
issued, the amount of revenues collected, how the revenues have been used, and whether 
there have been any measurable improvements to driver awareness and safety. 
 
Additionally, the bill establishes a maximum civil penalty of $40 for a violation recorded 
by a speed camera on Interstate 695 or Interstate 83 in Baltimore County. The bill includes 
a contingency provision to ensure that the maximum civil penalty of $40 applies even if 
certain legislation to increase the maximum civil penalty that may be imposed for a 
violation recorded by a speed camera throughout the State is enacted. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 338/ Page 3 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control 
systems. 
 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by SHA. Similar requirements apply to speed cameras established on 
Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of institutions of higher education 
in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, Maryland Route 175 in 
Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the Maryland Route 175/295 interchange 
and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, and at the intersection of 
Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in Talbot County. 
 
An authorizing ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body of a local 
jurisdiction must establish certain procedures related to the movement or placement of 
speed monitoring systems. Specifically, if a jurisdiction moves (or places) a mobile (or 
stationary) speed monitoring system to (or at) a new location, the jurisdiction may not issue 
a citation for a violation recorded by that speed monitoring system (1) until signage is 
installed, as specified and (2) for at least the first 15 calendar days after the signage is 
installed. 
 
Generally, from the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction 
may recover the costs of implementing the system and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. However, if the 
balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 10% of the 
jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
State Expenditures:  Assuming SHA uses the authorization to place the additional speed 
cameras on Interstate 695 and Interstate 83 in Baltimore County, TTF expenditures 
increase, as early as fiscal 2026. 
 
The exact cost to place the speed cameras and related signage depends on a number of 
factors (e.g., the total number of cameras placed and how many are routinely active, how 
often the cameras are moved, etc.). For comparison purposes, administrative costs 
(including equipment and personnel) for SHA and the Department of State Police to 
operate the State’s work zone speed control system totaled about $6.7 million and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 338/ Page 4 
$1.2 million, respectively, in fiscal 2023. Expenditures under the bill are likely 
significantly less than those amounts, as the speed monitoring systems authorized by the 
bill are limited to 14. Based on preliminary information from SHA, administrative costs 
for the program could total as much as $600,000 annually, which includes personnel costs 
associated with two additional program managers. 
 
In addition, TTF expenditures increase for roadway and safety improvements, after a 
portion of the revenues is retained by SHA for cost recovery, as authorized under the bill. 
SHA may incur costs to complete the report required by the bill; however, any such impact 
cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
The increase in District Court caseloads can likely be handled with existing resources until 
the bill terminates. In fiscal 2026 only, general fund expenditures increase by $12,208 for 
reprogramming for the Judiciary. 
 
State Revenues:  The amount of citation revenues that may be received as a result of the 
new speed monitoring systems cannot be determined without actual experience under the 
bill and depends on factors such as the exact locations where the cameras are placed, the 
traffic volume at such locations, the extent to which driver behavior changes, etc. For 
context, in fiscal 2023, citation revenues for the State’s work zone speed control systems 
totaled $9.7 million. 
 
Fine revenues collected for contested citations in the District Court accrue to the 
general fund under other automated enforcement systems; however, the District Court must 
remit all fine revenues collected under the bill to the Comptroller for subsequent 
distribution to SHA. Thus, based on revenues received under the State’s work zone 
monitoring system program, TTF revenues may increase significantly from fiscal 2026 
through 2030, assuming cameras are installed pursuant to the bill’s authorization. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1067 and HB 1502 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 978 (Baltimore County Delegation) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 338/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 27, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
Enrolled - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2025 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5