START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 396 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 396 
(Senator McKay, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation and Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Public Safety Officer - Performance of Duties - Death Benefits 
 
This bill (1) requires that the State pay public safety death benefits to the surviving family 
of specified law enforcement personnel who commit suicide and (2) makes local 9-1-1 
specialists eligible for public safety death benefits. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of circumstances, it 
likely has no immediate material effect on State expenditures, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  9-1-1 specialists are eligible for the public safety death benefit described 
below (but not the funeral benefit). Also, an individual who dies by suicide is presumed to 
have died as a direct and proximate result of an injury sustained in the performance of 
duties (and, therefore, is eligible for death benefits) if the individual was diagnosed by a 
licensed medical or mental health professional with post-traumatic stress disorder (better 
known as PTSD), acute stress disorder, or a trauma- and stress-related disorder and the 
diagnosis resulted due to the nature and performance of the individual’s duties. 
 
Current Law:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services is required to 
pay a death benefit to the surviving spouse, child, dependent parent, or estate of each of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 396/ Page 2 
the following individuals who is killed or dies in the performance of duties:  (1) a law 
enforcement officer; (2) a correctional officer; (3) a volunteer or career firefighter or rescue 
squad member; (4) a sworn member of the Office of the State Fire Marshal; (5) a public 
safety aviation employee; (6) a Maryland resident who was a member of the uniformed 
services of the United States serving in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict; or (7) a hazardous 
material response team employee of the Maryland Department of the Environment. With 
the exception of a member of the uniformed services serving in Afghanistan or Iraq, 
reasonable funeral expenses up to $25,000 must also be paid. 
 
Generally, an application for a death benefit must be submitted within three years after the 
death of the decedent. Beginning in fiscal 2009, the $125,000 death benefit is 
adjusted annually by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), and beginning in fiscal 2026, the 
$25,000 funeral benefit is adjusted annually by the CPI. 
 
On a case-by-case basis, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services may 
award a death benefit under these provisions if (1) the decedent’s death was caused by the 
decedent’s intentional misconduct; (2) the decedent intended to bring about the decedent’s 
death; (3) the decedent’s voluntary intoxication was the proximate cause of the decedent’s 
death; or (4) additional evidence arises that the decedent’s death resulted from an act 
committed against the decedent by another due to the nature and performance of the 
decedent’s duties. 
 
A death benefit under these provisions is in addition to (1) any workers’ compensation 
benefits; (2) the proceeds of any form of life insurance, regardless of who paid the 
premiums; and (3) the funeral benefit provided under these provisions.  
 
Payments of death or funeral benefits must be made out of money that the Governor 
includes for that purpose in the State budget. 
 
A 9-1-1 specialist is an employee of a county public safety answering point (i.e., 9-1-1 call 
center), or an employee working in a county public safety answering point, whose duties 
and responsibilities include (1) receiving and processing 9-1-1 requests for emergency 
services; (2) other support functions directly related to 9-1-1 requests for emergency 
services; or (3) dispatching law enforcement officers, fire rescue services, emergency 
medical services, and other public safety services to the scene of an emergency. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding eligibility for the death benefits to 9-1-1 specialists and 
requiring payments to individuals who die by suicide (instead of deciding such cases on a 
case-by-case basis) are both expected to apply in limited circumstances. The fiscal 2026 
budget as introduced includes $850,000 for the payment of death benefits to surviving 
family members of law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty, which is consistent 
with budgeted amounts in recent years. Total annual death benefit payments for each of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 396/ Page 3 
past four years have ranged from a high of $2.0 million (for 12 deaths) in fiscal 2023 to a 
low of $518,600 (for 3 deaths) in fiscal 2024. The bill’s changes may increase payments in 
some years, but any such increase likely can be covered with funds typically budgeted for 
these payments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with some provisions included in this bill has been 
proposed. For example, see HB 1389 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 76 (Delegate Lehman, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; City of Salisbury; Town of Bel Air; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
State Police; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management; State Retirement Agency; Bolton; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3