START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 335 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 335 
(Senators Bailey and Mautz) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Canada Geese - Bag Limits 
 
 
This bill establishes that during the migratory Canada goose (Atlantic population) hunting 
season, the bag limit for all Canada geese in the State, including geese found in the Atlantic 
Flyway Resident Population Hunt Zone and the Atlantic Population Hunt Zone, must 
conform to the bag limit for Atlantic population Canada geese adopted annually by the 
Department of the Interior’s U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). The bill, however, 
does not apply in Allegany, Frederick, Garrett, and Washington counties and the portion 
of Carroll County geographically west of Route 31 and Route 97. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Natural Resources Article, a Canada goose is considered a 
wetland game bird, which is a type of migratory game bird. A “migratory game bird” means 
any wetland game bird, dove, or woodcock. A “wetland game bird” means brant, coots, 
ducks, gallinules, geese, mergansers, rails, snipe, and swan. A Maryland migratory game 
bird stamp, in addition to a hunting license, is required to hunt all migratory game birds. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 335/ Page 2 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) regulations (COMAR 08.03.03.02) establish that 
the State’s seasons, bag limits, and possession limits for migratory game birds conform to 
regulations adopted by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior. 
Under USFWS’s 2024-2025 migratory bird hunting regulations (89 Fed. Reg. 70,545), 
apart from special early seasons in September, the Canada goose hunting seasons and 
bag/possession limits in Maryland are:   
 
 
Atlantic Flyway Resident Population Hunt Zone – (1) season (referred to in DNR’s 
guide to hunting and trapping as the Late Resident Canada Goose Season) – 
November 23 to 29 and December 16 to March 10; (2) bag limit – 5; and 
(3) possession limit – 15; and 
 
Atlantic Population Hunt Zone – (1) season (referred to in DNR’s guide to hunting 
and trapping as the Migratory Canada Goose (Atlantic Population) Season) – 
December 20 to January 4, and January 15 to February 1; (2) bag limit – two; and 
(3) possession limit – six. 
 
The Atlantic Flyway Resident Population Hunt Zone includes Allegany, Frederick, Garrett, 
Montgomery, and Washington counties, as well as the western halves of Carroll, Charles, 
and Prince George’s counties. 
 
The Atlantic Population Hunt Zone includes the entire Eastern Shore (Caroline, Cecil, 
Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester counties), 
as well as Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Harford, Howard, and St. Mary’s counties. It 
also covers the eastern halves of Carroll, Charles, and Prince George’s counties. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR indicates that the higher bag limit in the Atlantic Flyway 
Resident Population Hunt Zone, where the Canada geese are primarily resident geese (the 
geese in the Atlantic Population Hunt Zone are primarily wintering, migratory geese), is 
intended to reduce the resident goose population and the damage and complaints caused 
by the geese. The bill’s requirement that the bag limit in the Atlantic Flyway Resident 
Population Hunt Zone be the same as the bag limit in the Atlantic Population Hunt Zone 
during the Migratory Canada Goose (Atlantic Population) Season, except in Allegany, 
Frederick, Garrett, and Washington counties and part of Carroll County, reduces the 
number of geese that can be harvested during that time (December 20 to January 4, and 
January 15 to February 1) in Montgomery County as well as the western halves of Charles 
and Prince Georges’ counties (the remaining area of the Atlantic Flyway Resident 
Population Hunt Zone), potentially negatively affecting small businesses, including farms, 
that are negatively affected by resident geese. 
 
DNR estimates that, for the portion of the Atlantic Flyway Resident Population Hunt Zone 
within 
Montgomery 
County 
and 
the 
western 
halves 
of 
Charles 
and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 335/ Page 3 
Prince George’s counties, on average 669 geese were harvested each year and 156 hunters 
hunted on a combined 618 days each year from 2013 to 2022. In 2011, the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, estimated that resident Canada geese were responsible for $500,000 in 
agricultural damage in Maryland.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 42 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 892 (Delegate Jacobs, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Department of 
Agriculture; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3