START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 308 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 308 
(Senator Simonaire, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Election Law – Chief Election Judges – Party Affiliation 
 
 
This bill modifies provisions governing the party affiliation of chief election judges and 
other election judges assigned to a polling place. The bill requires that a polling place have 
an equal number of chief judges and other election judges from the majority party and 
principal minority party to the extent practicable; however, if an election director 
designates two chief judges for a polling place and is unable to designate one from each 
party at least 45 days before early voting, the election director must designate one chief 
judge from the majority or principal minority party and one chief judge who is not 
registered with either party. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill modifies an existing requirement that each polling place have an 
equal number of election judges from the majority party and principal minority party 
(which is subject to an exception for judges not registered with either party and judges who 
are minors). The bill modifies the requirement by (1) clarifying that it applies to chief 
judges in addition to other election judges and (2) requiring the number of judges from the 
majority party and principal minority party to be equal to the extent practicable. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 308/ Page 2 
The bill also repeals a provision that prohibits the number of election judges – in a precinct 
where there are six or more election judges – who are not registered with the majority party 
or principal minority party from exceeding the lesser of the number of election judges who 
belong to the majority party or the number of election judges who belong to the principal 
minority party. 
 
The bill finally establishes that if an election director that designates two chief judges for 
a polling place is unable to designate one chief judge from the majority party and one chief 
judge from the principal minority party at least 45 days before the start of early voting, the 
election director must designate one chief judge from the majority party or principal 
minority party and one chief judge who is not registered with either party.  
 
Current Law:  Each local election director, with the approval of the local board of 
elections, must appoint election judges for each polling place for a term that begins on the 
Tuesday that is 13 weeks before each statewide primary election.  
 
One or two election judges in each precinct must be designated chief election judge and 
supervise the staff at the polling place. 
 
Each local board must provide at least four election judges to be the staff for each polling 
place, but in a precinct with fewer than 200 registered voters, the local board may provide 
two election judges for that precinct’s polling place. 
 
Each polling place must have an equal number of election judges from the majority party 
and the principal minority party; however, if the total number of election judges for a 
precinct is six or more, a local board may provide (1) one or more election judges who are 
not registered with either the majority party or principal minority party and (2) one or more 
election judges who are minors. The number of election judges provided to a polling place 
who are not registered with either the majority party or principal minority party, or who 
are minors, may not exceed the lesser of (1) the number of election judges who belong to 
the majority party or (2) the number of election judges who belong to the principal minority 
party.         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 308/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; Maryland State Board of 
Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3