START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 399 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 399 
(Senator McKay) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Natural Resources - Wildland Areas - Overhead Transmission Lines 
 
 
This bill exempts, under specified circumstances, certain lands from continuing to be 
designated as part of the Big Savage Mountain Wildland, Bear Pen Wildland, or 
Dan’s Mountain Wildland. For the construction of a new overhead transmission line that 
passes through any of those wildlands, the Public Service Commission (PSC) must require 
an applicant for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) to provide 
wildland impact mitigation guarantees, including working with the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) to acquire and replace the Type 1 State wildland acreage that is lost as a 
result of the transmission line, as specified. It is the intent of the General Assembly that 
nothing in the bill be construed as a recommendation that a proposed NextEra Energy 
transmission line (i.e., the Mid-Atlantic Resiliency Link project) be issued a CPCN from 
PSC. Provisions altering wildland designations and the CPCN process are contingent 
on specified actions. The bill terminates if PSC, as further specified, (1) approves a 
CPCN for an alternative NextEra Energy transmission line that does not pass through 
any of those wildlands or (2) denies a CPCN for a NextEra Energy transmission line. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances; however, there 
may be an impact on local government operations, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 399/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes that the existing boundaries of the Big Savage 
Mountain Wildland, Bear Pen Wildland, or Dan’s Mountain Wildland do not include any 
NextEra Energy transmission line if the company obtains a CPCN for its construction and 
the new transmission line: 
 
 
runs parallel to the Potomac Edison transmission line, as specified; 
 
does not disturb any area further than 200 feet from the nearest point of the 
Potomac Edison transmission line right-of-way, except as otherwise specified; and  
 
is designed in consultation with DNR to minimize specified environmental impacts, 
including forest loss and fragmentation. 
 
For the construction of an overhead transmission line as specified above, PSC must require 
a CPCN applicant to provide wildland impact mitigation guarantees, including working 
with DNR to (1) acquire and replace the Type 1 wildland acreage that is lost due to the 
transmission line with acreage that is twice the size and is suitable for designation as 
wildland acreage and (2) develop and implement a land a conservation management plan 
for the area affected by the transmission line that supports wildlife habitats. 
 
Any alterations to the existing boundaries of the Big Savage Mountain Wildland, Bear Pen 
Wildland, or Dan’s Mountain Wildland – and the changes to the CPCN process discussed 
above – are contingent on (1) a 120-day stakeholder process, as specified; (2) DNR 
completing a 90-day deliberation period; and (3) the Secretary of Natural Resources 
recommending that PSC issue a CPCN for the proposed overhead transmission line. The 
stakeholder process must include:  
 
 
a public participation process that meets the requirements of COMAR 20.79.01; 
 
at least one public advertised meeting within 25 miles of each impacted designated 
wildland area; 
 
at least one public meeting that provides for virtual participation; 
 
special effort by the CPCN applicant to reach out to organizations with special 
expertise in wildlands, wildlife management, and environmental stewardship; and 
 
a portal for public comments, which must be submitted to DNR. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Wildlands 
 
There is a State wildlands preservation system established in statute for the purpose of 
securing for the people of present and future generations the benefits of an enduring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 399/ Page 3 
resource of State wildlands. DNR’s Land Acquisition and Planning Unit is responsible for 
administering the State wildlands preservation system. “Wildlands” are defined as limited 
areas of land or water that have retained their wilderness character, although not necessarily 
completely natural and undisturbed, or have rare or vanishing species of plant or animal 
life or similar features of interest worthy of preservation for use of present and future 
residents of the State. 
 
Under § 5-1203 of the Natural Resources Article, Big Savage Mountain Wildland, 
Bear Pen Wildland, and Dan’s Mountain Wildland are each classified as Type 1 State 
wildlands. A “Type 1 wildland” means a primitive area which by its size and location is in 
effect untouched by urban civilization and can offer the experience of solitude and 
self-reliance. These wildlands are usually lands located at higher elevations that protect 
watersheds and are ecologically vulnerable to human interferences. 
 
Big Savage Mountain Wildland (2,879 acres), Bear Pen Wildland (1,517 acres), and 
Dan’s Mountain Wildland (4,047 acres) are 3 of 38 separate wildlands designated in 
statute, consisting of approximately 66,000 acres statewide. Generally, the wildland areas 
must be devoted to public purposes for recreational, scenic, scientific, educational, 
conservation, and historical use. Commercial enterprises and permanent roads (subject to 
existing private rights), temporary roads, use of motorized equipment/vehicles/boats, and 
structures or installations are not allowed in the wildland areas. Certain statutory exceptions 
apply, however, including general exceptions (e.g., minimum measures necessary to 
administer the area as a wildland; maintenance of boundary roads; normal maintenance and 
certain upgrades and expansions of utility lines; and measures to protect nearby private 
land) and exceptions specific to certain wildland areas. 
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources may review areas under the Secretary’s jurisdiction as 
to their suitability for preservation as State wildlands and report findings to the Governor. 
The Governor, in turn, makes recommendations to the General Assembly with respect to 
the designation or reclassification of wildland areas or alteration of boundaries. Such 
additions or changes can only be made by the General Assembly. The Secretary must 
provide specified notice to the public and relevant State and local officials and hold a public 
hearing at a location convenient to the area affected prior to submitting recommendations 
to the Governor. 
 
Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act 
 
The Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act, first established in 1937, provides 
funding to states to support wildlife restoration, conservation, and hunter education and 
safety programs. Programs under the Act are administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service (USFWS), and funding is apportioned to states through several programs. Among 
other purposes, states may use this funding to acquire, restore, and manage wildlife areas 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 399/ Page 4 
(for example, Maryland’s wildlands preservation system); provide public access to wildlife 
resources; and facilitate public access for hunting or other wildlife-oriented recreation. 
Federal funds may be used for up to 75% of a state’s cost to implement eligible programs 
or projects. 
 
To be eligible for Pittman-Robertson funding, a state must comply with certain 
requirements, including maintaining legislation that ensures the conservation of fish and 
wildlife and requires that all revenue from hunting and fishing licenses be controlled by 
and used for the administration of the state fish and wildlife agency. If a state fish and 
wildlife agency uses grant funds to acquire an interest in a parcel of land, the agency must 
use it for the purpose authorized in the grant. 
 
If a state fish and wildlife agency allows a use of real property that interferes with its 
authorized purpose under a grant, the agency must fully restore the real property to its 
authorized purpose. Alternatively, if the agency cannot restore the real property to its 
authorized purpose, it must replace the real property using non-federal funds. The agency 
must determine that the replacement property is (1) of at least equal value at current market 
prices and (2) has fish, wildlife, and public use benefits consistent with the purposes of the 
original grant. USFWS regulations specify that an agency has up to three years, after 
receiving specified notice, to restore the property or acquire replacement property. If the 
agency fails to do so within three years, USFWS may declare the agency ineligible to 
receive new grants in the program(s) that funded the original acquisition. 
 
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
Generally, a person may not begin construction in the State of an overhead transmission 
line that is designed to carry a voltage in excess of 69,000 volts unless a CPCN is 
first obtained from PSC. PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due 
consideration of the recommendations of the governing body of each county or 
municipality in which any portion of the project is proposed to be located and the effect of 
the project on various aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
For the construction of a new overhead transmission line specifically, PSC must also 
provide due consideration of (1) the need to meet existing and future demand for electric 
service and (2) the alternative routes that the applicant considered, including the estimated 
costs of each alternative route and a statement of the reason why the alternative route was 
rejected. Additionally, PSC must require the applicant to (1) comply with specified 
agreements and obligations related to the ongoing operations and maintenance of the 
overhead transmission line and (2) identify whether the overhead transmission line is 
proposed to be constructed on an existing brownfields site, a property that is subject to an 
existing easement, or a site where a tower structure or components thereof exist and can be 
used to support an overhead transmission line. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 399/ Page 5 
For additional information on the CPCN process, please see the Appendix – Certificate 
of Public Convenience and Necessity. 
 
Public Participation Process (COMAR 20.79.01) 
 
Under COMAR 20.79.01, prior to filing a CPCN application for the construction of a new 
qualifying generating station, a prospective CPCN applicant must offer to engage the 
participation of the affected communities for the purpose of educating those communities 
concerning the proposed project and soliciting their feedback. At a minimum, the 
prospective CPCN applicant must: 
 
 
designate a community liaison officer for the proposed project; 
 
identify actual community members and organizations within the affected 
communities and provide notification of the proposed project and any public 
meeting invitation to those community members and organizations; and 
 
hold a minimum of one public meeting within the county or municipality in which 
any portion of the construction of the project is proposed to be located, in 
accordance with various administrative and public notice requirements. 
 
The applicant must then prepare a statement of public engagement and participation 
certification, which must describe the applicant’s efforts to provide notice to and engage 
the affected communities and must include a summary discussion of any actions the 
applicant has agreed to take to address the concerns raised at the public meeting. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill’s provisions affecting the designation of State wildlands and 
the CPCN process for overhead transmission lines are contingent on the completion of a 
stakeholder process, a 90-day deliberation period by DNR, and a recommendation by the 
Secretary of Natural Resources that a CPCN be issued to NextEra Energy for a proposed 
transmission line. For purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that these contingencies are 
met. If any of these contingencies are not met, the bill has no material impact on State 
finances or operations. 
 
DNR advises that State wildlands are partially managed using federal grant monies 
received under the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act. According to DNR, the 
bill may jeopardize a portion of the funding it receives annually under the Act because it 
would permit the installation of overhead transmission lines on land that is currently part 
of existing State wildlands. DNR advises that the State, which acquired many of its 
wildlands using Pittman-Robertson funds, is subject to strict requirements on how such 
land must be used and maintained. 
 
As previously discussed, if a state fish and wildlife agency allows real property to be used 
in a way that interferes with its authorized purpose under a Pittman-Robertson grant, the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 399/ Page 6 
agency must either fully restore the property to its authorized purpose or replace the real 
property using non-federal funds. Under the bill, if an overhead transmission line is 
eventually constructed at Big Savage Mountain, Bear Pen, and/or Dan’s Mountain, DNR 
would not be able to fully restore the property to its authorized purpose. However, the bill 
requires the CPCN applicant to provide wildland impact mitigation guarantees, including 
working with DNR to acquire and replace the Type 1 State wildland acreage that is lost as 
a result of the transmission line’s construction with twice as much acreage that is suitable 
for designation as State wildlands. DNR anticipates that this can be accomplished, if 
necessary, within the three-year timeframe required by USFWS, using existing funding. 
The Department of Legislative Services concurs with DNR’s assessment. 
 
DNR advises that any increase in its workload resulting from the bill’s implementation, 
including the 90-day deliberation period it must undertake to review a proposed 
transmission line, can be handled using existing staff. According to PSC, the bill does not 
have any impact on its finances or operations. 
 
Therefore, it is likely that State finances and operations are not materially affected as a 
result of the bill. In the event, however, that the proposed overhead transmission line is 
built, and the State is unable to replace the resulting acreage that is removed from State 
wildlands within three years, federal fund revenues (and corresponding expenditures) for 
DNR may decrease in the future (likely in the out-years). 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Should NextEra decide to proceed with a CPCN application to build 
an overhead transmission line through acreage that is currently part of Big Savage 
Mountain Wildland, Bear Pen Wildland, and/or Dan’s Mountain Wildland, county and 
other local entities in Allegany and Garrett counties are likely to be involved in the 
consultation, review, and permitting process for the transmission line. It is not anticipated 
that such involvement would have a material impact on local finances. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to DNR, Big Savage Mountain Wildland, Bear Pen 
Wildland, and Dan’s Mountain Wildland collectively support two endangered bat species, 
the rare Appalachian cottontail rabbit, and 25 other known rare, threatened, or endangered 
species. 
 
PJM Interconnection, LLC, the regional transmission organization for 13 states (including 
Maryland) and the District of Columbia, approved a set of proposed projects in 
December 2023 to expand the region’s transmission capacity, enhance the grid, and 
accommodate increasing electricity demand. Among the projects that PJM approved is the 
Mid-Atlantic Resiliency Link, a proposed transmission line that would be built by 
NextEra Energy and run from southwestern Pennsylvania, through parts of Maryland and 
West Virginia, into northern Virginia. According to NextEra Energy, it has not selected a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 399/ Page 7 
route yet for the project; however, it anticipates sharing potential routes for the 
transmission line on its website in spring 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1270 (Delegate Hinebaugh) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; 
PJM Interconnection, LLC; NextEra Energy; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
Enrolled - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2025 
 
km/smr 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 399/ Page 8 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or 
qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. 
 
State law provides that a “generating station” excludes:  
 
 
a facility used for electricity production with a capacity of up to 2 megawatts that is 
installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to the electric grid 
during time periods when the grid is out of service; 
 
a combination of two or more co-located or adjacent facilities used for electricity 
production 
from 
solar 
photovoltaic 
systems 
or 
specified 
eligible 
customer-generators that have a maximum cumulative capacity of 14 megawatts, 
including maximum individual capacities of 2 megawatts (subject to satisfying other 
requirements); and  
 
a facility, or a combination of two or more facilities, used for electricity production 
for the purpose of onsite emergency backup for critical infrastructure when service 
from the electric company is interrupted and conducting necessary test and 
maintenance operations (subject to satisfying other requirements). 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 399/ Page 9 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions and must consider alternative 
routes and related costs for the construction of a new overhead transmission line. 
 
Generating Station Exemptions 
 
There are three general conditions under which a person constructing a generating station 
may apply to PSC for an exemption from the CPCN requirement: 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 399/ Page 10 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company;  
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or  
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 
 

END OF PAGE 10