START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 376 
(Senator Kramer, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Department of Health and Office of Health Care Quality - Nursing 
Home Inspections - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), beginning July 1, 2025, and 
every three months thereafter, to report to the Senate Finance Committee and the 
House Health and Government Operations Committee the number of nursing home 
surveys conducted in each county. The data must be disaggregated by the following types 
of surveys:  standard; complaint; follow-up; revisit; special focus facility; abbreviated; and 
life safety code. Beginning July 1, 2025, and every six months thereafter, the Office of 
Health Care Quality (OHCQ) must report to each area agency on aging (AAA) the name 
of each nursing home in the county that was surveyed in the immediately preceding 
six months and the date each survey was conducted. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, 
and terminates May 31, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can report to specified committees of the General Assembly and 
AAAs using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Nursing home” means a facility (other than a facility offering domiciliary 
or personal care) that offers nonacute inpatient care to patients suffering from a disease, 
chronic illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease requiring 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 376/ Page 2 
maximal nursing care without continuous hospital services and who require medical 
services and nursing services rendered by or under the supervision of a licensed nurse 
together with convalescent, restorative, or rehabilitative services. 
 
State Oversight of Specified Health Care Facilities 
 
The Secretary of Health must adopt reasonable rules and regulations that set standards of 
services for related institutions, hospitals, and residential treatment centers in the following 
areas:  (1) the care of patients; (2) the medical supervision of patients; (3) the physical 
environment; (4) disease control; (5) sanitation; (6) safety; and (7) dietary matters. 
 
To ensure compliance with these rules and regulations, MDH’s OHCQ inspects each 
related institution, hospital, and residential treatment center. In general, OHCQ inspects 
facilities for which a license is sought and periodically after a license has been issued. 
MDH submits an annual report to the General Assembly regarding the inspections 
conducted during the immediately preceding year. Additionally, OHCQ must submit an 
annual report to the Oversight Committee on Quality of Care in Nursing Homes and 
Assisted Living Facilities regarding the status of quality of care in nursing homes. 
 
The oversight committee – within the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) –
comprises several members, including the Secretary of Aging, the Secretary of Health, and 
the Director of OHCQ. In general, the oversight committee evaluates progress in improving 
the quality of nursing home and assisted living facility care in the State. 
 
Area Agencies on Aging 
 
MDOA administers programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older 
Americans Act. Most of the direct services funded by MDOA are delivered through AAAs. 
In Maryland, each of the 23 counties and Baltimore City designate an AAA. The agency 
may be a unit of local government or a private, nonprofit corporation. AAAs provide a 
variety of adult services, incorporating assisted living, protective services, and temporary 
disability programs. 
 
Federal Oversight of Specified Health Care Facilities 
 
The 1864 Agreement is an agreement between the federal Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) and the state health facility survey agency to carry out specified 
provisions of the Social Security Act. Each 1864 Agreement stipulates the functions of the 
states to, among other things, certify whether or not providers and suppliers within the state 
comply with all applicable definitions and requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 376/ Page 3 
CMS allocates funding to each state for the reasonable costs of performing the functions 
specified in the agreement and for Medicare’s fair share of costs related to Medicare 
facilities. States that fail to perform survey and certification functions in a manner 
sufficient to assure the full certification of compliance, may, among other things, receive a 
revised budgetary allocation. The Medicare and Medicaid certification of providers in a 
state whose oversight process is substantially deficient may be jeopardized if CMS cannot 
ensure that the regulatory minimum health and safety standards have been met. 
 
In Maryland, certain long-term care facilities (assisted living programs and developmental 
disabilities facilities) necessitate compliance with CMS waiver requirements. Additionally, 
hospice facilities, residential treatment facilities, and other long-term care facilities require 
adherence to corresponding federal standards. 
 
Nursing Homes 
 
OHCQ generally makes an unannounced site visit and conducts a full survey of each 
licensed nursing home at least once per year. After a nursing home complaint alleging 
actual harm, OHCQ must initiate an investigation within 10 business days. If MDH 
receives a complaint alleging immediate jeopardy to a resident, it must make every effort 
to investigate the complaint within 24 hours, and no later than 48 hours, after receiving the 
complaint. 
 
According to MDH, and pursuant to specified federal regulations, the following nursing 
home surveys may generally be conducted to ensure compliance with both federal and 
State requirements: 
 
 
a “standard survey” means a periodic, resident-centered inspection that gathers 
information about the quality of service to determine compliance with specified 
requirements (according to MDH, a standard survey is referred to as the “annual 
survey” in the State, and is conducted on a 15.9 month cycle); 
 
an “abbreviated standard survey” means a survey other than a standard survey that 
gathers information primarily through resident-centered techniques on facility 
compliance and may be premised on (1) complaints received; (2) a change of 
ownership, management, or director of nursing; or (3) other indicators of concern; 
 
a complaint survey is a type of abbreviated standard survey initiated following a 
complaint alleging violation of federal and/or State laws and/or regulations; 
 
a follow-up survey, or revisit survey, occurs when the State has cited deficiencies 
during the course of another survey, and the State may, as necessary, conduct a post 
survey revisit to determine if the facility has come into compliance with specified 
CMS requirements; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 376/ Page 4 
 
a special focus facility survey is conducted as part of CMS’s Special Focus Facility 
program, which is targeted at nursing homes that have a history of serious quality 
issues; and 
 
a life safety code survey is a review of specified fire protection requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 429 (Delegate Cullison, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Harford, 
Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - April 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 8, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - April 29, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4