START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 360 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 360 
(Senators Hester and Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Revenge Porn - Definition of Visual Representation and Civil Action 
 
 
This bill (1) defines “visual representation” under § 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article 
(revenge porn); (2) establishes that a person whose “visual representation” was distributed 
in violation of § 3-809 has a civil cause of action for defamation per se or invasion of 
privacy against any person who distributed the visual representation and authorizes a court 
to award reasonable attorney’s fees to a prevailing plaintiff in addition to any other relief; 
and (3) expands an existing provision that limits the inspection of a visual representation 
of a victim that is part of a court record in a violation of § 3-809 to account for these civil 
actions and plaintiffs and plaintiffs’ attorneys. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to 
the expanded application of an existing penalty provision. The Judiciary can address 
additional civil cases using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s expanded application of an existing penalty provision. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 360/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Visual representation” of an identifiable person means (1) an unaltered 
image of the person or (2) an image created with or without using other existing depictions 
of the person that is indistinguishable from the person, from the perspective of an ordinary 
person. “Visual representation” includes a computer-generated image but does not include 
an image or depiction that is a drawing, cartoon, sculpture, or painting. 
 
Current Law:  Section 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from 
knowingly distributing a visual representation of another identifiable person that displays 
the other person with his or her intimate parts exposed or while engaged in an act of sexual 
activity (1) with the intent to harm, harass, intimidate, threaten, or coerce the other person; 
(2) under circumstances in which the person knew that the other person did not consent to 
the distribution or with reckless disregard as to whether the person consented to the 
distribution; and (3) under circumstances in which the other person had a reasonable 
expectation that the image would remain private. The State may institute a prosecution for 
a violation of § 3-809 at any time. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to two years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
The prohibition does not apply to (1) lawful and common practices of law enforcement, 
the reporting of unlawful conduct, or legal proceedings or (2) situations involving 
voluntary exposure in public or commercial settings. An interactive computer service, as 
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230(f)(2), is not liable for content provided by another person. 
 
A visual representation of a victim that is part of a court record in a case prosecuting 
revenge porn may not be available for public inspection and, except as otherwise ordered 
by the court, may only be made available to specified individuals for inspection in relation 
to a criminal charge for revenge porn. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, 391 criminal actions (293 in the 
District Court and 98 in the circuit courts) under § 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article 
(revenge porn) were filed in the State’s trial courts during fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 360/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - May 2, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3