START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 310 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 310 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Education - Youth Suicide Prevention School Program - Revisions 
 
This bill expands the educational programs authorized under the Youth Suicide Prevention 
School Program to include classroom instruction designed to increase pupils’ awareness of 
the relationship between gambling and youth suicide. The bill likewise expands the 
findings and declarations of the General Assembly to include that (1) youth suicide often 
exists in combination with other problems, including gambling addiction and (2) that a 
suicide prevention program for young people should promote recognizing student 
behavioral health issues, recognizing students experiencing trauma or violence out of 
school, and referring students to behavioral health services. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025.  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) can update regulations and materials used for the Youth 
Suicide Prevention School Program with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can likely update any local youth suicide prevention 
programs to include information on gambling addiction with budgeted existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 122 of 1986 established the Youth Suicide Prevention School 
Program, administered by MSDE in cooperation with local school systems and community 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 310/ Page 2 
suicide prevention agencies. The program requires MSDE to adopt regulations that set 
eligibility guidelines for State funding of youth suicide prevention school programs. 
Additionally, youth suicide prevention school programs must plan, fund, and implement 
educational programs, which may include classroom instruction, school or 
community-based alternative programs outside of the classroom, and teacher training 
programs. Among other things, classroom instruction may be designed to achieve an 
increase in pupils’ awareness of the relationship between drug and alcohol use and youth 
suicide.  
 
Chapter 36 of 2020, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future established the Maryland 
Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports within the Maryland Community Health 
Resources Commission. The consortium must complete certain tasks related to the 
development of coordinated community supports partnerships to meet student behavioral 
health needs and other related challenges in a holistic, nonstigmatized, and coordinated 
manner, including developing a statewide framework for the creation of a coordinated 
community supports partnership, implementing a related grant program, evaluating a 
payment reimbursement program for providers, and developing a program for uninsured 
students. In addition, in consultation with MSDE, the consortium must develop best 
practices for the creation of a positive classroom for all students. The Blueprint also 
expanded funding for school-based health centers and for local school systems to train 
school staff to recognize student behavioral health issues and required local boards of 
education to enhance and expand the availability of behavioral health services to students.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that, although the agency supports the development 
of youth suicide prevention programs with supports that include staff development, 
classroom programs of instruction, and crisis intervention, the State has not allocated 
additional funding to MSDE to foster the development of local youth suicide prevention 
programs since 2009. The program was subsequently funded via a federal grant to MDH’s 
Behavioral Health Administration; however, the federal grant ended in 2019. MDH advises 
that the agency still provides assistance for local school systems running their own suicide 
prevention programs, including by generating a School Suicide Prevention Toolkit. 
Additionally, MDH works with the Maryland Center of Excellence on Problem Gambling 
to develop materials related to gambling addiction. Therefore, although, MSDE and 
MDH may need to adopt new regulations, update procedures governing the Youth Suicide 
Prevention School Program, and potentially expand existing supports made available to 
local programs, such tasks are achievable with existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 310/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State Lottery and 
Gaming Control Agency; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3