START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 391 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 391 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission - Review of Report and 
Recommendations 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC) to 
(1) annually review the report published by the Independent Investigations Division (IID) 
of the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and (2) make any recommendations that 
MPTSC determines are appropriate based on its review.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MPTSC can handle review of the IID report and make recommendations 
with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission 
 
MPTSC operates approved police training schools and prescribes standards for and 
certifies schools that offer police and security training. In consultation and cooperation 
with various entities, it also sets minimum qualifications for instructors and certifies 
qualified instructors for approved training schools.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 391/ Page 2 
MPTSC certifies persons as police officers who have met commission standards, including 
submission to (1) a criminal history records check; (2) a specified mental health screening; 
and (3) a specified physical agility assessment. An individual who is not satisfactorily 
trained in the 12-month probationary period may not be employed as a police officer, and 
a police officer may not serve after certification has been revoked, suspended, or allowed 
to lapse.  
 
Independent Investigations Division 
 
IID is the primary investigative unit for police-involved incidents that result in the death 
of individuals or injuries likely to result in death. OAG must determine whether an incident 
is police-involved and whether an injury is likely to result in death. In addition, IID must 
investigate all police-involved incidents that result in the death of individuals or injuries 
that are likely to result in the death of an individual. IID may investigate any other crimes 
related to police misconduct that are discovered during an investigation of these incidents. 
A State’s Attorney may refer, for investigation by IID, a police-involved incident resulting 
in serious bodily injury to an individual that is not otherwise within IID’s jurisdiction; 
however, IID may decline to investigate the referred incident. IID may investigate any 
other crime related to police misconduct that is discovered during these investigations (i.e., 
investigations under IID’s main jurisdiction and investigations of police-involved incidents 
referred to IID by a States’ Attorney). In conducting these investigations, IID may act with 
the full powers, rights, privileges, and duties of a State’s Attorney, including the use of a 
grand jury in any county. To investigate alleged criminal offenses committed by police 
officers, IID may (1) detail one or more police officers employed by the Department of 
State Police and (2) employ other civilian personnel as needed.  
 
By January 31 each year, IID must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
the activities of the division in the prior calendar year, including (1) the number of 
investigations that were conducted by IID and (2) the number of prosecutions that were 
initiated as a result of an investigation by or a referral to IID.  
 
Additional Comments:  IID’s second annual report, which covers October 1, 2022, 
through December 31, 2023, can be found here. During calendar 2024, IID conducted 
22 investigations involving law enforcement. To date, no investigation from an incident in 
calendar 2024 has resulted in a prosecution.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 391/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Office 
of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3