START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 309 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 309 
(Senator Simonaire, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families - Communications, Outreach, and 
Advocacy Program - Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands the Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy Program in the 
Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) to include providing services to 
(1) service members and (2) the families of veterans and service members. The Secretary 
of Veterans and Military Families must include in their annual report a general assessment 
of communication methods utilized in support of the program. The bill also alters 
definitions relating to the military. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DVMF can implement the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill adds the following definitions of military terms to § 9-901 of the 
State Government Article:   
 
 
“reserve component” means the Army National Guard of the United States, the 
Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the Marine Corps Reserve, the Air National 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 309/ Page 2 
Guard of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, the Coast Guard Reserve, or the 
Reserve Corps of the Public Health Service (as specified under 37 U.S.C. § 101);  
 
“service member” means an individual who is a member of (1) the uniformed 
services or (2) a reserve component of the uniformed services; and 
 
“uniformed services” means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, 
Space Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and 
Public Health Service (as specified under 38 U.S.C. § 101). 
 
The definition of “veteran” is altered to mean a person who served in the active military, 
naval, air, or space service, and who was discharged or released under non-dishonorable 
conditions (as specified under 38 U.S.C. § 101). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy Program – Generally 
 
The Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy Program within DVMF ensures that 
veterans are informed of the services, benefits, and assistance available to them and that 
general issues relating to veterans’ needs are brought to the attention of the Governor and 
the General Assembly. The program is administered and coordinated by a director, who is 
appointed by the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families. 
 
The program must actively help veterans and their dependents become aware of and access 
any service or benefit to which they are entitled, including tax, health care, disability, and 
pension benefits. In collaboration with the Maryland Higher Education Commission, the 
program must actively help veterans and their dependents become aware of and access 
education and training benefits to which they are entitled. The director must support 
veterans and their dependents through the service or benefit process and refer veterans, 
veterans’ dependents, and veterans’ survivors to the appropriate governmental unit for 
claims assistance.  
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families – Annual Report 
 
The Secretary must submit an annual report by December 31 to the Governor and the 
General Assembly that includes:   
 
 
the number of (1) requests for help in obtaining benefits; (2) public contacts made 
by the Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy Program; (3) veterans enrolled in 
the U.S. Veterans Health Administration; and (4) veterans receiving benefits; 
 
the average amount of disability and pension benefits received by qualified 
individuals in Maryland compared to those in other states; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 309/ Page 3 
 
an account of the costs of operating the Communications, Outreach, and Advocacy 
Program; 
 
a status update on several programs, including cemeteries, memorials, and veterans 
homes, among others; 
 
a general assessment of the status of Maryland veterans; 
 
the estimated impact current military operations may have on the needs of veterans 
in the future (the bill repeals the reference to “military”); 
 
the status of federal veterans programs as they relate to Maryland veterans; and 
 
any other issues concerning veterans at the Secretary’s discretion. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of Veterans 
and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 20, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2025 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3