START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 432 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 432 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Criminal Records – Expungement and Maryland Judiciary Case Search 
(Expungement Reform Act of 2025) 
 
 
This Administration bill (1) alters various statutory provisions relating to waiting periods 
for the filing of a petition to expunge a conviction under §§ 10-105 or 10-110 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article; (2) expands the list of misdemeanor convictions eligible for 
expungement under § 10-110; (3) expands the factors a court must consider for an 
expungement under §§ 10-105 and 10-110; and (4) prohibits the Maryland Judiciary Case 
Search from referring in any way to a charge resulting in nolle prosequi with required drug 
or alcohol treatment, a charge marked “stet” on the docket at least three years previously, 
and charges of possession of cannabis (in a case with electronic records) if the charge 
resulted in a conviction that was later pardoned by the Governor. The provisions 
regarding Maryland Judiciary Case Search take effect January 31, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $23,800 in FY 2026 
for one-time computer programming. General fund expenditures for the Judiciary and the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) may also increase 
minimally to the extent that an increase in expungement petitions necessitates additional 
staff, as discussed below. General fund revenues increase minimally from filing fees.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 432/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Eligibility for Expungements – Waiting Periods (Effective October 1, 2025) 
 
Under current law, petitions for expungement under §§ 10-105 and 10-110 are subject to 
specified waiting periods. Some of these waiting periods begin after the satisfactory 
completion of the sentence or after the person satisfies the sentence or sentences imposed. 
The bill replaces these references with “completion of the sentence.” “Completion of the 
sentence” is defined as the time when a sentence has expired, including any period of 
probation, parole, or mandatory supervision.  
 
Expansion of Convictions Eligible for Expungement Under § 10-110 (Effective 
October 1, 2025) 
 
The bill expands eligibility for expungement under § 10-110 to include convictions under  
§ 8-204 of the Criminal Law Article (credit card theft) and § 16-101 of the Transportation 
Article (driving without a license). Both of these offenses are misdemeanors. 
 
Although the bill also adds convictions for misdemeanor violations of § 8-106 of the 
Criminal Law Article to the aforementioned list, § 8-106 specifies the classification and 
penalties (based on the value of the property or services) for charges filed under § 8-103 
of the Criminal Law Article (obtaining property or services by bad check). Misdemeanor 
convictions under § 8-103 are already eligible for expungement.  
 
Factors Courts Must Consider for Expungements Under §§ 10-105 and 10-110 (Effective 
October 1, 2025) 
 
The bill requires a court to consider the following criteria, to the extent applicable, when 
determining whether a person is entitled to expungement under § 10-105:  (1) the person’s 
success at probation, parole, or mandatory supervision; and (2) whether the person has paid 
any monetary restitution ordered by the court in the original proceeding or does not have 
the ability to pay the restitution. 
 
Among other things, § 10-110 currently requires a court, after consideration of specified 
factors, to find and state on the record that a person granted an expungement under  
§ 10-110 is not a risk to public safety. The bill adds the person’s success at probation, 
parole, or mandatory supervision as a required consideration when evaluating the 
petitioner’s risk to public safety. The bill also requires the court to find and state on the 
record that the person has paid any monetary restitution ordered by the court in the original 
proceeding or does not have the ability to pay the restitution. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 432/ Page 3 
 
Maryland Judiciary Case Search (Effective January 31, 2026) 
 
By removing an existing exception, the bill prohibits Maryland Judiciary Case Search from 
referring in any way to electronic records for charges resulting in a disposition of 
nolle prosequi with the requirement of drug or alcohol treatment. The bill also prohibits 
Maryland Judiciary Case Search from referring in any way to electronic records for (1) a 
charge marked “stet” on the docket at least three years previously and (2) charges of 
possession of cannabis (in a case with electronic records) if the charge resulted in a 
conviction that was later pardoned by the Governor.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Expungements 
 
Other than specified court-initiated expungements under § 10-105.1 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article, to begin the process of expungement, a petitioner must file a petition for 
expungement with the court under § 10-105 or § 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article, 
which establishes eligibility for the expungement of records pertaining to a criminal charge 
or conviction. With some exceptions, § 10-105 applies to dispositions other than a 
conviction, and § 10-110 applies to expungements of convictions.  
 
Expungement of a court or police record means removal from public inspection:   
 
 
by obliteration;  
 
by removal to a separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate 
reason for access are denied access; or  
 
if access to a court record or police record can be obtained only by reference to 
another such record, by the expungement of that record, or the part of it that provides 
access.  
 
Units of Charges 
 
Pursuant to § 10-107 of the Criminal Procedure Article, if two or more charges, other than 
one for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal 
Law Article, arise from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts, they are considered 
to be a unit. A charge for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 
of the Criminal Law Article that arises from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts 
as a charge in the unit is not a part of the unit. If a person is not entitled to expungement of 
one charge or conviction in a unit, the person is not entitled to expungement of any other 
charge or conviction in the unit. This “unit rule” applies to expungements under §§ 10-105 
and 10-110. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 432/ Page 4 
 
Section 10-105 of the Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Under § 10-105 of the Criminal Procedure Article, a person who has been charged with the 
commission of a crime for which a term of imprisonment may be imposed or who has been 
charged with a civil offense or infraction, except a juvenile offense, may file a petition for 
expungement of a police record, court record, or other record maintained by the State or a 
political subdivision of the State, under various circumstances listed in the statute. With 
specified exceptions, these grounds include acquittal, dismissal of charges, entry of 
probation before judgment, entry of nolle prosequi, stet of charge, and gubernatorial 
pardon. Individuals convicted of a crime that is no longer a crime, convicted of possession 
of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal Law Article, convicted of or found not criminally 
responsible for specified public nuisance crimes or specified misdemeanors, or who had a 
conviction vacated due to being a victim of human trafficking (as defined in statute), are 
also eligible for expungement of the associated criminal records under certain 
circumstances.  
 
Petitions for expungement under § 10-105 are subject to specified waiting periods, which 
vary depending on the type of disposition that is the basis for the petition. For example, a 
petition based on a conviction for specified public nuisance crimes may not be filed within 
three years after the conviction or satisfactory completion of the sentence, including 
probation, that was imposed for the conviction, whichever is later. A petition based on a 
conviction for possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal Law Article may be 
filed after the satisfactory completion of the sentence, including probation, that was 
imposed for the conviction.  
 
Unless the State’s Attorney files an objection to the petition for expungement within 
30 days after the petition is served, the court must pass an order requiring the expungement 
of all police records and court records about the charge. If the State’s Attorney files a timely 
objection to the petition, the court must hold a hearing. If the court at the hearing finds that 
the person is entitled to expungement, the court must order the expungement of all police 
records and court records about the charge.  
 
If the court finds that the person is not entitled to expungement, the court must deny the 
petition. A person is not entitled to expungement if (1) the petition is based on the entry of 
probation before judgment and the person, within three years of the entry of the probation 
before judgment, has been convicted of a crime other than a minor traffic violation or a 
crime where the act on which the conviction is based is no longer a crime; (2) the petition 
is based on the entry of probation before judgment for a violation of § 21‐902(a) or (b) of 
the Transportation Article (drunk driving) and the person, within 15 years after the entry 
of the probation before judgment, has been convicted of a crime other than a minor traffic 
violation or a crime where the act on which the conviction is based is no longer a crime or 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 432/ Page 5 
received probation before judgment for a violation of § 21‐902; or (3) the person is a 
defendant in a pending criminal proceeding.  
 
Except for court initiated expungements under § 10-105.1 and unless an order is stayed 
pending an appeal, within 60 days after entry of the order, every custodian of the police 
records and court records that are subject to the order of expungement must advise in 
writing the court and the person who is seeking expungement of compliance with the order.  
 
Section 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Section 10-110 of the Criminal Procedure Article authorizes an individual convicted of any 
of a list of approximately 100 specified offenses or an attempt, a conspiracy, or a 
solicitation of any of these offenses, to file a petition for expungement of the conviction, 
subject to specified procedures and requirements. An itemized list of convictions eligible 
for expungement under § 10-110 is shown in the Appendix – Convictions Eligible for 
Expungement.  
 
Petitions for expungements under § 10-110 are subject to the waiting periods listed below. 
These waiting periods begin after the petitioner satisfies the sentence or sentences imposed 
for all convictions for which expungement is requested, including parole, probation, or 
mandatory supervision:   
 
 
Misdemeanor (general):  5 years;  
 
Felony (general), Second-degree Assault, or Common Law Battery:  7 years;  
 
Domestically Related Crime (§ 6-233 of the Criminal Procedure Article):  15 years;  
 
Possession with Intent to Distribute Cannabis:  3 years; and  
 
Burglary in the First Degree (Breaking and Entering – Theft), Burglary in the 
Second Degree, or Felony General Theft:  10 years.  
 
If the person is convicted of a new crime during the applicable waiting period, the original 
conviction or convictions are not eligible for expungement unless the new conviction 
becomes eligible for expungement.  
 
A person is not eligible for expungement if the person is a defendant in a pending criminal 
proceeding.  
 
Unless the State’s Attorney or a victim files an objection to the petition for expungement 
within 30 days after the petition is served, the court must pass an order requiring the 
expungement of all police records and court records about the charge.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 432/ Page 6 
If the State’s Attorney or a victim files a timely objection to the petition, the court must 
hold a hearing. The court must order the expungement of all police records and 
court records about the charge after a hearing, if the court finds and states on the record:   
 
 
that the conviction is eligible for expungement under specified provisions of 
§ 10-110;  
 
that giving due regard to the nature of the crime, the history and character of the 
person, and the person’s success at rehabilitation, the person is not a risk to public 
safety; and  
 
that an expungement would be in the interest of justice.  
 
If at a hearing the court finds that a person is not entitled to expungement, the court must 
deny the petition.  
 
Unless an order is stayed pending appeal, within 60 days after entry of the order, every 
custodian of the police records and court records that are subject to the order of 
expungement must advise in writing the court and the person who is seeking expungement 
of compliance with the order.  
 
Automatic Expungements – § 10-105.1 of the Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 680 of 2021, beginning October 1, 2021, any police record, 
court record, or other record maintained by the State or a political subdivision of the State 
relating to the charging of a civil offense under § 5-601(c)(2)(ii) (related to possession of 
cannabis) of the Criminal Law Article or a crime other than a violation of the 
Transportation Article for which the defendant is not required to appear, must be expunged 
three years after a disposition of the charge if no charge in the case resulted in a disposition 
other than acquittal; dismissal; not guilty; or nolle prosequi, other than nolle prosequi with 
a requirement of drug or alcohol treatment.  
 
Maryland Judiciary Case Search  
 
The Maryland Judiciary Case Search may not in any way refer to the existence of records 
of a charge in a case with electronic records if the charge resulted in acquittal; dismissal; 
or nolle prosequi, except nolle prosequi with the requirement of drug or alcohol treatment. 
Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022, the Maryland Judiciary Case Search may not in any way 
refer to the existence of a criminal case in which possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of 
the Criminal Law Article is the only charge in the case and the charge was disposed of 
before July 1, 2023.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 432/ Page 7 
Background:   
 
2022 Court Decision 
 
In 2022, the Court of Special Appeals (now the Appellate Court of Maryland), held that 
the Circuit Court for Montgomery County properly denied a petition to expunge a 
2008 conviction for theft under $500 when the petitioner was sentenced to supervised 
probation for his conviction, subsequently violated his probation, and then served a 
four-day sentence for the probation violation. According to the Court of Special Appeals, 
even though the petitioner completed his sentence for the probation violation, because the 
petitioner was originally sentenced to probation and violated that probation (resulting in an 
unsatisfactory closing of the probation), the petitioner did not satisfy his original sentence. 
In re Expungement Petition of Abhishek I., 255 Md. App. 464 (2022).  
 
Pardoned Cannabis Convictions 
 
On June 17, 2024, Governor Wes Moore issued an executive order pardoning 
175,000 Maryland convictions for cannabis possession, including convictions for 
misdemeanor possession of cannabis and certain convictions for misdemeanor possession 
of drug paraphernalia. More than 150,000 of the pardoned convictions were for 
misdemeanor cannabis possession and more than 18,000 of the pardoned convictions were 
for misdemeanor use or possession with intent to use drug paraphernalia.  
 
In lieu of the traditional expungement application process, the Governor asked the 
Maryland Judiciary to identify and compile a list of electronically available case records 
for convictions based on conduct that occurred prior to January 1, 2023. The executive 
order indicated that the Judiciary will make electronic notations regarding the pardoned 
convictions in each identified electronically available case record. The order also directed 
DPSCS to develop a process to indicate the pardoned convictions on criminal background 
checks.  
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally from filing fees for 
expungement petitions. The Judiciary charges a $30 fee to file a petition to expunge a 
conviction. Fee waivers are available for financial hardship.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $23,824 in fiscal 2026 for one-time 
computer programming changes to facilitate the removal of references on Case Search in 
accordance with the bill. Depending on the volume of petitions for expungement received 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 432/ Page 8 
under the bill’s expanded eligibility, general fund expenditures may increase minimally for 
additional clerks to process petitions. Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of 
petitions filed in the District Courts and the circuit courts from fiscal 2021 through 2024.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Petitions for Expungement 
Fiscal 2021-2024 
 
 
District Court 
Circuit Courts 
Fiscal 2021 
39,061 
5,940 
Fiscal 2022 
32,874 
5,574 
Fiscal 2023 
38,563 
7,688 
Fiscal 2024 
44,673 
9,396 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
The increase in filed petitions resulting from the bill cannot be reliably determined at this 
time but is likely to be higher in the initial years (as individuals with eligible older 
convictions file applications) and then stabilize over time. However, given that driving 
without a proper license is by far the most common of the convictions affected by the bill 
(as noted in Exhibit 2), this estimate assumes that any potential increase in judicial staffing 
expenditures is likely to be minimal. Given the nature of this traffic-related offense, unless 
an individual is facing hardship because of the conviction (e.g., reduced job opportunities) 
or has another (more serious) disposition that is currently ineligible because of the 
conviction, some individuals with older convictions for driving without a proper license 
may not be inclined to petition for expungement. DLS also notes that driving without a 
proper license is mostly prosecuted in the District Court, where the Judiciary’s 
expungement operations are more centralized. For illustrative purposes only, the cost 
associated with employing a court clerk is approximately $73,000 annually.  
 
The Judiciary advises that while the bill requires the court to consider the petitioner’s 
payment of restitution in the original proceeding or the petitioner’s ability to pay the 
restitution, the court is not involved in the collection of monetary restitution payments and 
has no record of payments of restitution unless the State’s Attorney or another entity 
provides proof of payment or testifies at the hearing to whether payment was made in the 
original case.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 432/ Page 9 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services  
 
General fund expenditures may increase minimally for DPSCS to process expungement 
orders under the bill. DPSCS advises generally that the Criminal Justice Information 
System (CJIS) requires one additional administrative employee for every 2,500 additional 
orders for expungement it receives. However, DLS notes that CJIS has been routinely 
accommodating workloads beyond the 2,500-caseload standard. Any additional clerical 
resources that may be needed cannot be reliably determined at this time and depend on the 
number of expungement orders issued by courts under the bill; however, any potential 
additional staffing needs are assumed to be minimal. For illustrative purposes only, the 
cost associated with hiring one administrative employee is approximately $61,300 in 
fiscal 2026 and $80,600 in fiscal 2030.  
 
 
Exhibit 2  
Expungement Eligibility – Convictions for Added Offenses 
Fiscal 2022-2024 
 
District Court 
Convictions 
 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Criminal Law Article, § 8‐204 
Credit Card Theft 
45 
37 
40 
Transportation Article, § 16-101  
Driving without Proper License and 
Authorization 
2,611 
3,770 
4,094 
 
 
 
 
Circuit Courts 
Convictions 
 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Criminal Law Article, § 8-204  
Credit Card Theft 
28 
52 
27 
Transportation Article, § 16-101  
Driving without Proper License and 
Authorization  
363 
431 
409 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 432/ Page 10 
Designated Cross File:  HB 499 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland 
State Archives; Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 432/ Page 11 
Appendix – Convictions Eligible for Expungement 
 
 
Convictions Eligible for Expungement under Section 10-110 of the  
Criminal Procedure Article 
 
Misdemeanors Eligible for Expungement  
 
Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article 
 
AB, § 6-320 – Disorderly Intoxication 
 
Business Occupations and Professions Article 
 
BOP, § 17-613(a):  Crimes relating to real estate brokers and agents (e.g., failure to deposit 
money in trust accounts, engaging in discriminatory real estate practices, acting as a 
dual agent, providing brokerage services without a license, etc.) 
 
Business Regulation Article 
 
BR, § 5-610:  Violation of Business Regulation Article, Title 5, Subtitle 6 (perpetual care 
of cemeteries) 
BR, § 5-712:  Failure to deposit money received under or in connection with a preneed 
burial contract 
BR, § 5-904:  Violation of any provision of Title 5, Subtitle 9 of the Business Regulation 
Article (cemetery-related violations – failure to register as operator, operating a cemetery 
without the proper form of business entity, and unauthorized representations) 
BR, § 19-304:  Violations of laws relating to returnable containers and returnable textiles 
(improper use, improper registration, defacing, etc.) 
BR, § 19-308:  Violations of laws relating to plastic secondary packaging 
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article 
 
CJ, § 3-1508:  Failure to comply with a peace order 
CJ, § 10-402:  Divulging contents of communications (subsection (d)) 
 
Commercial Law Article 
 
CL, § 14-1915:  Violations of the Maryland Credit Services Businesses Act 
CL, § 14-2902:  False and fraudulent advertising 
CL, § 14-2903:  Bait and switch 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 432/ Page 12 
Criminal Procedure Article 
 
CP, § 5-211:  Failure to surrender after forfeiture of bail or recognizance 
 
Criminal Law Article 
 
CR, § 3-203:  Assault in the second degree (misdemeanor) 
CR, § 3-808:  Filing a fraudulent lien or encumbrance 
CR, § 5-601:  Possession or administration of a controlled dangerous substance (not 
involving use or possession of cannabis) 
CR, § 5-602(b)(1):  Possession with intent to distribute cannabis 
CR, § 5-618:  Possession or purchase of noncontrolled substance that the person reasonably 
believes is a controlled substance 
CR, § 5-619:  Use or possession of drug paraphernalia 
CR, § 5-620:  Obtaining, possessing, or distributing controlled paraphernalia 
CR, § 5-703:  Unsolicited mailing of a controlled dangerous substance, prescription drug, 
or medicine 
CR, § 5-708:  Smelling or inhaling harmful substances 
CR, § 5-902:  Omitting, removing, altering, or obliterating a symbol required by 
federal law for a substance governed by Title 5 of the Criminal Law Article (controlled 
dangerous substance prescriptions, and other substances); refusal or failure to maintain 
specified documentation required under Title 5; refusing entry into a premises or inspection 
of a premises authorized under Title 5), maintaining a place resorted to by others for 
illegal use of controlled dangerous substance or for the keeping or selling of a controlled 
dangerous substance; unauthorized manufacturing, dispensing, or distribution of controlled 
dangerous substance by a registrant; controlled dangerous substance/paraphernalia-related 
violations by authorized provider; and contraband 
CR, § 6-105:  Malicious burning of personal property in the second degree 
CR, § 6-108:  Willful and malicious burning of a trash container 
CR, § 6-205:  Fourth-degree burglary 
CR, § 6-206:  Breaking and entering a motor vehicle – rogue and vagabond 
CR, § 6-301:  Malicious destruction of property 
CR, § 6-303:  Public utility interference – electrical equipment 
CR, § 6-306:  Alteration of manufacturer’s serial number or sale of good with altered serial 
number 
CR, § 6-307:  Sale or possession of stolen serial number or vehicle identification plate or 
possession of a manufactured serial number or vehicle identification plate with intent to 
affix to stolen property or use for fraudulent purposes 
CR, § 6-402:  Trespass on posted property 
CR, § 6-503:  Unauthorized riding on railroad vehicle or unauthorized entry onto 
railroad property 
CR, § 7-104:  General theft (less than $100 and at least $100 but less than $1,500) 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 432/ Page 13 
CR, § 7-203:  Unauthorized removal of property 
CR, § 7-205:  Abandonment of or failure to return leased or rented motor vehicle 
CR, § 7-304:  Obtaining telephone records without authorization 
CR, § 7-308:  Prohibited transfer of recorded sounds or images (penalty contained in 
CR, § 7-309) 
CR, § 8-103:  Obtaining property or services by bad check (less than $100 and at least $100 
but less than $1,500) 
CR, § 8-206:  Misdemeanor credit card crimes (less than $100 and at least $100 but less 
than $1,500) 
CR, § 8-401:  Fraudulent conversion of partnership assets 
CR, § 8-402:  Fraudulent misrepresentation by corporate officer or agent 
CR, § 8-404:  Pyramid promotional schemes 
CR, § 8-406:  Misuse of documents of title 
CR, § 8-408:  Unlawful subleasing of motor vehicle 
CR, § 8-503:  Public assistance fraud – generally 
CR, § 8-521:  Fraudulently obtaining legal representation from the Office of the Public 
Defender 
CR, § 8-523:  Housing assistance fraud, making false statements 
CR, § 8-904:  Racing a horse under a name other than its registered name 
CR, § 9-204:  Bribing a person participating in or connected with an athletic contest 
CR, § 9-205:  Acceptance of a bribe by a person participating in or connected with an 
athletic contest 
CR, § 9-503:  Making a false statement to a State or local official/agency concerning a 
crime or hazard 
CR, § 9-506:  Making a false statement on an application for funds from the 
Maryland Higher Education Commission 
CR, § 10-110:  Illegal Dumping and Violation of Litter Control Law 
CR, § 10-201:  Disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct 
CR, § 10-402:  Unlawful removing or attempting to remove human remains from burial site 
CR, § 10-404:  Removal or destruction of funerary objects, graveyard plants, disorderly 
conduct in graveyards 
CR, § 10-502:  Bigamy (listed as a misdemeanor but is a felony) 
CR, § 11-303:  Engaging in prostitution 
CR, § 11-306:  Procuring or solicitation of prostitution or assignation 
CR, § 11-307:  Using a building, structure, or conveyance for prostitution or assignation 
CR, § 12-102:  Betting, wagering, gambling, etc.; pool on races/contests 
CR, § 12-103:  Playing specified games for money (e.g., craps, thimbles, etc.) 
CR, § 12-104:  Keeping a gaming device or a place for gambling 
CR, § 12-105:  Offshore gambling 
CR, § 12-109:  Prearrangement or predetermination of horse race results  
CR, § 12-203:  Holding a lottery or selling a lottery device 
CR, § 12-204:  Keeping a location for the sale or barter of lottery devices 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 432/ Page 14 
CR, § 12-205:  Importing a lottery device or possession of lottery records or money 
CR, § 12-302:  Unlawful possession or operation of a slot machine 
 
Election Law Article 
 
EL, § 13-401:  Failure to comply with authority line requirements in campaign material 
EL, § 13-602:  Specified campaign finance/election-related violations (e.g., providing 
money/aid or a thing of value to induce or procure a vote, influence by employer of 
employee’s vote, etc.) 
EL, § 16-201:  Voting-related offenses (e.g., impersonation of another in order to vote, 
voting under a false name, etc.) 
 
Family Law Article 
 
FL, § 4-509:  Failure to comply with protective order 
 
Health General Article 
 
HG, § 18-215:  Violations relating to infectious or contagious disease reports 
 
Housing and Community Development Article 
 
HCD, § 4-411:  Making a false statement or report to the Department of Housing and 
Community Development for Rental Housing Program loan 
HCD, § 4-2005:  Making a false statement or report to the Department of Housing and 
Community Development for Energy-Efficient Homes Construction Loan Program loan 
 
Insurance Article (fraudulent insurance acts) 
 
IN, § 27-403:  Failure to return premiums, making false or misleading claims to an insurer 
IN, § 27–404:  Insurer doing business with unlicensed persons 
IN, § 27–405:  Representations to public by unlicensed persons 
IN, § 27-406:  False applications and statements; unregulated insurers 
IN § 27-406.1:  Fraudulent insurance acts of individual sureties 
IN, § 27-407:  Solicitation of injured persons; solicitation of clients for lawyer or 
health care practitioner 
IN, § 27-407.1:  Organizing, planning, or knowingly participating in an intentional 
motor vehicle accident 
IN, § 27-407.2:  Compensation for insurance deductible 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 432/ Page 15 
Natural Resources Article 
 
NR, § 8-725.4:  Speed limits on the Severn River imposed on specified days from 
April 15, 1989, to October 15, 1989 
NR, § 8-725.5:  Noise levels for vessels operated in tidal waters 
NR, § 8-725.6:  Speed limit on Seneca Creek 
NR, § 8-725.7:  Speed limit on certain areas of Monocacy River 
NR, § 8-726:  Throwing or dumping refuse on waters of the State 
NR, § 8-726.1:  Throwing specified types of waste on certain waters of the State 
NR, § 8-727.1:  Use of flashing red and yellow lights or signal devices 
NR, § 8-738.2:  Operating a vessel in a reckless or dangerous manner 
Any prohibited act related to speed limits for personal watercraft 
NR, § 10‐301:  Hunting game birds or mammals without a hunting license) 
NR, § 10‐306:  Duty to be in physical possession of a license while hunting and duty to 
present a license to law enforcement on demand while hunting) 
NR, § 10‐308.1:  Hunting migratory game birds without a Maryland migratory game bird 
stamp, etc. 
NR, § 10‐413(e)(1):  Training a retriever dog using artificially reared game birds without 
a permit) 
NR, § 10‐418:  Failure to wear fluorescent clothing while hunting 
NR, § 10‐502:  Trapping furbearers without a nonresident trapper’s license 
NR, § 10‐611:  Hunting wild waterfowl from a blind site without a license 
NR, § 10‐907(a):  Engaging in specified activities without a falconry permit 
 
Public Safety Article 
 
PS, § 5-307:  Scope of handgun permit (listed in statute but is not a crime) 
PS, § 5-308:  Possession of handgun permit required 
PS, § 6-602:  Interference or obstruction of fire marshal, false representation as a 
fire marshal 
PS, § 7-402:  Interference, obstruction of fire or emergency services personnel 
PS, § 14-114:  Violation of order, rule, or regulation issued under Maryland Emergency 
Management Agency Act 
Real Property Article 
 
RP, § 7-318.1:  Failure of foreclosure consultant to obtain a real estate broker’s license or 
violation by foreclosure consultant of Maryland Real Estate Brokers Act 
RP, § 7-509:  Does not refer to a prohibited act – penalty provision for violations of 
provisions of Maryland Mortgage Assistance Relief Services Act 
RP, § 10-507:  Violation of Custom Home Protection Act (subsection (b)(3)) 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 432/ Page 16 
State Government Article 
 
SG, § 9-124:  Prohibited acts relating to State lottery 
 
Tax General 
 
TG, § 13-1001:  Willful failure to file tax return 
TG, § 13-1004:  Income tax preparer – false return, false claim for refund, or attempted 
tax evasion 
TG, § 13-1007:  Violations of income tax withholding requirements 
TG, § 13-1024:  Failure to provide information with intent to evade taxes 
 
Transportation Article 
 
TR, § 16-303:  Driving while privilege is canceled, suspended, or revoked 
 
Common Law Offenses 
 
Affray 
Battery 
Criminal contempt 
Hindering a law enforcement officer 
Rioting 
 
Felonies Eligible for Expungement 
 
Criminal Law Article 
 
CR, § 7–104:  General Theft (at least $1,500) 
CR, § 5-602:  Possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance 
CR, § 6-202(a):  Burglary in the first degree – breaking and entering with intent to commit 
theft 
CR, § 6-203:  Burglary in the second degree 
CR, § 6-204:  Burglary in the third degree 
 
An attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation of any offense listed above is also eligible for 
expungement under CP, § 10-110 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
SB 432/ Page 17 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Criminal Records – Expungement and Maryland Judiciary Case Search 
(Expungement Reform Act of 2025) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 432 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Myles Hicks 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
_x__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 17