START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 425 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 425 
(Senator M. Jackson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
 
Environment - Coal Combustion By-Products - Fees, Coordinating Committee, 
and Regulations 
 
 
This bill alters the factors on which the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) 
must base the annual fee that is paid by generators of coal combustion by-products (CCBs) 
to include, in general, the volume of CCBs stored. The bill also repeals a requirement that 
MDE reduce the CCB fees in the following fiscal year if, in any fiscal year, the fee schedule 
set by MDE generates revenue that exceeds program costs; instead, under the bill, MDE 
must use the excess revenue to take action necessary to increase the beneficial reuse of 
CCBs and mitigate human health and environmental impacts due to the release of CCBs 
from priority sites. The bill further requires MDE to update regulations, as specified. 
Finally, the bill establishes the Statewide CCB Coordinating Committee staffed by MDE 
and the Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by $1.0 million in FY 2027, increasing to 
$1.1 million by FY 2030. The FY 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$200,000 in special funds contingent upon the enactment of legislation to raise a CCB fee; 
thus, special fund expenditures increase by $200,000 in FY 2026, and out-years reflect 
ongoing costs. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1,031,300 
$1,055,600 
$1,078,900 
$1,102,600 
SF Expenditure 
$200,000 
$204,000 
$208,100 
$212,200 
$216,500 
Net Effect 
($200,000) 
$827,300 
$847,500 
$866,700 
$886,100 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal or none. The bill is not expected to directly affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 425/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition to other factors established under current law, MDE must base 
the annual fee for CCB generators on the volume of CCBs that have been disposed of and 
remain in landfills or other storage units in the State that are subject to inspection and 
monitoring, not including CCBs that have been (1) added to cement products; (2) used in 
coal mine reclamation; or (3) beneficially reused in a manner that is acceptable to MDE. 
 
The Statewide CCB Coordinating Committee must meet at least twice a year beginning in 
2026, as specified. The coordinating committee must, with respect to CCB sites, share 
information on monitoring results and discuss remedial action that is in process, is still 
required, or both. By October 1, 2026, and each October 1 thereafter, the coordinating 
committee must report its findings during the immediately preceding year to specified 
committees of the General Assembly. Members of the coordinating committee may not 
receive compensation, but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as specified. 
 
By December 1, 2025, MDE must update its regulations to incorporate the bill’s changes 
to the CCB fee provisions. By October 1, 2026, MDE must adopt regulations to implement 
the final rule governing legacy coal combustion residuals (CCRs) as adopted on 
May 8, 2024. In adopting the regulations to implement the final rule, MDE may amend the 
regulations as necessary to protect human health and the environment in the State, 
including (1) targeting actions at specific locations where CCBs have been used and 
(2) expanding the list of chemicals required to be tested beyond those required by the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to include specified chemicals. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Coal Combustion By-Products in General 
 
“Coal combustion by-products,” as defined in § 9-281 of the Environment Article, means 
the residue generated by, or resulting from, the burning of coal. CCBs are produced 
primarily from the burning of coal in coal-fired power plants. CCB include fly ash, bottom 
ash, boiler slag, pozzolan, and other solid residuals removed by air pollution control 
devices from the flue gas and combustion chambers of coal-burning furnaces and boilers. 
CCBs, which are also as referred to as coal ash and CCRs, are regulated at both the State 
and federal level. 
 
Federal Regulations 
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act – In General:  40 CFR Part 257 contains the 
criteria for the classification of solid waste disposal facilities and practices under the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 425/ Page 3 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). RCRA is a federal law that gives 
EPA the authority to control hazardous waste. 
 
Federal Regulation of Coal Combustion Residuals:  EPA proposed the first federal 
regulations of CCB disposal in June 2010, and published the final rule in April 2015. The 
final rule classifies CCBs (referred to as CCRs within the rule) as a nonhazardous waste 
subject to RCRA Subtitle D requirements for disposal. These requirements are primarily 
enforced at the state level. The federal rule also established monitoring requirements for 
CCB landfills. 
 
Regulation of Legacy Coal Combustion Residual Sites:  The 2015 federal rule did not 
address coal ash that has been placed into unlined landfills, ponds, and structural fill sites 
that were closed before its enactment (also called “legacy sites”). EPA finalized changes 
to CCR regulations for legacy CCR surface impoundments at inactive electric facilities on 
May 8, 2024, in response to an August 21, 2018, opinion by the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the District of Columbia Circuit (Utility Solid Waste Activities Group, et al v. EPA) that 
vacated and remanded the provision that exempted inactive impoundments at inactive 
facilities from the 2015 CCR Rule. On November 8, 2024, and on January 16, 2025, 
EPA published a direct and second direct final rule and companion proposed rule to correct 
errors and clarify provisions in the May 2024 legacy CCR rule.  
 
State Management and Tracking of Coal Combustion By-products 
 
State Regulations of Coal Combustion By-products:  At the State level, the Code of 
Maryland Regulations (COMAR 26.04.10) governs the management of CCBs broadly. 
There are also regulations that specifically address the utilization of CCBs in surface coal 
mining and reclamation operations in abandoned coal mines (COMAR 26.20.24) and 
noncoal surface mine reclamation (COMAR 26.21.04).  
 
Generator Fees and the Coal Combustion By-products Management Fund:  MDE is 
required to, by regulation, establish and collect a fee to be paid by a generator of CCBs 
based on a per ton rate of CCBs generated by the generator annually. MDE must base the 
fees on the following factors:  (1) the total annual tonnage of CCBs that the generator 
generates; (2) the type and volume of CCBs generated by the generator; (3) whether the 
generator uses or disposes of the CCBs; (4) to the extent that the CCBs are used rather than 
disposed of, the types of the uses; (5) whether the CCBs are transported for use or disposal 
out-of-state; and (6) other factors MDE considers appropriate.  
 
Chapter 480 of 2009 established a CCB Management Fund comprising fees collected by 
MDE on each ton of CCBs generated. The money generated from the fee must be used to 
administer and implement programs to control the disposal, use, beneficial use, recycling, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 425/ Page 4 
processing, 
handling, 
storage, 
transport, 
or 
other 
requirements 
related 
to 
CCB management.  
 
Regulations establish that the initial base fee for each ton of CCBs generated is $1.15, but 
the fee is adjusted annually to ensure that fee revenues approximate the cost of regulatory 
activities as required in statute. Statute prohibits the fee from being imposed on CCBs that 
are (1) beneficially used, as determined by MDE or (2) used for mine reclamation in 
accordance with MDE regulations or regulations of the receiving state. Regulations also 
exclude generators that generated less than 10,000 tons of CCBs per year from the fee. In 
any fiscal year, if the fee schedule established by MDE generates revenues that exceed 
program costs, MDE must reduce the fees in the following fiscal year. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program:  Pursuant to its responsibilities under the Power Plant 
Siting Act of 1971, PPRP researches power plant impacts to Maryland’s natural resources, 
including the Chesapeake Bay. In addition to surface water concerns, PPRP evaluates 
impacts to Maryland’s ground water, air, land, and socioeconomics for proposed power 
facilities and transmission lines, both for new installations and for modifications to existing 
structures. This extends to tracking and evaluating CCB storage, use, and disposal sites 
across the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund 
 
Recent History and the Bill’s Changes:  MDE advises that special fund expenditures from 
the State Coal Combustion By-Products Management Fund have been relatively consistent 
and that, under current law, its fees are set to fully cover those costs. However, the 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the current fee, based exclusively on CCBs 
produced, has been applicable to fewer generators over the years, as CCBs produced in the 
State have decreased. MDE advises that with the last coal-fired power plant being slated to 
cease burning coal in calendar 2025, there will be no generators that meet the threshold to 
pay the fee, resulting in a deficit for the program of approximately $1.0 million annually. 
The bill’s changes allow MDE to apply the fee to former generators. Consistent with 
current law, MDE plans to set the fee at a level to cover its costs. 
 
Timing and Amount of Special Fund Revenues:  CCB generators report annual tonnage 
amounts on a calendar year basis. MDE sets proposed annual generator fee rates based on 
these reports and then sends the proposed rates to the General Assembly for approval 
before finalizing and billing CCB generators. As a result, there is a lag between the time 
that CCBs are generated and when the generators are billed. This means that there is also 
a delay in the collection of the increased fees under the bill. As a result, there is no impact 
on special fund revenues in fiscal 2026 despite the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 425/ Page 5 
Based on information provided by MDE, special fund revenues for the State CCB 
Management Fund increase by $1.0 million in fiscal 2027, increasing to $1.1 million by 
fiscal 2030, accounting for inflation. 
 
Special Fund Expenditures and the Potential Need for a General Fund Deficiency 
Appropriation in Fiscal 2026:  The bill itself does not require additional spending by MDE 
under the program. However, the fiscal 2026 budget includes $200,000 in special funds for 
MDE contingent on the enactment of legislation to raise a CCB fee, which this bill 
effectuates. Thus, special fund expenditures increase by $200,000 in fiscal 2026. Future 
year estimates assume that special fund expenditures increase by 2% annually. 
 
Based on the timing of anticipated fee collections under the bill, as discussed above, it is 
likely that MDE does not have sufficient special fund revenues or fund balance in 
fiscal 2026 to cover the contingent special fund appropriation included in the fiscal 2026 
budget. Thus, a general fund deficiency appropriation may be needed in fiscal 2026 to 
cover those costs; any such effect has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
In future years, because the increase in special fund revenues exceeds the estimated 
special fund expenditures (once fee revenues are collected beginning in fiscal 2027), 
additional special fund revenues are available that could be brought into the budget via 
budget amendment. 
 
Coordinating Committee 
 
MDE and PPRP can staff the coordinating committee with existing resources, and any 
expense reimbursements for coordinating committee members are assumed to be minimal 
and absorbable within existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  Senate Bill 250 of 2025, as passed by the General Assembly, also 
alters the factors that MDE must base the CCB generator fee on to include the volume of 
CCBs that have been disposed of and remain in landfills or other storage units in the State 
that are subject to inspection and monitoring, except as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 902 (Delegate Lehman, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation and Economic Matters. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 425/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Calvert, Howard, and Prince 
George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department 
of Natural Resources; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - April 30, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6