START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 431 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 431 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes (1) the Maryland Office of Registered Apprenticeship 
Development (MORAD) within the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program 
(MATP) of the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor); (2) the Registered 
Apprenticeship Qualified Intermediary Program (RAQI); (3) the Maryland Pay Per 
Apprentice Program (MPPA) and associated special fund; and (4) the Registered 
Apprenticeship Development Advisory Board. The Governor must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation sufficient to cover the administrative costs for MORAD and, 
in fiscal 2027 through 2030, may include an appropriation for the MPPA fund. The bill 
also (1) establishes a one-to-one ratio of journeyworkers to apprentices and requires the 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council (MATC) to review and recommend 
deviations; (2) repeals the Youth Apprenticeship Advisory Committee; and (3) alters 
apprenticeship reporting requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.5 million in FY 2026 for staffing; 
out-years reflect annualization and inflation. General fund expenditures and special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase by an indeterminate, but likely significant amount in 
FY 2027 through 2030 to award grants under MPPA, as discussed below. General fund 
revenues increase minimally from interest earnings of the new special fund through 
FY 2028. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2027 through 2030. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
SF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$1,500,000 
$1,517,400 
$1,584,700 
$1,655,200 
$1,725,900 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($1,500,000) 
- 
- 
- 
-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 431/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Minimal, to the extent local governments apply for and receive grants. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Office of Registered Apprenticeship Development 
 
The purpose of MORAD is to scale registered apprenticeships across industries and 
occupations to meet the needs of the State’s economy. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Qualified Intermediary Program 
 
The bill establishes RAQI within the MATP of the Division of Workforce Development 
and Adult Learning (DWDAL). A “qualified intermediary” is an entity that demonstrates 
expertise in (1) connecting sponsors, employers, or potential apprenticeship program 
participants with registered apprenticeship programs; (2) convening stakeholders to 
develop registered apprenticeship programs; and (3) other key functions, as determined by 
MD Labor. 
 
The program reports to the director of MATP who must, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Labor, the Governor’s Workforce Development Board, the Registered 
Apprenticeship Development Advisory Board, and the Department of Commerce, develop 
the program. The program must increase awareness of registered apprenticeship programs 
through industry outreach, connect employers and labor organizations with workforce and 
education partners, and provide technical assistance to launch and expand registered 
apprenticeship programs with a focus on nontraditional sectors. MPPA must include a 
process for monitoring and evaluating the program. The Secretary of Labor may use grants 
or procurement, among other strategies, to advance and accomplish the goals of the 
program. 
 
Maryland Pay Per Apprenticeship Program and Fund 
 
The purposes of the MPPA program are to (1) develop a well-trained, productive workforce 
that meets the needs of the State’s economy and (2) help employers and registered 
apprenticeship sponsors offset costs, including recruitment, education, training, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 431/ Page 3 
accommodations for disabilities that are associated with hiring newly registered 
apprentices. 
 
MD Labor must administer MPPA, may adopt regulations to carry out the program and 
administer the fund, and must establish (1) requirements for incentive applications; 
(2) review and awarding processes; (3) maximum award eligibility per newly registered 
apprentice, subject to fund availability; (4) the maximum amount of incentives an eligible 
employer or sponsor may receive each year; and (5) a process for monitoring and 
evaluating outcomes, assessing compliance, and taking corrective action, including 
requiring reimbursement of incentives should an employer or sponsor fail to meet the 
requirements of the program. 
 
The MPPA fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by the Secretary of Labor. The 
fund consists of money appropriated to the fund in accordance with the bill’s mandated 
appropriation, money collected due to noncompliance with program requirements, interest 
earnings of the fund, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit 
of the fund. The fund may be used only for providing incentives under the MPPA program 
and for administrative expenses related to the program. 
 
An employer (an individual or organization located or operating in the State) or sponsor 
(an individual, association, committee, organization, intermediary, or employer, as 
specified) may apply for only one grant for a newly registered apprentice who has been 
employed for at least seven months and is within the initial year of employment with the 
applicant. An employer or sponsor may be awarded only one grant for each newly 
registered apprentice per year. An employer or sponsor awarded a grant must attest to its 
intent to retain an apprentice through the duration of the full apprenticeship and after 
completion of the apprenticeship, unless an apprentice leaves on the apprentice’s own 
accord or has been dismissed for cause. If an incentive is awarded to an employer or a 
sponsor on behalf of a newly registered apprentice, another employer or sponsor may not 
apply for an incentive under MPPA for the same newly registered apprentice. 
 
Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory Board 
 
The purpose of the Registered Apprenticeship Development and Advisory Board is to 
advise MORAD on the strategy to achieve its mission of expanding registered 
apprenticeship opportunities in the State. The board must consult with MORAD regularly 
about developing strategy and reviewing outcomes for apprenticeships, provide advice on 
programs operated by MORAD, evaluate MORAD, and report the results of its evaluation 
to the Governor and General Assembly annually beginning December 1, 2025. 
 
Members of the board may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the State budget. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 431/ Page 4 
Members serve for a term of four years until a successor is appointed and qualifies. The 
terms of members are staggered such that, of the initial members, (1) the terms of 
two members, neither of whom is the chair, must expire on September 30, 2027; (2) the 
term of the chair must expire on September 30, 2028; and (3) the term of two members 
neither of whom is the chair must expire September 30, 2029.  
 
Apprenticeship Ratios 
 
Under the bill, MATC must require a minimum ratio of one journeyworker regularly 
employed to one apprentice, consistent with proper supervision, training, and continuity of 
employment and applicable provisions in collective bargaining agreements. MATC must, 
at the time of or subsequent to registration, recommend a deviation from the minimum ratio 
requirement for all occupations that are defined by the Secretary of Labor as nonhazardous 
to workers and members of the public. For all other occupations, MATC must only 
consider formal written requests for deviations. The apprenticeship ratio provisions must 
be construed to apply retroactively and must be applied to and interpreted to affect only 
registered apprenticeship programs initially approved by MD Labor on or after 
January 1, 2023. 
 
Other Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill updates DWDAL’s annual reporting requirements. The reports must be submitted 
annually by December 31, instead of June 30. The bill also expands the scope of the report 
by requiring information from the preceding five calendar years (instead of the previous 
calendar year) and information on (1) the number of qualified intermediaries registered in 
RAQI; (2) the number of approved grants and procurements awarded by the Secretary of 
Labor under RAQI; (3) the number of newly registered apprentices and newly registered 
apprenticeship programs resulting from RAQI; (4) the number and value of the incentives 
awarded under MPPA; (5) worker outcomes for each registered apprenticeship program, 
as specified; and (6) any corrective action, including requiring reimbursement of 
incentives, for failure to meet the requirements of MPPA. Under the bill, DWDAL no 
longer must sort the information in the report by apprenticeship program. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Appendix – Apprenticeship provides an overview of 
apprenticeship programs in Maryland. 
 
Apprenticeship Ratios 
 
Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024 required MD Labor to submit a report to the 
General Assembly that analyzes the apprenticeship mentoring ratios for all nontraditional 
apprenticeable occupations in the State. The final report includes a nonhazardous 
occupations list, which MD Labor advises will continue to be maintained and updated as 
circumstances change. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 431/ Page 5 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program 
 
DWDAL oversees MATP, which is a model of job preparation that combines paid  
on-the-job learning with related instruction to progressively increase workers’ skill levels 
and wages. MD Labor advises this model provides an effective way for employers to 
recruit, train, and retain highly skilled workers. 
 
Youth Apprenticeship Advisory Committee 
 
Chapter 646 of 2014 established the Youth Apprenticeship Advisory Committee to 
evaluate the effectiveness of existing high school youth apprenticeship programs in the 
State, other states, and other countries based on a systematic review of data. The committee 
must review and identify (1) ways to implement high school youth apprenticeship 
programs in the State and (2) means through which employers and organizations can obtain 
grants, tax credits, and other subsidies to support establishment and operation of  
high school youth apprenticeship programs. The Youth Apprenticeship Advisory 
Committee must set targets for the number of apprenticeship opportunities for youth that 
the State should reach over the next three years. 
 
Apprenticeship Tax Credit 
 
Chapter 149 of 2017 established the apprenticeship income tax credit under the More Jobs 
for Marylanders Act, with a termination date of June 30, 2020. Chapter 643 of 2020 
extended the termination date of the tax credit to June 30, 2025, modified the eligibility 
requirements and increased the tax credit amount, and established the Apprenticeship Tax 
Credit Reserve Fund. The program is not applicable to tax years 2025 and beyond. 
 
An eligible apprentice is an individual in an apprenticeship program registered with MATC 
that meets specified requirements. The eligible apprentice must have been employed by the 
taxpayer for at least 450 hours of the taxable year through a youth apprenticeship program 
or been employed by the taxpayer for at least seven full months of the taxable year and 
receive an apprenticeship wage of at least 50% of the prevailing wage if there is an 
applicable prevailing wage rate. 
 
With respect to the first five eligible apprentices for whom the taxpayer claims the credit, 
the credit is $1,000 for each apprentice in a youth apprenticeship program and $3,000 for 
each eligible apprentice if the eligible apprentice is not employed through a youth 
apprenticeship program. Otherwise, the credit is $1,000 for each eligible apprentice. 
MD Labor may not certify more than $15,000 of tax credits in a taxable year for any 
taxpayer and tax credit applications are approved on a first-come, first-served basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 431/ Page 6 
The Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation to the Apprenticeship 
Tax Credit Reserve Fund, and the amount of credits that MD Labor can award each year 
cannot exceed the amount appropriated to the fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MATC can review and adjust apprenticeship ratios with existing 
resources. MD Labor can support the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory 
Board as necessary with existing resources. Repealing the Youth Apprenticeship Advisory 
Committee has no material effect on State finances.  
 
Administrative Expenditures 
 
MD Labor advises that, although there are existing staff within MATP paid through a 
combination of federal and Apprenticeship and Training Fund funds, MD Labor does not 
expect such funding to continue to be available beyond FY 2025. Therefore, MD Labor 
anticipates significant administrative expenditures to support MORAD. MD Labor also 
advises that $1.5 million in general funds has been included in the agency’s fiscal 2026 
operating budget for the administrative costs associated with MORAD. This analysis 
assumes that at least $1.5 million is appropriated annually beginning in fiscal 2026 (as 
discussed further below) to fulfil the bill’s mandate for an appropriation sufficient to cover 
the administrative costs for MORAD. 
 
MD Labor further advises that it can administer MPPA and RAQI with existing resources. 
To the extent that the MPPA program does require additional staffing and related 
expenditures, administrative costs are an authorized expenditure for the MPPA fund under 
the bill and are assumed to be sufficient to cover any additional support required (with 
corresponding reductions in the amounts available for program grants each year). 
 
General fund expenditures therefore increase by $1.5 million in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring 14 Apprenticeship Navigators to market and develop new registered apprenticeship 
opportunities and track the results of such apprenticeships under MORAD. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This 
estimate also includes additional operating expenses for MORAD for travel, technology 
and additional equipment, bringing total combined expenditures to $1.5 million in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Positions 
14.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$1,167,416 
Travel and Technology 
229,421 
Other Operating Expenses 
     103,163 
FY 2026 MD Labor Staffing Expenditures 
$1,500,000 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 431/ Page 7 
These costs are budgeted in fiscal 2026; future year expenditures reflect full salaries with 
annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
Grant and Programmatic Expenditures 
 
General fund expenditures and MPPA special fund revenues and expenditures increase by 
an indeterminate, but potentially significant, amount in fiscal 2027 through fiscal 2030 for 
MPPA to disburse grants to support registered apprenticeships. Exact funding is as 
provided in the State budget each fiscal year. Nevertheless, MD Labor advises $5.0 million 
annually through fiscal 2030 would be sufficient to achieve the program’s goals. As noted 
above, MD Labor does not anticipate using any of these funds for administrative costs, 
although the bill authorizes such uses. To the extent such funds are included in the State 
budget in fiscal 2027 through 2030 and to the extent MD Labor elects to use MPPA funds 
for administrative costs, total funding is not affected but fewer funds are available for 
grants. 
 
The fiscal 2023 operating budget appropriated $25 million to the Dedicated Purpose 
Account (DPA) for registered apprenticeships, which remains unspent. In fiscal 2026, 
MD Labor advises that the agency plans to use $10.0 million in funds from DPA available 
for apprenticeship initiatives to make grants under MPPA and RAQI ($5.0 million in grants 
for each program). MD Labor further advises that, pending legislative decisions, the agency 
also plans to use another $10.0 million from DPA in fiscal 2027, leaving $5.0 million in 
DPA for future, unspecified uses. As such funding is discretionary and not contingent on 
the bill, these amounts are not included in this analysis; nonetheless, this analysis 
anticipates MD Labor will award a combined $10 million in grants under MPPA and RAQI 
in each of fiscal 2026 and 2027. Exhibit 1 shows total assumed funding by source for 
RAQI and MPPA for fiscal 2026 through 2030.  
 
Beyond fiscal 2027 and after exhausting DPA funds, RAQI has no dedicated funding 
sources. MD Labor advises that it instead will use other strategies (besides grants) 
authorized by the bill, including using existing contracts or other resources to increase 
awareness, connect workers, and provide technical assistance. DLS notes that, as discussed 
above, $5.0 million will remain in DPA for apprenticeship programs that could be accessed 
by MD Labor to support further RAQI activities. Any such expenditures are discretionary 
and not reflected in this analysis. Otherwise, RAQI does not affect State expenditures 
beyond fiscal 2027. 
 
To the extent DPA funds are not available in fiscal 2026, additional general fund 
expenditures may be incurred to make grants available under MPPA and RAQI in 
fiscal 2026. Alternatively, implementation of MPPA may be delayed until fiscal 2027 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 431/ Page 8 
when discretionary funding may become available, and RAQI may operate using only other 
strategies as authorized by the bill beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Expected Grant Expenditures by Fund Source 
($ in Millions) 
Fiscal 2026-2030 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
MPPA Program 
General Funds (discretionary)  
- 
- 
- 
- 
DPA Funds 
$5.0 
$5.0* 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
RAQI Program 
DPA Funds 
$5.0 
$5.0* 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
Total Expected Grant Expenditures: 
$10.0 
$10.0 
- 
- 
- 
 
DPA:  Dedicated Purpose Account 
MPPA:  Maryland Pay Per Apprenticeship 
RAQI:  Registered Apprenticeship Qualified Intermediary 
 
* Pending legislative decisions. 
 
Note:  - = indeterminate amount 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Labor, Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Special Fund Interest Earnings 
 
Although the bill indicates that interest earnings of the MPPA Fund remain in the fund, the 
bill does not amend Section 8 of Chapter 717 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2024), which requires, notwithstanding any other provision of law, that 
interest earnings from special funds (with certain exceptions) accrue to the general fund 
from fiscal 2024 through 2028. Thus, general fund revenues increase minimally from 
interest earnings of the MPPA special fund through fiscal 2028. Under current law, the 
MPPA fund retains interest earnings beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires the Registered Apprenticeship Development 
Advisory Board to submit an initial evaluation of MORAD by December 1, 2025. 
However, the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date leaves just two months to complete the 
evaluation. This timeline for an initial evaluation is likely challenging given the time 
needed to establish both MORAD and the board. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 431/ Page 9 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 501 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 431/ Page 10 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship 
programs. More specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as 
changes to current programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. 
The approval process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program 
in a proposed industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current 
staffing level of the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate 
supervision can be provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations 
of the entity. The Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory 
role for legislation and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 431/ Page 11 
At the end of 2023, there were 11,271 apprentices registered in 124 different occupations. 
There were 2,016 Certificates of Completion for apprentices in 2023. The State added 
41 new apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship 
system has also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The 
percentage of minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 43% in 
December 2023. Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in 
November 2016 to 7.6% in December 2023. 
 
In addition to registered apprenticeship, MD Labor, in collaboration with the Maryland 
State Department of Education, also operates a parallel youth apprenticeship program 
aimed at connecting students to paid employment and training opportunities called the 
Apprenticeship Maryland Program. As of May 2024, there were 1,045 active youth 
apprenticeships participating in the program. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages; 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and 
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met 4 times in 2023 and 10 times in 2024 and 
published the Interim Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. A final report is 
expected during calendar 2025. 
 
In response to Chapters 307 and 308 of 2024, MD Labor released a report on analyzing the 
apprenticeship mentoring ratio for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the 
State. The report indicates that, for fiscal 2024, there were approximately 694 apprentices 
employed by 119 employers in nontraditional apprenticeships (those outside the traditional 
building trades). 
 
The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report (JCR) outlined concerns with workforce shortages 
among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation sectors. The 
report directed MD Labor to convene workgroups to study and report on the short-term 
and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. Pursuant to the 2022 JCR, 
MD Labor released reports from a Healthcare Apprenticeship Workgroup, Transportation 
Apprenticeship Workgroup, and Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 431/ Page 12 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy 
(RAISE) Act 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 431 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Brad Fallon 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The RAISE Act provides direct financial incentives to businesses to encourage them to 
utilize the Maryland Registered Apprenticeship model to develop their workforce. 
Together, the Maryland Apprenticeship Incentive Program and the Registered 
Apprenticeship Qualified Intermediary Program will direct $10 million in FY2026 towards 
businesses for these purposes. 
 
Additionally, the policy changes made to the Registered Apprenticeship program and 
pathways to licensure will help small businesses develop and access a skilled workforce. 

END OF PAGE 12