START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 443 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 443 
(Senator Smith, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Trafficking Regulated Firearms - Felony Classification 
 
 
This bill reclassifies – from a misdemeanor to a felony – the prohibition against 
transporting a regulated firearm into the State for the purpose of unlawfully selling or 
trafficking of the regulated firearm. The bill also extends the applicable statute of 
limitations of a prosecution for such an offense; instead of a prosecution being instituted 
within three years after the offense was committed, a prosecution may be instituted at any 
time. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes are not expected to materially affect State finances, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s changes are not expected to materially affect local finances, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A dealer or other person may not transport a regulated firearm into the 
State for the purpose of unlawfully selling or trafficking of the regulated firearm. A violator 
is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to maximum penalties of 
imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a fine of up to $25,000. Each violation is a separate 
crime. A prosecution for a violation must be instituted within three years after the offense 
was committed. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 443/ Page 2 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Changing crimes from misdemeanors to felonies means that 
(1) such cases are likely to be filed in the circuit courts rather than the District Court and 
(2) some persons may eventually serve longer incarcerations due to more stringent penalty 
provisions applicable to some offenses for prior felony convictions.  
 
The Judiciary advises that for the offense altered by the bill, in fiscal 2023, there was 
one filing in the District Court and four filings in the circuit courts, with no convictions, 
and in fiscal 2024, there were no filings or convictions. Accordingly, it is assumed that this 
bill shifts a minimal number of cases from the District Court to the circuit courts (including 
any fines imposed in these cases). It is not known whether such a prospective shift may 
spur more plea bargains and affect actual sentencing practices for this offense. In addition, 
it is not known whether allowing for the prosecution of the offense at any time will result 
in an increase in the number of filings. Nevertheless, based on the data provided by the 
Judiciary, it is assumed that the bill does not materially affect State or local finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard County; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2025 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2