START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

Chapter 2

(Senate Bill 431)

AN ACT concerning

Registered Apprenticeship Investments for a Stronger Economy (RAISE) Act

FOR the purpose of ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Plumbing~~ ~~to~~ ~~waive~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~
~~examination~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~journey~~ ~~plumber~~ ~~license;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Secretary~~
~~of~~ ~~Labor~~ ~~to~~ ~~waive~~ ~~the~~ ~~examination~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~licenses;~~ altering the duties of the
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council; repealing the Youth Apprenticeship
Advisory Committee; establishing the Maryland Office of Registered Apprenticeship
Development within the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program;
establishing the Registered Apprenticeship Qualified Intermediary Program within
the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Program; establishing the Maryland
~~Apprenticeship~~ ~~Incentive~~ Pay Per Apprentice Program within the Maryland
Department of Labor; establishing the Maryland ~~Apprenticeship~~ ~~Incentive~~ Pay Per
Apprentice Program Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring that the interest
earnings of the Fund remain in the Fund; establishing the Registered
Apprenticeship Development Advisory Board in the Department; applying certain
provisions of this Act retroactively; and generally relating to registered
apprenticeships.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Occupations~~ ~~and~~ ~~Professions~~
~~Section~~ ~~12–305.3~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2018~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2024~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Regulation~~
~~Section~~ ~~2–104.1~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2024~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–405(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–409
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–409, 11–410, 11–411, and 11–607
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)204. and 205.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)206.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Occupations~~ ~~and~~ ~~Professions~~

~~12–305.3.~~

THE BOARD SHALL WAIVE THE EXAMINATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A
JOURNEY PLUMBER LICENSE FOR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) HAS SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED A PLUMBING APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAM APPROVED BY THE DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND
ADULT LEARNING; AND

(2) PAYS THE APPROPRIATE FEE REQUIRED UNDER § 12–306 OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Regulation~~

~~2–104.1.~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “LICENSE” MEANS A LICENSE, CERTIFICATE,
REGISTRATION, PERMIT, OR OTHER CREDENTIAL THAT IS ISSUED BY A UNIT OF THE
DIVISION OF OCCUPATIONAL AND PROFESSIONAL LICENSING IN THE
~~DEPARTMENT.~~

(B) UNLESS REQUIRED BY FEDERAL LAW, THE SECRETARY MAY WAIVE THE
~~EXAMINATION~~ ~~REQUIREMENT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~WHO~~
~~SUCCESSFULLY~~ ~~COMPLETES~~ ~~A~~ ~~REGISTERED~~ ~~APPRENTICESHIP~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~APPROVED~~
BY THE DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING IF THE
MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING COUNCIL HAS FOUND THAT THE
~~APPROVED~~ ~~REGISTERED~~ ~~APPRENTICESHIP~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~MEETS~~ ~~INDUSTRY~~ ~~STANDARDS~~
AND LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO ELIMINATE EDUCATION OR
EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER STATE LAW FOR LICENSURE.

Article – Labor and Employment

11–405.

(a) The [duties of the] Council shall [be to]:

(1) advise the Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning on
the apprenticeability of occupations in the State of Maryland;

(2) encourage the establishment of local apprenticeship committees where
the committees are needed;

(3) make recommendations regarding the formulation and adoption of
standards of apprenticeship which safeguard the welfare of apprentices, being guided, but
not controlled, by the standards of apprenticeship recommended by the federal committee
on apprenticeship;

(4) REQUIRE A MINIMUM RATIO OF ONE JOURNEYWORKER
REGULARLY EMPLOYED TO ONE APPRENTICE, CONSISTENT WITH PROPER
SUPERVISION, TRAINING, AND CONTINUITY OF EMPLOYMENT AND APPLICABLE
PROVISIONS IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS;

(5) AUTHORIZE AT THE TIME OF OR SUBSEQUENT TO REGISTRATION,
RECOMMEND A DEVIATION FROM THE MINIMUM RATIO REQUIREMENT FOR ALL
OCCUPATIONS THAT ARE DEFINED BY THE SECRETARY AS NONHAZARDOUS TO
WORKERS AND MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) CONSIDER FORMAL WRITTEN DEVIATION REQUESTS FROM ALL
OTHER OCCUPATIONS;

[(4)] (7) make recommendations regarding the formulation of policies for
the overall apprenticeship program;

[(5)] (8) make recommendations regarding the registration of standards
of apprenticeship of the groups or employers that elect to conform with the provisions of
this subtitle;

[(6)] (9) make recommendations regarding the registration of
apprenticeship agreements which conform to the standards of apprenticeship adopted by
the Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning;

[(7)] (10) recommend the issuance of certificates of completion of
apprenticeship to apprentices who are registered with the Division of Workforce
Development and Adult Learning when the Division determines that such apprentices have
completed successfully their apprenticeship;

[(8)] (11) seek all information pertaining to apprenticeship training in the
State;

[(9)] (12) prescribe its rules of procedure and duties of the Chairman,
Director, and Secretary subject to the provisions of this law; and

[(10)] (13) perform other advisory functions as the Governor or the
Secretary may direct or as may come within the scope of the Council.

(d) (1) On or before [June 30 of] DECEMBER 31 each year, the Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning shall report to the General Assembly, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the following information for
the immediately preceding calendar year 5 CALENDAR YEARS:

(i) the completion and enrollment rates of each apprenticeship
program registered in the State; [and]

(ii) the age, race, sex or gender identity, county of residence, and
program enrollment of each individual enrolled in a registered apprenticeship program;

(III) THE NUMBER OF:

1. QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARIES REGISTERED IN THE
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARY PROGRAM;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

2. APPROVED GRANTS AND PROCUREMENTS USED BY
THE SECRETARY UNDER § 11–410(C)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

3. NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICES AND NEWLY
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS RESULTING FROM THE REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIP QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARY PROGRAM; AND

(IV) THE NUMBER AND VALUE OF THE INCENTIVES AWARDED
UNDER THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP INCENTIVE PAY PER APPRENTICE
PROGRAM;

(V) WORKER OUTCOMES FOR EACH REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

1. JOB PLACEMENT;

2. POST–APPRENTICESHIP WAGE RATES; AND

3. RETENTION AND ADVANCEMENT DATA; AND

(VI) ANY CORRECTIVE ACTION, INCLUDING REQUIRING
REIMBURSEMENT OF INCENTIVES, FOR FAILURE TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF
THE MARYLAND PAY PER APPRENTICE PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 11–607
OF THIS TITLE.

(2) The Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning shall[:

(i) sort the information required under paragraph (1) of this
subsection by apprenticeship program; and

(ii)] publish the report required under paragraph (1) of this
subsection on the Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning’s Web site.

[11–409.

(a) In this section, “Committee” means the Youth Apprenticeship Advisory
Committee.

(b) There is a Youth Apprenticeship Advisory Committee in the Division of
Workforce Development and Adult Learning.

(c) The Committee consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the State Superintendent of Schools, or the State Superintendent’s
designee;

(3) the Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Secretary of Juvenile Services, or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) the Assistant Secretary of the Division of Workforce Development and
Adult Learning, or the Assistant Secretary’s designee; and

(6) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) two representatives of the Council;

(ii) one representative of an employee organization;

(iii) one employer whose business has a nonjoint apprenticeship
program;

(iv) one representative from a community college;

(v) one individual who holds a doctoral degree and specializes in
labor economics with expertise in national and international apprenticeship systems;

(vi) one representative of a nonprofit organization who is involved
with employee training and workforce development;

(vii) one representative of the Maryland Chamber of Commerce; and

(viii) two representatives from regional business councils that serve
different regions of the State.

(d) The Committee shall:

(1) evaluate the effectiveness of existing high school youth apprenticeship
programs in the State, other states, and other countries based on a systematic review of
relevant data;

(2) review and identify:

(i) ways to implement high school youth apprenticeship programs
in the State; and

(ii) means through which employers and organizations can obtain
grants, tax credits, and other subsidies to support establishment and operation of high
school youth apprenticeship programs; and

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

(3) set targets for the number of apprenticeship opportunities for youth
that the State should reach over the next 3 years.

(e) On or before December 1 of each year, the Committee shall submit a
report, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the General
Assembly regarding any recommended legislation to promote high school youth
apprenticeship programs in the State.]

11–409.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “OFFICE” MEANS THE MARYLAND OFFICE OF
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP DEVELOPMENT.

(B) THERE IS A MARYLAND OFFICE OF REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING
PROGRAM OF THE DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT
LEARNING.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE OFFICE IS TO MARKET AND ADVANCE THE
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP SYSTEM THROUGHOUT THE STATE SCALE
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS ACROSS INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS TO MEET
THE NEEDS OF THE STATE’S ECONOMY.

(D) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION TO THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING PROGRAM
TO COVER ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS FOR THE OFFICE.

11–410.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DIRECTOR” MEANS THE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING PROGRAM.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARY PROGRAM.

(4) “QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARY” MEANS AN ENTITY THAT
DEMONSTRATES EXPERTISE IN:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) CONNECTING SPONSORS, EMPLOYERS, OR POTENTIAL
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS WITH REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAMS;

(II) CONVENING STAKEHOLDERS TO DEVELOP REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS; OR

(III) OTHER KEY FUNCTIONS AS DETERMINED APPROPRIATE BY
THE DEPARTMENT TO SUCCESSFULLY BUILD AND SCALE REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS THAT ACHIEVE DESIRED WORKFORCE OUTCOMES.

(B) THERE IS A REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP QUALIFIED INTERMEDIARY
PROGRAM WITHIN THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING PROGRAM OF
THE DIVISION OF WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING.

(C) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL:

(I) REPORT TO THE DIRECTOR;

(II) INCREASE AWARENESS OF REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAMS THROUGH INDUSTRY OUTREACH;

(III) CONNECT EMPLOYERS AND LABOR ORGANIZATIONS WITH
WORKFORCE AND EDUCATION PARTNERS; AND

(IV) PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO LAUNCH AND EXPAND
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS WITH A FOCUS ON NONTRADITIONAL
SECTORS; AND

(V) INCLUDE A PROCESS FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATING
THE PROGRAM.

(2) THE DIRECTOR SHALL, IN COLLABORATION CONSULTATION WITH
THE SECRETARY, THE GOVERNOR’S WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT BOARD, THE
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD, AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEVELOP THE PROGRAM.

(3) THE SECRETARY MAY USE GRANTS OR PROCUREMENT, AMONG
OTHER STRATEGIES, TO ADVANCE AND ACCOMPLISH THE GOALS OF THE PROGRAM.

11–411.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “BOARD” MEANS THE REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD.

(3) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHED UNDER § 11–409 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THERE IS A REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP DEVELOPMENT
ADVISORY BOARD IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE BOARD IS TO ADVISE THE OFFICE ON THE
STRATEGY TO ACHIEVE ITS MISSION OF EXPANDING REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE STATE.

(C) THE BOARD SHALL CONSIST OF:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) TWO MEMBERS DESIGNATED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE
MARYLAND STATE AND DC AFL–CIO;

(4) TWO MEMBERS REPRESENTING EMPLOYERS ENGAGED IN
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; AND

(5) ONE MEMBER TO SERVE AS CHAIR OF THE BOARD, APPOINTED BY
THE GOVERNOR.

(D) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(E) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE TERMS OF MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS REQUIRED BY THE
TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD ON OCTOBER 1, 2025.

(3) A VACANCY SHALL BE FILLED FOR AN UNEXPIRED TERM IN THE
SAME MANNER AS THE ORIGINAL APPOINTMENT.

(4) AT THE END OF THE TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE
UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(5) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM AND UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
QUALIFIES.

(F) THE BOARD SHALL:

(1) CONSULT WITH THE OFFICE REGULARLY ABOUT DEVELOPING
STRATEGY AND REVIEWING OUTCOMES FOR APPRENTICESHIPS;

(2) PROVIDE ADVICE ON PROGRAMS OPERATED BY THE OFFICE; AND

(3) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN 2025,
EVALUATE THE OFFICE AND REPORT THE RESULTS OF THE EVALUATION TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

11–607.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EMPLOYER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL OR ORGANIZATION LOCATED
OR OPERATING IN THE STATE THAT EMPLOYS A REGISTERED APPRENTICE.

(3) “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP INCENTIVE
PAY PER APPRENTICE PROGRAM FUND.

(4) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP
~~INCENTIVE~~ PAY PER APPRENTICE PROGRAM.

(5) “REGISTERED APPRENTICE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE WHO
PARTICIPATES IN A REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

(6) “REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP” MEANS AN APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAM THAT IS REGISTERED WITH, AND APPROVED BY, THE DIVISION OF
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT AND ADULT LEARNING.

(7) “SPONSOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL, ASSOCIATION, COMMITTEE,
ORGANIZATION, INTERMEDIARY, OR EMPLOYER IN WHOSE NAME OR TITLE THE
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM IS OR IS TO BE REGISTERED.

(B) THERE IS A MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP INCENTIVE PAY PER
APPRENTICE PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM ARE TO:

(1) DEVELOP A WELL–TRAINED, PRODUCTIVE WORKFORCE THAT
MEETS THE NEEDS OF THE STATE’S ECONOMY; AND

(2) HELP EMPLOYERS AND SPONSORS OFFSET COSTS, INCLUDING
RECRUITMENT, EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABILITIES
OR MATERIALS, ASSOCIATED WITH HIRING NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICES.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM AND ESTABLISH:

(1) REQUIREMENTS FOR INCENTIVE APPLICATIONS;

(2) A PROCESS FOR REVIEWING INCENTIVE APPLICATIONS AND
AWARDING INCENTIVES TO ELIGIBLE EMPLOYERS OR SPONSORS;

(3) THE MAXIMUM AWARD ELIGIBILITY PER NEWLY REGISTERED
APPRENTICE SUBJECT TO FUND AVAILABILITY;

(4) THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF INCENTIVES THAT AN ELIGIBLE
EMPLOYER OR SPONSOR MAY RECEIVE EACH YEAR; AND

(5) A PROCESS FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATING OUTCOMES,
ASSESSING COMPLIANCE, AND TAKING CORRECTIVE ACTION, INCLUDING
REQUIRING REIMBURSEMENT OF INCENTIVES, SHOULD AN EMPLOYER OR SPONSOR
FAIL TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PROGRAM.

(E) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP INCENTIVE PAY PER
APPRENTICE PROGRAM FUND.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE INCENTIVES UNDER
THE PROGRAM.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED TO THE FUND UNDER PARAGRAPH
(9) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(II) MONEY COLLECTED DUE TO NONCOMPLIANCE WITH
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS;

(III) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND;AND

(IV) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR PROVIDING INCENTIVES
UNDER THE PROGRAM AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES RELATED TO THE
PROGRAM.

(7) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(8) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(9) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2027 THROUGH 2030, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF AT LEAST $5,000,000 FOR THE FUND.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO THIS SUBSECTION, AN EMPLOYER OR A SPONSOR
MAY APPLY FOR AND BE AWARDED AN INCENTIVE UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(2) AN EMPLOYER OR A SPONSOR MAY APPLY FOR ONLY ONE GRANT
FOR A NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICE WHO:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 2

(I) HAS BEEN EMPLOYED FOR AT LEAST 7 MONTHS; AND

(II) IS WITHIN THE INITIAL YEAR OF EMPLOYMENT WITH THE
APPLICANT.

(3) AN EMPLOYER OR A SPONSOR MAY BE AWARDED ONLY ONE GRANT
PER EACH NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICE PER YEAR.

(4) AN EMPLOYER OR SPONSOR AWARDED A GRANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM SHALL ATTEST TO ITS INTENT TO RETAIN THE APPRENTICE AFTER
~~COMPLETION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REGISTERED~~ ~~APPRENTICESHIP~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~
~~PLAN~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ACHIEVE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RETENTION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~APPRENTICE~~ AN APPRENTICE THROUGH
THE DURATION OF THE FULL APPRENTICESHIP AND AFTER COMPLETION OF THE
APPRENTICESHIP, UNLESS AN APPRENTICE LEAVES ON THE APPRENTICE’S OWN
ACCORD OR HAS BEEN DISMISSED FOR CAUSE.

(5) IF AN INCENTIVE IS AWARDED TO AN EMPLOYER OR A SPONSOR
ON BEHALF OF A NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICE, ANOTHER EMPLOYER OR
SPONSOR MAY NOT APPLY FOR AN INCENTIVE UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR THE SAME
NEWLY REGISTERED APPRENTICE.

(G) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) 1. This subparagraph does not apply in fiscal years 2024
through 2028.

2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

204. the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund;
[and]

205. the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund; AND
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 2 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

206. THE MARYLAND APPRENTICESHIP INCENTIVE PAY
PER APPRENTICE PROGRAM FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That § 11–405 of the Labor and
Employment Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be construed to apply
retroactively and shall be applied to and interpreted to affect only registered apprenticeship
programs initially approved by the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Apprenticeship~~ ~~and~~ ~~Training~~ ~~Council~~
Maryland Department of Labor on or after January 1, 2023.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
members of the Registered Apprenticeship Development Advisory Board shall expire as
follows:

(1) two members neither of whom is the chair on September 30, 2027;

(2) the chair on September 30, 2028; and

(3) two members neither of whom is the chair on September 30, 2029.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 8, 2025.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14