START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 547 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 547 
(Senator James, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Commission to Study Health Insurance Pooling - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Commission to Study Health Insurance Pooling to study pooling 
public employee health insurance purchasing among the State, counties, municipal 
corporations, and local boards of education. A member of the commission may not receive 
compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. The Department of Budget 
and Management (DBM) must staff the commission. The commission may contract with 
external organizations to provide data analysis. By December 1, 2026, the commission 
must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DBM can staff the commission using existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government finances 
or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission must study pooling of public employee health insurance 
purchasing using data collected by DBM, including information provided by the Maryland 
Association of Counties, the Maryland Municipal League, and the Maryland Association 
of Boards of Education.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 547/ Page 2 
Based on the data collected, the commission must analyze the impacts of pooling public 
employee health insurance purchasing, including the fiscal impacts, and identify any 
barriers to successful implementation. The commission must make legislative or regulatory 
recommendations regarding pooling of public employee health insurance purchasing to 
maximize value and efficiency while maintaining a broad package of benefits and 
reasonable premiums for public employees.  
 
Current Law:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
established in statute to provide health insurance benefit options to State employees and 
retirees. The Secretary of Budget and Management is charged with developing and 
administering the program, including selecting the insurance options to be offered.  
 
Specified nonprofit organizations and local governments (including counties, 
municipalities, and local boards of education) may elect to participate in the State plan as 
satellite organizations. They must pay the full cost of their participation to the State, 
including any premiums and administrative costs. In general, only employees, but not 
retirees, of satellite organizations may elect to participate in the State plan, with specified 
exceptions. As of January 1, 2025, DBM advises that 28 municipal corporations and 
educational organizations participate in the State’s health plan.  
 
Chapter 307 of 2018 established the Task Force to Study Cooperative Purchasing for 
Health Insurance. The task force was required to (1) study models of cooperative 
purchasing of health insurance and (2) make recommendations generally related to 
expanding coverage under the State’s health plan to other satellite organizations, while 
minimizing costs and without adversely affecting benefits provided to participating 
employees. The task force submitted its findings and recommendations in December 2019. 
Among other things, the task force recommended:  
 
 
increased outreach to local governments that are allowed to join the State’s plan;  
 
if participation by local governments is not increased after outreach, establishment 
of a governing body or joint health care committee to allow local governments to 
have representation and substantive input into the plan design and procurement 
evaluation processes for the State’s health plan; 
 
analysis of the potential costs to the State and savings to local governments by the 
State assuming or sharing the administrative burden for any local governments that 
join the State’s plan;  
 
increasing awareness of other options available to local governments besides the 
State’s health plan; and 
 
encouraging local entities to combine resources and perform their own 
intergovernmental cooperative procurements. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 547/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and 
Management; Board of Public Works; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3