START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 513 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 513 
(Senator Henson, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Real Property - Unlawfully Restrictive Covenant Modifications - County or 
Municipality Notice Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters a statutory provision in regard to the notice that a local government must 
provide when it intends to execute and record a restrictive covenant modification to an 
unlawfully restrictive covenant. In addition to repealing the requirement for the notice to 
be sent by first class mail, the bill requires notice to be (1) published once per week for 
four successive weeks in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the county or 
municipality where the property is located and (2) posted on the official website of the 
county or municipality where the property is located. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an unlawfully restrictive covenant is any recorded covenant or 
restriction that restricts ownership based on race, religious belief, or national origin. 
 
A county or municipality may execute and record a restrictive covenant modification to an 
unlawfully restrictive covenant if the subject property is within the boundaries of the 
county or municipality and specific notice requirements are satisfied. In addition to other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 513/ Page 2 
requirements, the notice must (1) be sent by first-class mail and (2) provide information on 
how a person with an ownership interest in the property may decline to have the restrictive 
covenant modification executed and recorded by the county or municipality. 
 
A person with an ownership interest in the property may decline to have the modification 
executed and recorded by notifying the county or municipality within 30 days after the date 
of the required notice. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2025 
Enrolled - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2