START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 529 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 529 
(Senator Brooks) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Business Occupations and Professions - Professional Engineers - Examination 
 
 
This bill requires an applicant for licensure as a professional engineer under the 
work-experience-only option to take and pass the fundamentals of engineering examination 
prior to taking the principles and practice of engineering examination. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Professional Engineers can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board for Professional Engineers in the Maryland Department 
of Labor licenses and regulates professional engineers. In addition to other requirements, 
an individual may qualify for licensure as a professional engineer by meeting one of 
three combinations of educational and experience requirements. Each of the three options 
requires a specified amount of work experience in engineering that is satisfactory to the 
board, depending on the level of educational attainment. Generally, the work experience 
requirement is either 4, 8, or 12 years, with progressively more work experience required 
as educational attainment decreases.  
 
In two of the three license eligibility options, both of which include a degree from a  
4-year college or university, the applicant must take and pass the fundamentals of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 529/ Page 2 
engineering examination prior to taking the principles and practice of engineering 
examination. Under the third work-experience-only option, an applicant with  
12 or more years of satisfactory experience in engineering need only pass the principles 
and practice of engineering examination. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 927 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1526 (Delegate Phillips) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2