START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 550 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 550 
(Senators McCray and Hayes) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Baltimore City - Property Tax - Authority to Impose on Vacant and Abandoned 
Property Owned by Nonprofit Organizations 
 
 
This bill authorizes Baltimore City to impose the city’s regular property tax rate and a 
special tax rate for specified vacant property on real property that would otherwise be 
exempt from taxation, if the real property is (1) a vacant lot or (2) improved property cited 
as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building violation 
notice. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City property tax revenues may increase beginning in FY 2026 
depending on the number of tax exempt properties that become subject to taxation. 
Baltimore City expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Local property tax rates are set annually by local governments and are 
applied to the county and municipal assessable bases. Generally, State law does not restrict 
the setting of property tax rates, enabling local governments to set rates at the level required 
to fund governmental services. Under the Maryland Constitution, the General Assembly 
retains the authority to set maximum limits on the rate of property taxes in municipalities 
(subject to approval at a local referendum) and in code home rule counties. However, the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 550/ Page 2 
Department of Legislative Services is unaware of any instances in which this authority has 
ever been exercised. Furthermore, local government statutes may limit the tax rates that 
may be set. 
 
The local property tax rate is established by each county, Baltimore City, or municipality 
expressed as an amount per $100 of assessed value. The county property tax rate may be 
supplemented by special property tax levies for special districts. Thus, local governments 
have the final authority for determining how much property tax revenue is generated. 
 
Property Valuation and Assessments 
 
Title 8 of the Tax Property Article establishes the methods of property valuation and 
assessments and lists those classifications of property created by the General Assembly. 
For assessment purposes, property is divided into two classes – real property and 
personal property. Real property is divided into 11 subclasses, and personal property is 
divided into 7 subclasses. The State only imposes a property tax on real property, whereas 
county governments impose separate tax rates for real and personal property. Several 
county governments do not impose a personal property tax on business property. 
 
Prior to fiscal 2025, Baltimore City and county governments were not authorized to set 
separate property tax rates among different subclasses of property. However, Chapter 277 
of 2024 authorized Baltimore City and county governments, beginning July 1, 2024, to 
establish, by law, a subclass of real property consisting of vacant lots or improved property 
cited as vacant and unfit for habitation or other authorized use on a housing or building 
violation notice. Baltimore City and county governments are authorized to set a special 
property tax rate for properties within this subclass. An annual reporting requirement was 
included for jurisdictions that enact a special property tax rate. 
 
Unlike the Baltimore City and county governments, municipalities have broader discretion 
to impose property tax rates on different classes of property. Municipalities may impose 
property taxes on those classes of property that it selects to be subject to the municipal 
property tax. In addition, municipalities retain the authority to classify property for local 
purposes and to impose different tax treatment on those classes. Furthermore, 
municipalities have the express power to exempt classes of property from taxation. 
Moreover, because municipalities may select the classes of property to be taxed and may 
set special rates for any class of property that is subject to the municipal property tax, 
municipalities retain the authority to levy different tax rates on selected classes of property. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City property tax revenues may increase beginning in 
fiscal 2026 depending on the number of tax exempt entities that own real property that 
meet the restrictions imposed by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 550/ Page 3 
Baltimore City has set the special property tax rate for vacant and abandoned property at 
three times the regular city property tax rate in the first year and four times the regular city 
property tax rate in subsequent years. The special property tax rate goes into effect 
beginning in fiscal 2027. The regular property tax rate in Baltimore City is currently set at 
$2.248 per $100 of assessed value. Accordingly, the special property tax rate for vacant 
and abandoned property will be set at $6.744 in the first year and $8.992 in the second and 
subsequent years. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues for Baltimore City and 
county governments can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. Additional 
information on the local property tax base can be found in the Local Government Overview 
Report. A copy of both reports is available on the Department of Legislative Services 
website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1189 (Delegate Young, et al.) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3