START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 525 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 525 
(Senator Charles, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Prince George's County - Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law - Video 
Evidence and Reward Programs 
 
 
This bill authorizes Prince George’s County to establish a pilot program through which 
members of the public are allowed to submit video evidence of violations of the Illegal 
Dumping and Litter Control Law to the appropriate enforcement unit. Should the video 
submitted by a member of the public through the program lead to a conviction, they are to 
receive half the total amount of any fines collected in relation to the violation. The bill also 
authorizes Prince George’s County to refer the amount of an unpaid outstanding fine under 
the bill to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) of the Department of Budget and 
Management. Fines collected in Prince George’s County must be used to pay for 
maintaining the pilot program, litter receptacles and related signage, litter removal, and 
rewards to members of the public. The bill terminates September 30, 2030.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2026 for 
one-time costs to purchase a secure server for the public to upload video for the pilot 
program should Prince George’s County move forward with the pilot program. 
Prince George’s County revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 525/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law 
 
A person may not (1) dispose of litter on a highway or perform an act that violates the 
Maryland Vehicle Laws regarding disposal of litter, glass, and other prohibited substances 
on highways or (2) dispose, or cause or allow the disposal of, litter on public or private 
property unless the property is designated by the State, a unit of the State, or a political 
subdivision for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public 
authority to use the property, or the litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container 
installed on the property. 
 
If two or more individuals are occupying a motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other 
conveyance from which illegal litter is disposed, and it cannot be determined which 
occupant is the violator, then (1) if present, the owner of the conveyance is presumed to be 
responsible for the violation or (2) if the owner of the conveyance is not present, the 
operator is presumed to be responsible for the violation. 
 
A person who disposes of litter in violation of these provisions in an amount up to 
100 pounds or 27 cubic feet and not for commercial gain is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment up to 30 days and/or a fine of $1,500. A 
person who disposes of litter in an amount above 100 pounds or 27 cubic feet, but not more 
than 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet, and not for commercial gain is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment up to one year and/or a fine of $12,500. 
A person who disposes of litter in an amount above 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet or in any 
amount for commercial gain is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties 
of imprisonment up to five years and/or a fine of $30,000. 
 
In addition to the incarceration and monetary penalties, a court may order the violator to  
(1) remove or render harmless the litter disposed of; (2) repair or restore any property 
damaged by, or pay damages for, the disposal of the litter; (3) perform public service 
relating to the removal of litter or to the restoration of an area polluted by litter; or 
(4) reimburse the State, county, municipal corporation, or bi-county unit for its costs 
incurred in removing the litter. 
 
If a person is convicted of violating a provision of the Illegal Dumping and Litter Control 
Law using a motor vehicle, the court must notify the Motor Vehicle Administration of the 
violation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 525/ Page 3 
Collection and Disbursement of Fines 
 
Fines collected for violations of the Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law are to be 
dispersed to the county or municipal corporation where the violation occurred or to the 
bi-county unit if a bi-county unit is responsible for enforcing the provisions of the law and 
the violation occurred on property subject to the jurisdiction of the bi-county unit. 
 
Central Collection Unit 
 
CCU is responsible for collecting any delinquent accounts or debts owed to the State. CCU 
is authorized to use any actions available to it under State law to collect debts or claims. 
CCU is authorized to charge an administrative fee of up to 20% of the outstanding principal 
and interest on the debt referred to it for collection; the current fee is 17%. Debt payments 
are credited to the agency that refers the debt. The administrative fees are credited to the 
Central Collection Fund, which is the special fund used to pay for CCU’s operating 
expenses. 
 
CCU uses a variety of methods and resources to facilitate the collection of delinquent 
accounts, including automated and manual efforts, as well as a private collection agency. 
Under certain conditions, CCU also allows a person to pay their debt over an extended 
period of time by entering into a Payment Plan Agreement. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by $50,000 in 
fiscal 2026 for one-time costs to purchase a secure server for the public to upload video for 
the pilot program should Prince George’s County move forward with the pilot program.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1527 (Delegate Roberts) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Prince George’s 
County; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 525/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 3, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4