START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 599 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 599 
(Senators Hettleman and Augustine) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Behavioral Health Crisis Response Grant Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill reestablishes, for a three-year period, a funding mandate. Accordingly, the 
Governor must include $5.0 million in the operating budget for the Behavioral Health 
Crisis Response Grant Program from fiscal 2027 through 2029. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million 
from FY 2027 through 2029 for the mandated appropriation. Revenues are not affected. 
This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2027 through 2029. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
$0.0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that discretionary 
funding would not have been provided to award local behavioral health authorities 
(LBHAs) grants from FY 2027 through 2029. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 209 and 210 of 2018 established the Behavioral Health Crisis 
Response Grant Program in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide funds 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 599/ Page 2 
to local jurisdictions to establish and expand community behavioral health crisis response 
systems. The Governor was required to include the following appropriations in the State 
operating budget for the program:  (1) $3.0 million for fiscal 2020; (2) $4.0 million for 
fiscal 2021; and (3) $5.0 million for fiscal 2022. 
 
Chapters 755 and 756 of 2021 modified the priorities for awarding grants to local 
behavioral health authorities, extended the requirement that the Governor provide a 
$5.0 million annual appropriation to the program through fiscal 2025, and required – 
beginning in fiscal 2023 – that at least one-third of the mandated appropriation be used to 
award competitive grants for mobile crisis teams. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although neither the bill nor current law mandates funding for the 
program in fiscal 2026, MDH advises that $5.0 million in the fiscal 2026 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly is intended to be used to continue funding the grant program at 
current levels. 
 
Under the bill, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million from fiscal 2027 
through 2029 due to the mandated appropriation for the grant program. This estimate 
assumes that discretionary funding would not continue to be provided absent the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that support behavioral health crisis services 
(such as community behavioral health providers) may benefit from fiscal 2027 through 
2029, from continued grant funding to LBHAs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1049 (Delegate Feldmark) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 599/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3