START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 522 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 522 
(Senator Charles) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Home Builders - New Home Sales - Notice of Appliance Warranty Registration 
 
 
This bill requires a person registered as a home builder in the State to provide at the time 
of closing for the initial sale of a new home specified information about the warranties for 
appliances registered by the home builder. Specifically, for each appliance in the new home 
(including the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning system) that was registered by the 
home builder, the home builder must provide warranty information for the appliance, 
including (1) the date the home builder registered the warranty and (2) the time remaining 
under the warranty. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  New home builders are required to register with the Home Builder 
Registration Unit within the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the 
Attorney General. 
 
A “new home” is defined under the Maryland Home Builder Registration Act as a newly 
constructed residential dwelling and the fixtures that are part of the dwelling. A “new home 
contract” means an agreement between a home builder and a consumer for the sale or 
construction of a new home. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 522/ Page 2 
A contract for the initial sale of a new home in Baltimore City and all counties except 
Montgomery County must include, in conspicuous type:   
 
 
the builder registration number of the seller of the new home; 
 
a provision stating that the new home must be constructed in accordance with all 
applicable building codes; 
 
a provision referencing specified performance standards or guidelines that the seller 
must comply with and that must prevail in the performance of the contract and any 
arbitration or adjudication of a claim arising from the contract; and 
 
a provision detailing the purchaser’s right to receive a consumer information 
pamphlet as provided under the Home Builder Registration Act. 
 
In Montgomery County, provisions of the county code subject home builders to similar 
registration and licensing requirements, and home builders are required to provide 
specified disclosures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2025 
Third Reader - March 17, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2