START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 666 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 666 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Community Action Agencies - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, for each of fiscal 2027 through 2030, to include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $250,000 to the Department of Housing and 
Community Development (DHCD) to be used solely as operating grants to eligible 
community action agencies (CAA). The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and terminates 
June 30, 2032. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
annually in FY 2027 through 2030 due to the mandated appropriation. DHCD can 
administer the grants with existing resources. No effect on revenues. This bill establishes 
a mandated appropriation for FY 2027 through 2030. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent they 
receive and spend operating grants from DHCD as a result of the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 666/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Community Action Agencies 
 
A CAA is defined as (1) a governmental unit in a political subdivision; (2) a governmental 
unit created by a combination of political subdivisions; (3) an agency designated as a CAA 
under the federal Community Services Block Grant Program (CSBG); or (4) a private, 
nonprofit organization that meets requirements for designation. 
 
A CAA must actively supplement local efforts to combat poverty by (1) focusing resources 
on the most needy; (2) providing employment opportunities for low-income persons; 
(3) closing service gaps; and (4) enabling low-income persons to participate in community 
action programs and projects. Among other responsibilities, CAAs must also join with and 
encourage business, labor, and other private or public officials and organizations to support 
community action programs that (1) use private resources and capabilities for new 
employment opportunities; (2) stimulate investments that measurably reduce poverty in 
areas of concentrated poverty; and (3) provide residents in those areas with methods to 
work with private organizations, firms, and institutions to seek solutions to problems of 
common concern. 
 
Community Services Block Grant Program 
 
CSBG, which is funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is 
administered by DHCD for the State. Funds are allocated to 17 CAAs that serve all areas 
of the State. CAAs provide a range of services under CSBG, involving employment, 
education, income and asset building services, housing, nutrition, emergency services, and 
health care based on needs assessments conducted by local entities. DHCD distributed 
$9.9 million in federal funds as grants to CAAs in fiscal 2024, and DHCD advises that it 
anticipates distributing $9.8 million in federal funds as grants to CCAs during fiscal 2025. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually in 
fiscal 2027 through 2030 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation to DHCD to be used as 
operating grants to eligible CAAs. DHCD can distribute the grants to CAAs using existing 
staff. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase from 
fiscal 2027 through 2030 to the extent local CAAs receive grant funding from DHCD under 
the bill and spend the grants for authorized purposes. The Department of Legislative 
Services notes, however, that some CAAs are nonprofit organizations (and not local 
government agencies), so not all of the mandated funding provided by the bill is distributed 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 666/ Page 3 
to local governments. A reliable estimate of the amount of additional funding that local 
governments receive as a result of the bill cannot be made at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford and Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3