START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 633 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 633 
(Senator Kagan) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Campaign Finance - Political Organizations - Disclosures on Solicitations (Stop 
Scam PACs Act) 
 
 
This bill requires certain persons that solicit for the benefit of a candidate or a political 
party and use the candidate’s name, image, or likeness in the solicitation to include a 
specified disclaimer on the solicitation. The bill also requires certain persons that solicit 
for what appears to be an electoral or political purpose to disclose on each solicitation 
(1) specified recipients of expenditures or disbursements made by the person and (2) the 
total amount of expenditures or disbursements made to each recipient. The 
State Administrator of Elections is authorized to investigate potential violations and the 
State Board of Elections (SBE) may prohibit a violator from soliciting contributions or 
donations for a period of time or impose a civil penalty. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $106,800 in FY 2026 and by ongoing 
amounts in future years. Special fund revenues may increase annually, beginning in 
FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$106,800 
$96,900 
$101,200 
$105,800 
$110,300 
Net Effect 
($106,800) 
($96,900) 
($101,200) 
($105,800) 
($110,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 633/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Solicitation Disclaimer and Disclosure 
 
The bill establishes that if a person solicits for the benefit of a candidate or a political party 
and uses a candidate’s name, image, or likeness in the solicitation, the person must clearly 
and conspicuously include on the solicitation the following disclaimer or a substantially 
similar disclaimer: 
 
“The (name, image, or likeness) of (name of candidate or political party) on 
this solicitation is included without the knowledge or permission of (name of 
candidate or political party) and does not imply authorization or approval by 
(name of candidate or political party).” 
 
If a person solicits for what appears to be an electoral or a political purpose, the person 
must disclose in a clear and conspicuous manner on each solicitation disseminated by the 
person (1) the five recipients to which the person made the largest expenditures or 
disbursements during the immediately preceding calendar quarter and (2) the total amount 
of expenditures or disbursements made to each recipient. 
 
Applicability 
 
The bill applies to persons that make independent expenditures or disbursements for 
electioneering communications, or participating organizations that make political 
disbursements, in amounts that require them to file reports with SBE. The bill also applies 
to a political action committee that (1) is not affiliated with a corporation or labor 
organization and (2) exclusively makes independent expenditures or disbursements for 
electioneering communications. 
 
Enforcement Provisions and Implementing Regulations 
 
The bill gives the State Administrator of Elections (or the administrator’s designee) 
specified authority (including subpoena authority) to investigate potential violations of the 
bill’s provisions. At the conclusion of an investigation, SBE must issue a public report of 
its findings and may (1) prohibit a person who violated the bill’s provisions from soliciting 
contributions or donations for a period of time determined by SBE or (2) impose a civil 
penalty of up to $10,000. The civil penalty is assessed in a manner specified under existing 
provisions, which, among other things, distribute penalty revenues to the Fair Campaign 
Financing Fund (FCFF) (which holds funds for public campaign financing of gubernatorial 
tickets under the Public Financing Act). 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 633/ Page 3 
Violations of the bill are not subject to existing civil or criminal penalties, or investigation 
by the State Prosecutor. 
 
SBE may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Campaign Finance Entities (Political Committees) 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article must be conducted through a campaign finance entity 
(defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the Election Law Article). 
An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration of intent until the 
individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized candidate campaign 
committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to promote the 
candidate’s candidacy). 
 
“Political committee” is defined as a combination of two or more individuals that has as its 
major purpose promoting the success or defeat of a candidate, political party, question, or 
prospective question submitted to a vote at any election. 
 
“Political action committee” is defined as a political committee that is not a political party, 
a central committee, a slate, a legislative party caucus committee, an authorized candidate 
campaign committee, or a ballot issue committee. 
 
Whether establishing and filing with SBE as an authorized candidate campaign committee 
or other campaign finance entity, a political committee must include with the filing a 
statement of organization that includes a statement of purpose specifying (1) each 
candidate or ballot question, if any, that the political committee was formed to promote or 
defeat; (2) the identity of each special interest, including any business or occupation, that 
the organizers of or contributors to the political committee have in common; and 
(3) whether the political committee will participate in presidential, gubernatorial, 
Baltimore City, or multiple elections. 
 
For each election in which a campaign finance entity participates, it generally must file 
campaign finance reports at various times prior to and after the primary and general 
elections, as well as an annual report. The reports must contain information required by 
SBE with respect to all contributions received and all expenditures made by or on behalf 
of the campaign finance entity during a reporting period. 
 
Subject to certain exceptions, a person may not make aggregate contributions of more than 
$6,000 to any one campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle, and a campaign 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 633/ Page 4 
finance entity may not make transfers in a cumulative amount of more than $6,000 to any 
one other campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle. 
 
Independent Expenditures and Electioneering Communications 
 
Independent expenditures in general – political spending by individuals or organizations 
without coordination with a candidate – cannot be limited or prohibited, pursuant to the  
2010 Supreme Court decision Citizens United v. FEC. Requirements for disclosure of 
independent expenditures, however, have been upheld by courts. Under Maryland’s 
disclosure requirements, independent expenditures are expenditures for public 
communications that are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance 
entity and that expressly advocate the success or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or 
ballot question. Electioneering communications, on the other hand, do not expressly 
advocate the success or defeat of a candidate or ballot question, but refer to a clearly 
identified candidate or ballot question, are made within 60 days of an election, are capable 
of being received by a certain amount of individuals (with the amount depending on the 
type of communication) in the constituency where the candidate or ballot question is on 
the ballot, and are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance entity. 
 
Within 48 hours after a person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements 
for electioneering communications of $5,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must 
file a registration form with SBE. Within 48 hours after a day on which a person makes 
aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering communications 
of $10,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must file a report with SBE providing 
information on the person, the expenditures or disbursements, and persons who made 
cumulative donations of $6,000 or more to the person during the period covered by the 
report. Further, a person who files an independent expenditure or electioneering 
communication report must file an additional report within 48 hours after a day on which 
the person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering 
communications of $10,000 or more following the closing date of the person’s previous 
report. 
 
Participating Organizations 
 
A “participating organization” is an entity that is organized under § 501(c)(4) or (6) or 
§ 527 of the Internal Revenue Code and makes political disbursements (contributions to a 
campaign finance entity, disbursements to persons making independent expenditures or 
disbursements for electioneering communications in the State, or disbursements to 
out-of-state political committees that make a disbursement in the State). 
 
Participating organizations that make aggregate political disbursements of more than 
$6,000 in a four-year election cycle must file a registration form with SBE within 48 hours 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 633/ Page 5 
and are subject to reporting/disclosure requirements after spending $10,000 or more. The 
reports filed must include the amount and date of each political disbursement made in the 
State or to influence a State election and the identity of each person that made cumulative 
donations of $10,000 or more to the participating organization. 
 
Political Action Committees That Only Engage in Independent Spending 
 
Consistent with legal authority on the issue, SBE indicates, in Chapter 5 of its Summary 
Guide to Maryland Candidacy and Campaign Finance Laws that it does not interpret the 
limits applicable to contributions to most campaign finance entities to apply to 
contributions or donations to political action committees that make only independent 
expenditures or disbursements for electioneering communications (commonly referred to 
as “Super PACs”). SBE regulations establish that a person may make an unlimited 
contribution to a political action committee that is registered to make exclusively 
independent expenditures, disbursements for electioneering communications, or both. 
 
A political action committee that exclusively makes independent expenditures or 
disbursements for electioneering communications, in addition to filing campaign finance 
reports required of all campaign finance entities, must file a disclosure report within 
48 hours after a day on which the political action committee makes aggregate expenditures 
of $10,000 or more on campaign material during the reporting period covered by its next 
campaign finance report, and must file additional disclosures for each subsequent $10,000 
or more spent on campaign material. A disclosure report must include information required 
by SBE with respect to all contributions received and all expenditures made by or on behalf 
of the political action committee during the reporting period. 
 
Campaign Material 
 
“Campaign material” means any material that (1) contains text, graphics, or other images; 
(2) relates to a candidate, a prospective candidate, or the approval or rejection of a question 
or prospective question; and (3) is published, distributed, or disseminated. “Campaign 
material” includes (1) a qualifying paid digital communication; (2) any other material 
transmitted by or appearing on the Internet or other electronic medium; (3) an oral 
commercial campaign advertisement; and (4) an automated or prerecorded oral 
communication. Chapter 12 of SBE’s Summary Guide to Maryland Candidacy and 
Campaign Finance Laws confirms that solicitations are campaign material. 
 
Each item of campaign material generally must contain an authority line that states  
(1) as to campaign material published, distributed, or disseminated by a campaign finance 
entity, the name and address of the treasurer of each campaign finance entity responsible 
for the campaign material and the name of each campaign finance entity for which each 
treasurer is acting and (2) as to campaign material published, distributed, or disseminated 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 633/ Page 6 
by any other person, the name and address of the person responsible for the campaign 
material. The authority line may omit an address that is on file with SBE or a local board. 
 
Campaign material that is published or distributed in support of or in opposition to a 
candidate, but is not authorized by the candidate, must include the statement “This message 
has been authorized and paid for by (name of payor or any organization affiliated with the 
payor), (name and title of treasurer or president). This message has not been authorized or 
approved by any candidate.” 
 
SBE is authorized to impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for a failure to include an 
authority line on campaign material. A person who violates the authority line requirements 
is also guilty of a misdemeanor and (1) subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to one year and (2) ineligible to hold any public or party office for 
four years after the date of the offense. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $106,766 in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2025, effective date. This estimate reflects the costs 
for SBE to hire one program administrator to conduct investigations of violations of the 
bill’s provisions, produce the required public reports, and administer penalties. The 
estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$99,121 
Operating Expenses 
      7,645 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$106,766 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund FCFF revenues increase, beginning in fiscal 2026, to the 
extent civil penalties are collected for violations of the bill’s provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 906 (Delegate Palakovich Carr) - Ways and Means. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 633/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 19, 2025 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7