START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 600 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 600 
(Senator McCray) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Baltimore City and Takoma Park - Stop Sign Monitoring Systems - 
Authorization of Pilot Program 
 
This bill authorizes (1) the use of stop sign monitoring systems on State and local highways 
located in a school zone in the City of Takoma Park and the 45th and 46th legislative 
districts in Baltimore City to record violations of State law requiring obedience to stop 
signs through June 30, 2029, and (2) local jurisdictions that use any such systems to use 
the fine revenues to generally recover implementation and administrative costs, as 
specified. Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at 
the time, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty of up to $40 if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a stop sign monitoring system during commission of the 
violation. The bill generally applies existing statutory provisions related to other stop sign 
monitoring systems and automated enforcement systems used in the State to stop sign 
monitoring systems used under the bill’s authority, with additional requirements related to 
the use of fine revenues from systems in Baltimore City. The bill also establishes reporting 
requirements related to implementation and makes minor technical changes to the 
provisions governing the use of the systems. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025, and 
terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the bill is authorizing in nature, the impact on State finances 
generally depends on the extent to which the systems are deployed, as discussed below. 
Nevertheless, the District Court must be prepared should any systems be deployed, with 
programming costs totaling $10,900 in FY 2026 only. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature for Takoma Park and Baltimore City, and 
Prince George’s County has not implemented any stop sign monitoring systems under 
current law. Accordingly, the impact on local government finances depends on the extent 
to which the systems are deployed, as discussed below. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 600/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Stop Sign Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Procedures 
 
The bill authorizes the use of stop sign monitoring systems on State and local highways in 
school zones in Takoma Park and in specified legislative districts in Baltimore City under 
the same provisions that govern the use of stop sign monitoring systems in  
Prince George’s County, pursuant to Chapter 678 of 2024, with two notable exceptions. 
 
First, existing requirements that limit and prioritize the placement of the systems only apply 
for Prince George’s County. Second, existing provisions that require an agency to publish 
notice in a newspaper of general circulation when the systems are placed apply only in 
Baltimore City and Prince George’s County (other notification requirements apply to all 
three jurisdictions). 
 
The bill also makes two technical changes to provisions governing the stop sign monitoring 
systems used by all three jurisdictions. First, the bill specifies that the citation mailed to 
the owner liable for a violation recorded by a system must include the registration plate 
number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation instead of the registration number of 
the motor vehicle. Second, the bill specifies that certain requirements for contractors 
related to the manner in which contractor fees are paid are applicable if a contractor 
administers or processes citations generated by a stop sign monitoring system (rather than 
any monitoring system). 
 
Fine Revenues 
 
The bill generally authorizes any local jurisdiction that deploys a stop sign monitoring 
system to use the fine revenues to recover their implementation and administrative costs. 
 
However, from the fines collected by Baltimore City or the District Court as a result of 
violations enforced by a stop sign monitoring system located in Baltimore City, the bill 
also specifies that 50% must be distributed to the local management board for 
Baltimore City and used only for providing youth programming and services for youth 
living in or attending a school located in the 45th or 46th legislative district, depending on 
the district in which the system was located. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 600/ Page 3 
Reporting Requirement 
 
By December 1, 2027, the City of Takoma Park and the Baltimore City Department of 
Transportation must each report to the Governor and the General Assembly on: 
 
 
the time period during which stop sign monitoring systems were in use in the local 
jurisdiction and the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of violations 
recorded over the reported time period, by location and date (through  
October 1, 2027); 
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating stop sign monitoring systems 
and the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations; 
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of stop sign monitoring systems; 
 
the performance and reliability of stop sign monitoring systems used by the local 
jurisdiction; and 
 
the effectiveness of stop sign monitoring systems in reducing violations, crashes, 
and pedestrian injuries in the local jurisdiction and in areas where the systems were 
implemented and used. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Required Stops When Approaching a Stop Sign  
 
Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle 
approaching a stop sign at an intersection must: 
 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop line; 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, 
before entering any crosswalk; and 
 
stop at the near side of an intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest 
point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic 
approaching on the intersecting roadway. 
 
A violation of any of these requirements is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The 
prepayment penalty is $90 with one point assessed against the license. If the violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalty is $130 and three points must be 
assessed against the license. 
 
Stop Sign Monitoring Systems – Prince George’s County  
 
Chapter 678 authorized the use of stop sign monitoring systems in Prince George’s County, 
with substantially similar requirements and processes as those specified by the bill for stop 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 600/ Page 4 
sign monitoring systems in the City of Takoma Park and certain legislative districts in 
Baltimore City. Chapter 678 terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for contested citations 
issued under the bill, general fund revenues increase from fiscal 2026 through 2029. Any 
such impact depends on the extent to which stop sign monitoring systems are deployed in 
Takoma Park and Baltimore City and the amount of the fine established for a violation. 
Any such impact, if realized, is likely to be minimal, particularly since the bill requires 
one-half of the fine revenues collected based on violations in Baltimore City to be 
distributed to the local management board, as further discussed below. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, the bill authorizes the use of stop sign monitoring 
systems in school zones in Takoma Park and Baltimore City. The impact on State 
expenditures depends on the extent to which stop sign monitoring system programs are 
implemented in either local jurisdiction. 
 
To the extent that stop sign monitoring systems are used on State highways in either local 
jurisdiction, Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increase for the State Highway 
Administration to install required signage and for potential planning costs. Any costs are 
assumed to terminate after fiscal 2029. 
 
In addition, in anticipation of any stop sign monitoring systems being deployed by State 
and/or local agencies in Takoma Park or Baltimore City, general fund expenditures for the 
District Court increase for programming changes necessary to collect payments for 
citations that may be issued under the bill. Programming-related costs total approximately 
$10,920. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Takoma Park 
 
To the extent that stop sign monitoring systems are deployed in school zones in 
Takoma Park, local expenditures increase from fiscal 2026 through 2029 as a result of 
start-up costs and ongoing implementation costs. Local revenues also increase over the 
same time period to the extent that penalties are collected from citations issued as a result 
of locally controlled stop sign monitoring systems. As noted above, because the bill allows 
for cost recovery for stop sign monitoring systems, revenues may first be used to offset 
program implementation and administrative costs for Takoma Park. Any fine revenues 
remaining after cost recovery must be expended exclusively for public safety purposes. 
Information about potential implementation in Takoma Park is not available. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 600/ Page 5 
Baltimore City 
 
To the extent that stop sign monitoring systems are deployed in school zones in 
Baltimore City, local expenditures increase from fiscal 2026 through 2029 as a result of 
start-up costs, ongoing implementation costs, and to provide funding for authorized 
purposes. Local revenues also increase over the same time period to the extent that 
penalties are collected from citations issued as a result of locally controlled stop sign 
monitoring systems (including the portion of the penalty revenues remitted by the 
District Court from contested citations). 
 
Under the bill, Baltimore City must first distribute 50% of the total revenues from stop sign 
monitoring systems – including those collected by the District Court for contested cases – 
to the local management board (to be used for youth service programs). After this 
distribution, Baltimore City may use the revenues for cost recovery and then must use any 
remainder exclusively for public safety purposes. However, it is unclear whether 
Baltimore City would fully offset its administrative costs. 
 
For context, Baltimore City advises that the estimated annual cost to operate one camera is 
approximately $40,000. According to information from Baltimore City based on its 
experience with the city’s red-light camera program, the bill may result in higher 
administrative expenses than revenues for the program; however, any such impact cannot 
be reliably predicted without actual experience under the bill. 
 
Prince George’s County  
 
Prince George’s County advises that, although it has passed a law to implement a stop sign 
monitoring system program under Chapter 678, no program has yet been implemented. 
Moreover, the county notes that it will not implement a program if doing so would result 
in a deficit. 
 
Nevertheless, to the extent that a stop sign monitoring system program is implemented in 
the county, the bill affects how citation revenues may be used, by authorizing cost recovery 
for the implementation and administrative costs (absent the bill, all citation revenues that 
may have been realized under the existing authorization for stop sign monitoring systems 
must be used for public safety purposes). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 600/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1226 (Delegate Young, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; Comptroller’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 19, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2025 
Enrolled - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 7, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6