START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 695 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 695 
(Senator Beidle) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Labor and Employment - Uninsured Employers' Fund Board - Membership and 
Reserves 
 
   
This bill modifies the membership of the board of the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) 
by expanding the number of members from three to five and altering minimum 
qualifications for board members. The bill also requires, instead of authorizes, the board to 
establish reserves to meet potential losses of the fund.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for UEF increase minimally for additional 
compensation paid to board members beginning in FY 2026. The bill’s requirement that 
the board establish reserves to meet potential losses is not anticipated to affect UEF 
operations or finances in the short term, as discussed below; revenues are, therefore, not 
affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  For general information on the workers’ compensation 
system, UEF, and recent financial difficulties experienced by UEF, please see the 
Appendix – Workers’ Compensation, the Uninsured Employers’ Fund, and the 
Subsequent Injury Fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 695/ Page 2 
Under current law, the board of UEF includes three members:  one that must represent 
labor; one that must represent management; and one that must represent the general public. 
The bill expands the board to five members and modifies qualifications of board members 
such that:  
 
 
two members must have substantial experience as officers or employees of a 
property and casualty insurance company; 
 
one must have substantial experience in the field of accounting or finances;  
 
one must be a policyholder of workers’ compensation insurance issued in the State; 
and  
 
one must represent the general public.  
 
Both under current law and the bill, board members are entitled to compensation for each 
day the member is engaged in duties of the office and reimbursement for expenses under 
the Standard State Travel Regulations.  
 
Under current law, the board may establish reserves to meet potential losses of UEF. Under 
the bill, the board must establish reserves to meet potential losses of UEF.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires, instead of authorizes, the board of UEF to establish 
reserves to meet potential losses of the fund. In the short term, this requirement is not 
anticipated to affect UEF’s operations or finances because UEF advises that it already has 
reserves for its current cases and is, therefore, meeting the bill’s requirements.  
 
However, as discussed in more detail in the attached appendix, UEF has faced significant 
financial difficulties in recent years. Absent a solution to address those financial 
difficulties, the bill could exacerbate UEF’s financial situation in future fiscal years; 
however, any such impact cannot be reliably ascertained at this time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 695/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
 
km/smr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 695/ Page 4 
Appendix – Workers’ Compensation, the Uninsured 
Employers’ Fund, and the Subsequent Injury Fund 
 
 
Workers’ Compensation – Generally 
 
Generally, each employer in the State must secure workers’ compensation for all covered 
employees of the employer by maintaining insurance with an authorized insurer or, in 
limited circumstances, through self-insurance. An individual is presumed to be a covered 
employee while in the service of an employer under an express or implied contract of 
apprenticeship or hire. To overcome the presumption of covered employment, an employer 
must establish that the individual performing services is an independent contractor in 
accordance with the common law or is specifically exempted from covered employment 
under the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
If an employee covered under workers’ compensation insurance has suffered an accidental 
personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational disease, the employee is entitled to 
compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF), 
or the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF), as appropriate. Workers’ compensation benefits 
include wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation expenses. 
 
Uninsured Employers’ Fund and Subsequent Injury Fund – Generally 
 
UEF and SIF are separate and distinct State agencies that each support the State’s workers’ 
compensation system in a different way. UEF directly pays a claimant’s compensation 
benefits and medical expenses in the event that an injured employee who should be 
receiving workers’ compensation benefits is not properly compensated by the employer or 
the employer’s insurer (which may happen because the employer has not purchased 
workers’ compensation insurance or becomes insolvent). SIF assumes the financial 
responsibility for a worker’s preexisting disability should the worker sustain an accidental 
workplace injury, thereby encouraging the hiring of such workers. 
 
UEF and SIF are both special funded, and their revenues are primarily derived from 
two assessments (one for each agency) on awards against employers or insurers for 
permanent disability or death and amounts payable by employers or insurers under 
settlement agreements. The SIF assessment also applies to payments made by the Property 
and Casualty Guaranty Corporation on behalf of insolvent insurers; however, this source 
of revenue is relatively minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 695/ Page 5 
Recent Legislative Action to Address Uninsured Employers’ Fund Financial Difficulties 
 
UEF has faced significant financial difficulties in recent years. During the 2020 legislative 
session, the Department of Legislative Services projected that UEF would become 
insolvent without financial intervention. Consequently, Chapter 495 of 2020 temporarily 
adjusted the distribution of the assessments between UEF and SIF, providing UEF with an 
additional $4.0 million in fiscal 2021, before reverting to the previous distribution in 
subsequent years. Exhibit 1 shows the distribution of the assessments under Chapter 495. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Distribution of Assessments to UEF and SIF under Chapter 495 of 2020 
Fiscal 2020-2022 and Subsequent Years 
 
 
FY 2020 
FY 2021 
FY 2022+ 
SIF Assessment 
6.5% 
5.5% 
6.5% 
Base UEF Assessment 
1.0% 
2.0% 
1.0% 
Additional UEF Assessment 
1.0% 
1.0% 
1.0% 
 
SIF:  Subsequent Injury Fund 
UEF:  Uninsured Employers’ Fund 
 
Notes:  The distribution in fiscal 2022 has continued in future fiscal years under current law. UEF may 
implement its additional assessment when its reserves are inadequate to meet anticipated losses, as 
specified. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Even with the additional funding provided by Chapter 495, UEF has continued to 
experience financial issues. To assist in addressing these issues, the General Assembly 
passed Senate Bill 216 of 2024 (enacted as Chapter 78) and used the Joint Chairmen’s 
Report (JCR) to require the Workers’ Compensation Commission (WCC) and UEF to form 
a workgroup to study and report on UEF’s financial difficulties and possible solutions to 
ensure UEF’s long-term financial health. 
 
Chapter 78 increased the maximum penalty that WCC is authorized to impose on an 
employer who fails to secure and maintain workers’ compensation insurance for its covered 
employees from $10,000 to $25,000. These penalties directly accrue to UEF; however, the 
aforementioned assessment has remained its primary funding source. In response to the 
JCR, UEF and WCC each prepared a separate report discussing UEF’s financial difficulties 
and possible reforms, both legislative and administrative. 

END OF PAGE 5