START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 623 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 623 
(Senator Bailey) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
St. Mary's County - Public Facilities Bond 
 
 
This bill authorizes the St. Mary’s County Commissioners to issue up to $71.0 million in 
general obligation (GO) bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or 
renovation of public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity 
of the bonds cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County receives up to $71.0 million in bond proceeds. County 
debt service expenditures increase by an estimated $5.0 million annually over a 
20-year period.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. 
St. Mary’s County is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of 
government.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2013, St. Mary’s County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $229.9 million in GO bonds for public facilities, as shown 
in Exhibit 1.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 623/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for St. Mary’s County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter 
Number 
Authorized 
Amount 
2013 
Ch. 96 
$30.0 
2017 
Ch. 427 
26.3 
2018 
Ch. 109 
24.6 
2019 
Ch. 180 
30.0 
2020 
Ch. 596 
33.0 
2021 
Ch. 731 
30.0 
2023 
Ch. 130 
56.0 
Total 
 
$229.9 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
St. Mary’s County revenues increase by up to $71.0 million from bond proceeds. Annual 
debt service costs for the bonds total approximately $5.0 million. This estimate is based on 
a 3.72% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, expenditures would adjust 
accordingly.  
 
At the end of fiscal 2023, St. Mary’s County had approximately $238.4 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.7% of the county’s assessable base and 
$2,077 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AA+ rating from 
Standard & Poor’s, an Aa1 credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AA+ rating from Fitch Ratings.  
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can be found 
in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2025 report can be found on the 
Department of Legislative Services website.  
 
Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects in St. Mary’s County; however, the 
authorization under the bill is not sufficient to fully fund these projects.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 623/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
St. Mary’s County Planned Project List 
 
Project Description 
Amount 
Public Facilities 
 
Airport Improvements 
$560,086 
Sheriff’s Headquarters Facility 
28,548,750 
Building Maintenance – Critical and Programmatic 
317,000 
Health Department Renovations 
366,395 
Parking and Site Improvements 
172,000 
Lexington Park/Charlotte Hall Library 
300,000 
College of Southern Maryland 
2,526,138 
Fire Department Water Supply Points 
257,750 
Total Public Facilities 
$33,048,119 
Highways 
 
Bridge/Culvert Repair and Replacement 
$1,372,333 
Neighborhood Drainage Improvements 
1,850,000 
Retrofit Sidewalk Program 
548,320 
Roadway and Safety Improvements 
11,608,553 
Water Quality and Nutrient Improvements 
36,800 
Southampton Neighborhood Revitalization 
2,958,280 
Federal Bridge Replacement Program 
296,000 
Total Highways 
$18,670,286 
Parks and Recreation 
Recreation Facility and Park Improvements 
$2,892,000 
Sports Complex 
100,000 
Snow Hill Park 
1,000,000 
St. Clement’s Island Museum Renovations 
460,500 
Three Notch Trail – Phase Seven 
3,730,083 
Total Parks and Recreation  
$8,182,583 
Public Schools 
Building Infrastructure – Critical and Programmatic 
$3,518,000 
Chopticon High School  
21,400,288 
Green Holly Elementary School Roof/HVAC System 
2,637,088 
Aging Schools Program 
7,000 
Relocatables for Various Sites 
835,000 
Total Public Schools 
$28,397,376 
Grand Total  
$88,298,364 
 
HVAC:  heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
 
Source:  St. Mary’s County Government 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 623/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 561 (St. Mary's County Delegation) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2025 
Third Reader - March 13, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4