START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 621 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 621 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Maryland Judiciary) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Courtroom Security - Minimum Adequate Security 
 
 
This bill requires that, by September 30, 2025, each law enforcement agency, department, 
or entity providing security at a courthouse facility submit a report to the Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court of Maryland on specified information related to courthouse security. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can handle the bill’s reporting requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local entities can handle the bill’s reporting requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Bill Summary:  By September 30, 2025, each law enforcement agency, department, or 
entity providing security at a courthouse facility must submit a report to the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court of Maryland identifying: 
 
 
the current number of court security officers available to provide courthouse 
security; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 621/ Page 2 
 
the minimum number of court security officers necessary to meet the minimum 
adequate security standards, accounting for annual leave and absences, sufficient to 
ensure that (1) all court security officers meet the standards for a special police 
officer under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Public Safety Article; (2) at least one court 
security officer is present for each court proceeding; (3) at least two court security 
officers are present for each court proceeding at which an individual who is or may 
be incarcerated is present; and (4) there is at least one additional court security 
officer for every four courtrooms on each floor of a courthouse; 
 
the current number of courthouse security positions for which funding has been 
allocated; 
 
the current number of vacancies in the agency, department, or entity; 
 
a viable plan to meet the minimum adequate security standards, as specified above; 
and 
 
any obstacles to the agency, department, or entity meeting those minimum adequate 
security standards. 
 
Current Law/Background:  There are no minimum adequate security standards for 
courtroom security specified in statute. The Judiciary is responsible for the security of the 
Supreme Court of Maryland, the Appellate Court of Maryland, and the District Court of 
Maryland. Local jurisdictions are generally responsible for providing security in the 
circuit courts, including the orphans’ courts, through the sheriffs’ offices. 
 
Chapters 414 and 415 of 2024 (Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson Judicial Security Act) created 
the Task Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities, staffed by the Administrative 
Office of the Courts, to, among other things, identify (1) minimum requirements for 
courthouse safety, including the minimum number of security officers to be present in each 
type of judicial proceeding in a circuit court or in the District Court and (2) minimum 
qualifications for security officers. Also, the task force was required to develop a legislative 
proposal to ensure that the minimum standards are met. In December 2024, the task force 
issued its report.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 789 (Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Maryland 
Judiciary) - Judiciary. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 621/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3