START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 608 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 608 
(Senators Augustine and Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Criminal Procedure - U Nonimmigrant Status Petitions 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes to the U Nonimmigrant Status Petition process as set 
forth in Maryland statute. Among other provisions, the bill (1) includes the attorney, victim 
advocate, or other representative of the victim as an individual who may request 
certification of the victim helpfulness; (2) establishes that there is no statute of limitations 
for when a qualifying criminal activity occurred relative to the request for certification of 
victim helpfulness; and (3) if applicable, requires a certifying official to provide a written 
explanation to the victim (or other requester) that sets forth reasons why the available 
evidence does not support issuance of the certification. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, individuals without legal status in the 
United States who are victims of criminal activity may file for U Nonimmigrant Status, 
which is status set aside for victims of crimes who have suffered substantial mental or 
physical abuse due to the criminal activity and who are willing to assist law enforcement 
agencies or government officials in the investigation of that activity. In order to file for the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 608/ Page 2 
status, the individual must provide a certification from a federal, state, or local law 
enforcement official that certifies specified information, as discussed below. 
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, a “certifying entity” means (1) a State or local law enforcement agency; 
(2) a State’s Attorney or deputy or assistant State’s Attorney; (3) any other authority that 
has responsibility for the detection, investigation, or prosecution of a qualifying crime or 
criminal activity; or (4) an agency that has criminal detection or investigative jurisdiction 
in its respective areas of expertise, including child protective services, the 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights, and the Maryland Department of Labor. The bill 
expands the definition to include an agency that has criminal, civil, family, or 
administrative detection, investigative, or prosecutorial jurisdiction in the agency’s area 
of expertise; the bill also incorporates adult protective services. 
 
Under current law, a “certifying official” means (1) the head of a certifying entity; (2) an 
individual in a supervisory role who has been specifically designated by the head of a 
certifying entity to provide U Nonimmigrant Status certifications on behalf of that entity; 
or (3) any other certifying official, as specified in federal regulations. 
 
Under current law, “qualifying criminal activity” means criminal activity under a specified 
provision of the U.S. Code. The bill includes criminal activity described in federal 
U Nonimmigrant Status Petition guidelines, as further specified. 
 
Certification of Victim Helpfulness 
 
Under current law, for purposes of filing a petition for U Nonimmigrant Status, a victim or 
the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend may request a certifying official to certify 
victim helpfulness if the victim (1) was a victim of a qualifying criminal activity and has 
been helpful to the certifying entity in the detection, investigation, or prosecution of that 
qualifying criminal activity; (2) was younger than age 16 on the date that an act that 
constitutes an element of a qualifying criminal activity first occurred and the victim’s 
parent, guardian, or next friend has been helpful to the certifying entity; or (3) is 
incapacitated or incompetent and the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend has been 
helpful to the certifying entity in the detection, investigation, or prosecution of that 
qualifying criminal activity. 
 
The bill expands the parties who may request a certifying official to certify victim 
helpfulness to include the victim’s attorney, victim advocate, or other representative. The 
bill repeals provisions specifying the victim or other specified party has been helpful 
specifically to the certifying entity and specifies the helpfulness qualifications to include 
when the individual is being helpful or is likely to be helpful. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 608/ Page 3 
Under the bill, a victim of a qualifying crime or a qualifying criminal activity is eligible 
for certification. If a victim is applying for certification as a result of being a victim of more 
than one qualifying crime or qualifying criminal activity, each qualifying crime and 
criminal activity must be listed on the certification. For purposes of determining 
helpfulness for a request for certification, an individual must be considered helpful if, since 
the initiation of helpfulness, the individual has not unreasonably refused to cooperate or 
unreasonably failed to provide information and assistance reasonably requested by a 
certifying agency. 
 
Under current law, for purposes of determining helpfulness, if the victim or victim’s parent, 
guardian, or next friend is assisting, has assisted, or is likely to assist law enforcement 
authorities in the detection, investigation, or prosecution of qualifying criminal activity, 
the individual must be considered helpful, to have been helpful, or likely to be helpful. 
 
Under current law, if the victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend satisfies the 
criteria, the certifying official must fully complete and sign the specified certification form 
and, with respect to victim helpfulness, include (1) specific details about the nature of the 
crime investigated or prosecuted (the bill includes detected); (2) a detailed description of 
the victim’s helpfulness or likely helpfulness; and (3) copies of any documents in the 
possession of the certifying official that demonstrate the harm endured by the victim due 
to the criminal activity. The bill makes conforming changes to these provisions. 
 
Timeliness of Certification and Written Explanation 
 
Under current law, the certifying entity must certify or decline certification of the form 
within 90 days after receiving a request. However, if the noncitizen victim is the subject of 
removal, exclusion, or deportation proceedings or subject to a final order of those 
proceedings, the certifying entity must certify or decline certification of the form within 
14 days after receiving a request. A current investigation, the filing of charges, a 
prosecution, or a conviction is not required for a victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, or 
next friend to request and obtain the certification. 
 
The bill modifies the time period for a certifying entity to certify or decline certification 
from (1) 90 days to 45 days, after receiving a request under standard circumstances and 
(2) 14 days to 7 days if the noncitizen victim is the subject of removal, exclusion, or 
deportation proceedings. 
 
The bill also establishes that if the certifying official cannot determine whether the 
applicant is a victim of a qualifying criminal activity or determines that the applicant does 
not qualify for certification, the certifying official must provide a written explanation to 
the victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, next friend, attorney, victim advocate, or other 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 608/ Page 4 
representative setting forth the reasons why the available evidence does not support 
issuance of the certification. 
 
Withdrawal or Denial of Certification 
 
Under current law, a certifying official may withdraw the certification only when the victim 
or the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend (if applicable) refuses to provide information 
and assistance when reasonably requested. The bill repeals these provisions. 
 
Instead, under the bill, a certifying official may deny or withdraw the certification only if, 
after considering the totality of the circumstances, the person providing the helpfulness 
unreasonably refused to cooperate or unreasonably failed to provide information or 
assistance reasonably requested by a certifying official. 
 
Completion of Certification 
 
The bill further specifies that notwithstanding any other provision, a certifying official’s 
completion of a certification form may not be considered sufficient evidence that an 
applicant for a U Nonimmigrant Status has met all eligibility requirements for that status, 
and completion of a certification form by a certifying official may not be construed to 
guarantee that the victim will receive immigration relief under federal law. Completion of 
a certification form by a certifying official only serves as verification of the factual 
information relevant for a federal immigration official to determine eligibility for a 
U Nonimmigrant Status. By completing a certification form, the certifying official attests 
that the information is true and correct to the best of the certifying official’s knowledge. 
These provisions do not limit the manner in which a certifying official or agency may 
(1) describe whether the person has been helpful, is being helpful, or is likely to be helpful 
to the certifying entity or (2) provide any additional information the certifying official or 
entity believes may be relevant to the adjudication of a U Nonimmigrant Status. A 
certifying entity must develop protocols to assist petitioners who have limited English 
proficiency to facilitate completion of certification forms. 
 
Information Disclosures 
 
Under current law, a certifying entity may disclose information relating to a victim who is 
seeking or has obtained U Nonimmigrant Status only (1) in order to comply with federal 
law, a court order, or a discovery obligation in the prosecution of a criminal offense or 
(2) after adult petitioners or holders of U Nonimmigrant Status have provided written 
consent for the disclosure of such information. A certifying entity or official who acts or 
fails to act in good faith in compliance with statute is immune from civil or criminal liability 
that may otherwise occur as a result of the act or failure to act. A person who brings an 
action seeking enforcement may not be awarded attorney’s fees or costs unless that action 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 608/ Page 5 
demonstrates willful or wanton misconduct by a certifying entity or official. The bill 
repeals these provisions.  
 
Under the bill, a certifying entity or official may disclose information relating to a victim 
who is seeking certification, or who is seeking or has obtained U Nonimmigrant Status 
only (1) to comply with federal law, a court order, or a discovery obligation in the 
prosecution of a criminal offense or (2) if applicable, after the victim has waived 
confidentiality protections under the Violence Against Women Act. The provisions may 
not be construed to alter or diminish the duties and requirements of a law enforcement 
officer, a State’s Attorney, or the Attorney General from disclosing exculpatory 
information to a defendant in a criminal case. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 579 (Delegate Embry, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Garrett, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland State’s Attorney’s Association; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5