START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

Chapter 114

(Senate Bill 608)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – U Nonimmigrant Status Petitions

FOR the purpose of altering the requirements for certification of a U Nonimmigrant Status
Petition; altering the individuals eligible to request a certain official to certify victim
helpfulness on a certain form relating to certification of a U Nonimmigrant Status
Petition; altering the time periods within which a certain certifying entity shall
certify or decline a certain form under certain circumstances; requiring a certifying
entity to develop protocols to assist certain petitioners to take certain actions;
authorizing disclosure of certain information under certain circumstances; and
generally relating to U Nonimmigrant Status petitions.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–930 and 11–931
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–932
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–930.

(a) In this part the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Certifying entity” means:

(1) a State or local law enforcement agency;

(2) a State’s Attorney or deputy or assistant State’s Attorney;

(3) any other authority that has responsibility for the detection,
investigation, or prosecution of a qualifying crime or criminal activity; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 114 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) an agency that has criminal, CIVIL, FAMILY, OR ADMINISTRATIVE
detection [or], investigative, OR PROSECUTORIAL jurisdiction in the agency’s respective
areas of expertise, including child protective services, ADULT PROTECTIVE SERVICES, the
Commission on Civil Rights, and the Maryland Department of Labor.

(c) “Certifying official” means:

(1) the head of a certifying entity;

(2) an individual in a supervisory role who has been specifically designated
by the head of a certifying entity to provide U Nonimmigrant Status certifications on behalf
of that entity; or

(3) any other certifying official defined under Title 8, § 214.14(a)(3)(i) of the
Code of Federal Regulations.

(d) “FEDERAL U VISA NONIMMIGRANT STATUS PETITION GUIDELINES”
MEANS FEDERAL STATUTES, REGULATIONS, POLICIES, PUBLICATIONS, GUIDANCE,
AND INSTRUCTIONS RELATING TO U NONIMMIGRANT STATUS, INCLUDING 8 U.S.C.
§ 1101(A)(15)(U), 8 U.S.C. ~~§~~ ~~1184(O)~~ § 1184(P), 8 U.S.C. § 1367, 72 FED. REG. 53014
(SEPT. 17, 2007), 8 C.F.R. § 214.14 AND 245.24, 8 C.F.R. § 245.24, AND 8 U.S.C. §
1255(M)(1).

(E) “Qualifying crime” includes a criminal offense for which the nature and
elements of the offense are substantially similar to the criminal activity described in
subsection [(e)] (F) of this section and the attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit the
offense.

[(e)] (F) “Qualifying criminal activity” means criminal activity under §
1101(a)(15)(U)(iii) of the United States Code OR THAT IS DESCRIBED IN FEDERAL U VISA
NONIMMIGRANT STATUS PETITION GUIDELINES.

11–931.

(a) (1) For purposes of filing a petition with the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services for U Nonimmigrant Status, a victim or the victim’s parent,
guardian, [or] next friend, ATTORNEY, VICTIM ADVOCATE, OR OTHER
REPRESENTATIVE may request a certifying official of a certifying entity to certify victim
helpfulness on a Form I–918, Supplement B certification if the victim:

[(1)] (I) was a victim of a qualifying criminal activity and has been
helpful, IS BEING HELPFUL, OR IS LIKELY TO BE HELPFUL [to the certifying entity] in
the detection, investigation, or or prosecution, INCLUDING SENTENCING, CONVICTION,
OR SENTENCING of that qualifying criminal activity;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

[(2)] (II) was under the age of 16 years on the date that an act that
constitutes an element of qualifying criminal activity first occurred and the victim’s parent,
guardian, or next friend has been helpful to the certifying entity in the detection,
investigation, or or prosecution, INCLUDING SENTENCING, CONVICTION, OR
SENTENCING of that qualifying criminal activity; or

[(3)] (III) is incapacitated or incompetent and the victim’s parent,
guardian, or next friend has been helpful to the certifying entity in the detection,
investigation, or or prosecution, INCLUDING SENTENCING, CONVICTION, OR
SENTENCING of that qualifying criminal activity.

(2) (I) A VICTIM OF A QUALIFYING CRIME OR A QUALIFYING
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY IS ELIGIBLE FOR CERTIFICATION.

(II) IF A VICTIM IS APPLYING FOR CERTIFICATION AS A RESULT
OF BEING A VICTIM OF MORE THAN ONE QUALIFYING CRIME OR QUALIFYING
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY, EACH QUALIFYING CRIME AND QUALIFYING CRIMINAL
ACTIVITY SHALL BE LISTED ON THE CERTIFICATION.

(b) FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING HELPFULNESS FOR A REQUEST FOR
CERTIFICATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, AN INDIVIDUAL SHALL
BE CONSIDERED HELPFUL IF, SINCE THE INITIATION OF HELPFULNESS, THE
INDIVIDUAL HAS NOT UNREASONABLY REFUSED TO COOPERATE OR UNREASONABLY
FAILED TO PROVIDE INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE REASONABLY REQUESTED BY
A CERTIFYING ENTITY.

(C) For purposes of determining helpfulness under subsection (a) of this section,
THERE IS A REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION THAT if the victim or the victim’s parent,
guardian, or next friend is assisting, has assisted, or is likely to assist law enforcement
authorities in the detection, investigation, or prosecution of qualifying criminal activity, the
victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend shall be considered to be helpful, to
have been helpful, or likely to be helpful. ~~is~~ ~~assisting,~~ ~~has~~ ~~assisted,~~ ~~or~~ ~~is~~ ~~likely~~ ~~to~~ ~~assist~~ ~~law~~
~~enforcement~~ ~~authorities~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~detection,~~ ~~investigation,~~ ~~or~~ ~~prosecution~~ ~~of~~ ~~qualifying~~
~~criminal~~ ~~activity,~~ ~~the~~ ~~victim~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~victim’s~~ ~~parent,~~ ~~guardian,~~ ~~or~~ ~~next~~ ~~friend~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~
considered to be helpful, to have been helpful, or likely to be helpful HAS NOT
~~UNREASONABLY~~ ~~REFUSED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COOPERATE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~UNREASONABLY~~ ~~FAILED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PROVIDE~~
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~ ~~REASONABLY~~ ~~REQUESTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~ENFORCEMENT~~
AUTHORITIES, THE VICTIM OR THE VICTIM’S PARENT, GUARDIAN, OR NEXT FRIEND
SHALL BE CONSIDERED TO BE HELPFUL, TO HAVE BEEN HELPFUL, OR LIKELY TO BE
HELPFUL TO THE DETECTION, INVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION, CONVICTION, OR
SENTENCING, OF THE QUALIFYING CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 114 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(c)] (D) If the victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend satisfies
the criteria specified under subsection (a) of this section, the certifying official shall fully
complete and sign the Form I–918, Supplement B certification and, with respect to victim
helpfulness, include:

(1) specific details about the nature of the crime DETECTED, investigated,
[or], prosecuted, CONVICTED, OR SENTENCED;

(2) a detailed description of the victim’s PAST OR PRESENT helpfulness or
likely helpfulness to the detection, investigation, or or prosecution, INCLUDING
SENTENCING, CONVICTION, OR SENTENCING of the criminal activity; and

(3) copies of any documents in the possession of the certifying official that
evince the harm endured by the victim due to the criminal activity.

[(d)] (E) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) PARAGRAPHS (2), (3), AND
(4) paragraph (2) of this subsection, the certifying entity shall certify or decline certification
of the Form I–918, Supplement B certification within 90 45 days after receiving a request
under subsection (a) of this section.

(2) If a noncitizen victim is the subject of removal, exclusion, or deportation
proceedings or subject to a final order of removal, exclusion, or deportation, the certifying
entity shall certify or decline certification of the Form I–918, Supplement B certification
within 14 7 days after receiving a request under subsection (a) of this section.

(3) IF A NONCITIZEN VICTIM IS THE SUBJECT OF REMOVAL,
EXCLUSION, OR DEPORTATION PROCEEDINGS AND IS DETAINED PENDING
RESOLUTION OF THE PROCEEDINGS, THE CERTIFYING ENTITY SHALL CERTIFY OR
DECLINE CERTIFICATION OF THE FORM I–918, SUPPLEMENT B CERTIFICATION
WITHIN 7 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A REQUEST UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
~~SECTION.~~

(4) IF A QUALIFYING FAMILY MEMBER OF A NONCITIZEN VICTIM WILL
LOSE ELIGIBILITY FOR U NONIMMIGRANT STATUS IN 60 DAYS OR FEWER BECAUSE
OF THE AGE OF THE QUALIFYING FAMILY MEMBER, THE CERTIFYING ENTITY SHALL
CERTIFY OR DECLINE CERTIFICATION OF THE FORM I–918, SUPPLEMENT B
CERTIFICATION WITHIN 12 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A REQUEST UNDER SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION.

[(e)] (F) A current investigation, the filing of charges, a prosecution, or a
conviction is not required for a victim or the victim’s parent, guardian, [or] next friend,
ATTORNEY, VICTIM ADVOCATE, OR OTHER REPRESENTATIVE to request and obtain the
Form I–918, Supplement B certification under this section.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(G) THERE IS NO STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR WHEN A QUALIFYING
~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~ACTIVITY~~ ~~OCCURRED~~ ~~RELATIVE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CERTIFICATION~~ ~~OF~~
VICTIM HELPFULNESS UNDER THIS SECTION A CERTIFYING ENTITY MAY NOT
DECLINE CERTIFICATION OF THE FORM I–918, SUPPLEMENT B CERTIFICATION
~~SOLELY~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TIME~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~PASSED~~ ~~SINCE~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFYING~~
CRIME WAS COMMITTED THERE IS NO STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR WHEN A
QUALIFYING CRIMINAL ACTIVITY OCCURRED RELATIVE TO THE REQUEST FOR
CERTIFICATION OF VICTIM HELPFULNESS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(H) IF THE CERTIFYING OFFICIAL CANNOT DETERMINE WHETHER THE
APPLICANT IS A VICTIM OF A QUALIFYING CRIMINAL ACTIVITY OR DETERMINES
THAT THE APPLICANT DOES NOT QUALIFY FOR CERTIFICATION, THE CERTIFYING
OFFICIAL SHALL PROVIDE A WRITTEN EXPLANATION TO THE VICTIM OR THE
VICTIM’S PARENT, GUARDIAN, NEXT FRIEND, ATTORNEY, VICTIM ADVOCATE, OR
OTHER REPRESENTATIVE SETTING FORTH REASONS WHY THE AVAILABLE EVIDENCE
DOES NOT SUPPORT ISSUANCE OF THE CERTIFICATION.

[(f)] (I) A certifying official may DENY OR withdraw the certification provided
under this section only [on refusal to provide information and assistance when reasonably
requested of:

(1) the victim; or

(2) the victim’s parent, guardian, or next friend if the victim was under the
age of 16 years on the date that an act that constitutes an element of qualifying criminal
activity first occurred or if the victim is incapacitated or incompetent] IF, AFTER
CONSIDERING THE TOTALITY OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES, THE PERSON PROVIDING
THE HELPFULNESS UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION UNREASONABLY
REFUSED TO COOPERATE OR UNREASONABLY FAILED TO PROVIDE INFORMATION
OR ASSISTANCE REASONABLY REQUESTED BY A CERTIFYING OFFICIAL.

(J) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS SECTION, A
CERTIFYING OFFICIAL’S COMPLETION OF A CERTIFICATION FORM MAY NOT BE
CONSIDERED SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE THAT AN APPLICANT FOR A U OR A T VISA U
NONIMMIGRANT STATUS HAS MET ALL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR THAT VISA
STATUS, AND COMPLETION OF A CERTIFICATION FORM BY A CERTIFYING OFFICIAL
MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO GUARANTEE THAT THE VICTIM WILL RECEIVE
IMMIGRATION RELIEF UNDER FEDERAL LAW.

(2) COMPLETION OF A CERTIFICATION FORM BY A CERTIFYING
OFFICIAL ONLY SERVES AS VERIFICATION OF THE FACTUAL INFORMATION
RELEVANT FOR A FEDERAL IMMIGRATION OFFICIAL TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY
FOR A U OR A T VISA U NONIMMIGRANT STATUS.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 114 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) BY COMPLETING A CERTIFICATION FORM, THE CERTIFYING
OFFICIAL ATTESTS THAT THE INFORMATION IS TRUE AND CORRECT TO THE BEST OF
THE CERTIFYING OFFICIAL’S KNOWLEDGE.

(4) THIS SECTION DOES NOT LIMIT THE MANNER IN WHICH A
CERTIFYING OFFICIAL OR CERTIFYING AGENCY MAY:

(I) DESCRIBE WHETHER THE PERSON HAS BEEN HELPFUL, IS
BEING HELPFUL, OR IS LIKELY TO BE HELPFUL TO THE CERTIFYING ENTITY; OR

(II) PROVIDE ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION THE CERTIFYING
OFFICIAL OR CERTIFYING ENTITY BELIEVES MIGHT BE RELEVANT TO THE
ADJUDICATION OF A U OR A T VISA APPLICATION NONIMMIGRANT STATUS
PETITION.

[(g) A certifying entity may disclose information relating to a victim who is seeking
or has obtained U Nonimmigrant Status only:

(1) in order to comply with federal law, court order, or a discovery
obligation in the prosecution of a criminal offense; or

(2) after adult petitioners for U Nonimmigrant Status or adult U
Nonimmigrant Status holders have provided written consent for the disclosure of the
information.

(h) (1) Except in cases of willful or wanton misconduct, a certifying entity or
certifying official who acts or fails to act in good faith in compliance with this section has
the immunity from liability described under § 5–643 of the Courts Article.

(2) A person who brings an action to seek enforcement of this section may
not be awarded attorney’s fees or costs unless the action demonstrates willful or wanton
misconduct by a certifying entity or certifying official.]

(K) A CERTIFYING ENTITY SHALL DEVELOP PROTOCOLS TO ASSIST
PETITIONERS WHO HAVE LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY TO PROCEED UNDER THIS
SECTION.

11–932.

(A) A CERTIFYING ENTITY OR A CERTIFYING OFFICIAL MAY DISCLOSE
INFORMATION RELATING TO A VICTIM WHO IS SEEKING CERTIFICATION, OR WHO IS
SEEKING OR HAS OBTAINED U NONIMMIGRANT STATUS ONLY:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 114

(1) TO COMPLY WITH FEDERAL LAW, A COURT ORDER, OR A
DISCOVERY OBLIGATION IN THE PROSECUTION OF A CRIMINAL OFFENSE; OR

(2) IF APPLICABLE, AFTER THE VICTIM HAS WAIVED
CONFIDENTIALITY PROTECTIONS UNDER THE VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN ACT
UNDER 34 U.S.C. § 12291(B)(2).

(B) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO ALTER OR DIMINISH THE
DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, A STATE’S
ATTORNEY, OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL FROM DISCLOSING EXCULPATORY
INFORMATION TO A DEFENDANT IN A CRIMINAL CASE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7