START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

Chapter 512

(Senate Bill 758)

AN ACT concerning

Condominiums and Homeowners Associations – Elections, Financial
Statements, and Enforcement

FOR the purpose of establishing certain requirements for elections of the governing body
of a condominium or homeowners association; requiring the governing body of a
condominium to accommodate unit owner organizing activities relating to the
governance of the condominium; prohibiting a condominium or homeowners
association from charging a unit or lot owner for examining certain records of the
condominium or homeowners association in a certain manner; authorizing a
condominium or homeowners association to charge a reasonable fee for copying
certain documents; expanding the authority of the Division of Consumer Protection
of the Office of the Attorney General to enforce certain provisions of law relating to
condominiums and homeowners associations; and generally relating to
condominiums and homeowners associations.

BY renumbering
Article – Real Property
Section 11B–118
to be Section 11B–119
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 11–109(c)(17) through (22) and 11B–118
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–116, 11–130, 11B–112, and 11B–115
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 11B–118 of Article – Real Property of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
renumbered to be Section(s) 11B–119.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 512 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Real Property

11–109.

(c) (17) (I) ELECTIONS, INCLUDING THE COLLECTION AND COUNTING
OF BALLOTS AND THE CERTIFYING OF RESULTS, FOR OFFICERS OR MEMBERS OF
THE GOVERNING BODY OTHER THAN THE FULL MEMBERSHIP OF THE COUNCIL OF
UNIT OWNERS SHALL BE CONDUCTED BY INDEPENDENT PARTIES WHO:

1. ARE NOT CANDIDATES IN THE ELECTION; AND

2. DO NOT HAVE A CONFLICT OF INTEREST REGARDING
ANY CANDIDATE IN THE ELECTION.

(II) A UNIT OWNER IS AN INDEPENDENT PARTY IF THE UNIT
OWNER:

1. COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
SECTION;

2. DOES NOT ELECTIONEER FOR ANY CANDIDATE; AND

3. IS NOT SUBJECT TO AN OBJECTION BY MORE THAN 25
PERCENT OF THE ELIGIBLE VOTING MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS.

(III) REPRESENTATIVES UNLESS PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FOR
A CONDOMINIUM IS OWNED BY THE CONDOMINIUM, OR A PARENT ASSOCIATION OF
THE CONDOMINIUM, REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CONDOMINIUM’S PROPERTY
MANAGEMENT ARE NOT INDEPENDENT PARTIES.

(18) THE GOVERNING BODY MAY RETAIN A THIRD–PARTY VENDOR OR
EMPLOY A COMMERCIAL TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM TO CONDUCT AN ELECTION.

(19) INDIVIDUALS CONDUCTING AN ELECTION SHALL MAKE
REASONABLE EFFORTS TO ENSURE THAT THE ELECTION IS FAIR AND THAT THERE
IS ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE PROCESS AND THE RESULTS OF THE ELECTION.

(20) A UNIT OWNER DESIGNATED TO CONDUCT AN ELECTION WHO
ACTS IN GOOD FAITH IS NOT PERSONALLY LIABLE IN CONNECTION WITH THE
CONDUCT OF THE ELECTION.

(21) (I) THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL MAKE REASONABLE
ACCOMMODATIONS, INCLUDING REASONABLE USE OF ANY PORTION OF COMMON

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

AREAS, FOR UNIT OWNERS TO ENGAGE IN ORGANIZING ACTIVITIES RELATING TO
GOVERNANCE OF THE CONDOMINIUM.

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY MAY NOT PREVENT UNIT OWNERS
FROM OR RETALIATE AGAINST UNIT OWNERS FOR EXERCISING RIGHTS
GUARANTEED UNDER LAW OR UNDER THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS OF THE
CONDOMINIUM.

(22) PROVISIONS OF THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, RULES, OR
REGULATIONS OF A CONDOMINIUM RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS
THAT ARE INCONSISTENT WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION ARE
UNENFORCEABLE AND VOID.

11–116.

(a) The council of unit owners shall keep books and records in accordance with
good accounting practices on a consistent basis.

(b) On the request of the unit owners of at least 5 percent of the units, the council
of unit owners shall cause an audit of the books and records to be made by an independent
certified public accountant, provided an audit shall be made not more than once in any
consecutive 12–month period. The cost of the audit shall be a common expense.

(c) (1) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, all books
and records, including insurance policies, kept by the council of unit owners shall be
maintained in Maryland or within 50 miles of its borders and shall be available at some
place designated by the council of unit owners for examination or copying, or both, by any
unit owner, a unit owner’s mortgagee, or their respective duly authorized agents or
attorneys, during normal business hours, and after reasonable notice.

(ii) If a unit owner requests in writing a copy of financial statements
of the condominium or the minutes of a meeting of the board of directors or other governing
body of the condominium to be delivered, the board of directors or other governing body of
the condominium shall compile and send the requested information by mail, electronic
transmission, or personal delivery:

1. Within 21 days after receipt of the written request, if the
financial statements or minutes were prepared within the 3 years immediately preceding
receipt of the request; or

2. Within 45 days after receipt of the written request, if the
financial statements or minutes were prepared more than 3 years before receipt of the
request.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 512 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Books and records required to be made available under paragraph (1)
of this subsection shall first be made available to a unit owner not later than 15 business
days after a unit is conveyed from a developer and the unit owner requests to examine or
copy the books and records.

(3) Books and records kept by or on behalf of a council of unit owners may
be withheld from public inspection, except for inspection by the person who is the subject
of the record or the person’s designee or guardian, to the extent that they concern:

(i) Personnel records, not including information on individual
salaries, wages, bonuses, and other compensation paid to employees;

(ii) An individual’s medical records;

(iii) An individual’s personal financial records, including assets,
income, liabilities, net worth, bank balances, financial history or activities, and
creditworthiness;

(iv) Records relating to business transactions that are currently in
negotiation;

(v) The written advice of legal counsel; or

(vi) Minutes of a closed meeting of the board of directors or other
governing body of the council of unit owners, unless a majority of a quorum of the board of
directors or governing body that held the meeting approves unsealing the minutes or a
recording of the minutes for public inspection.

(d) (1) [Except for a reasonable charge imposed on a person desiring to review
or copy the books and records or who requests delivery of information, the council of unit
owners may not impose any charges under this section.]

(I) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION,
THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS MAY IMPOSE A REASONABLE CHARGE ON A PERSON
DESIRING TO REVIEW OR COPY THE BOOKS AND RECORDS OF THE CONDOMINIUM OR
WHO REQUESTS DELIVERY OF INFORMATION.

(II) THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS MAY NOT IMPOSE ANY
CHARGES UNDER THIS SECTION OTHER THAN THOSE AUTHORIZED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) A UNIT OWNER MAY NOT BE CHARGED FOR:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(I) EXAMINING THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE
CONDOMINIUM IN PERSON WHERE THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ARE MAINTAINED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C)(1)(I) OF THIS SECTION; OR

(II) RECEIVING THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE
CONDOMINIUM THROUGH ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (C)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

[(2)] (3) A charge imposed under paragraph (1) of this subsection for
copying books and records may not exceed the limits authorized under Title 7, Subtitle 2 of
the Courts Article.

11–130.

(a) This section is intended to provide minimum standards for the protection of
consumers in the State.

(b) (1) [For purposes of] IN this section, “consumer” means an actual or
prospective purchaser, lessee, assignee or recipient of a condominium unit OR A UNIT
OWNER.

(2) “Consumer” includes a co–obligor or surety for a consumer.

(c) [(1) To the extent that a violation of any provision of this title affects a
consumer, that] A violation OF THIS TITLE shall be within the scope of the enforcement
duties and powers of the Division of Consumer Protection of the Office of the Attorney
General, as described in Title 13 of the Commercial Law Article.

[(2) The provisions of this title shall otherwise be enforced by each agency
of the State within the scope of its authority.]

(d) THE DIVISION OF CONSUMER PROTECTION OF THE OFFICE OF THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

(E) A county or incorporated municipality, or an agency of any of those
jurisdictions, may adopt laws or ordinances for the protection of a consumer to the extent
and in the manner provided for under § 13–103 of the Commercial Law Article.

[(e)] (F) Within 30 days of the effective date of a law, ordinance, or regulation
enacted under this section which is expressly applicable to condominiums, the local
jurisdiction shall forward a copy of the law, ordinance, or regulation to the Secretary of
State.

11B–112.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 512 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) (i) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection, all
books and records kept by or on behalf of the homeowners association shall be made
available for examination or copying, or both, by a lot owner, a lot owner’s mortgagee, or
their respective duly authorized agents or attorneys, during normal business hours, and
after reasonable notice.

(ii) Books and records required to be made available under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall first be made available to a lot owner no later than
15 business days after a lot is conveyed by the declarant and the lot owner requests to
examine or copy the books and records.

(iii) If a lot owner requests in writing a copy of financial statements
of the homeowners association or the minutes of a meeting of the governing body of the
homeowners association to be delivered, the governing body of the homeowners association
shall compile and send the requested information by mail, electronic transmission, or
personal delivery:

1. Within 21 days after receipt of the written request, if the
financial statements or minutes were prepared within the 3 years immediately preceding
receipt of the request; or

2. Within 45 days after receipt of the written request, if the
financial statements or minutes were prepared more than 3 years before receipt of the
request.

(2) Books and records kept by or on behalf of a homeowners association
may be withheld from public inspection, except for inspection by the person who is the
subject of the record or the person’s designee or guardian, to the extent that they concern:

(i) Personnel records, not including information on individual
salaries, wages, bonuses, and other compensation paid to employees;

(ii) An individual’s medical records;

(iii) An individual’s personal financial records, including assets,
income, liabilities, net worth, bank balances, financial history or activities, and
creditworthiness;

(iv) Records relating to business transactions that are currently in
negotiation;

(v) The written advice of legal counsel; or

(vi) Minutes of a closed meeting of the governing body of the
homeowners association, unless a majority of a quorum of the governing body of the

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

homeowners association that held the meeting approves unsealing the minutes or a
recording of the minutes for public inspection.

(b) (1) [Except for a reasonable charge imposed on a person desiring to review
or copy the books and records or who requests delivery of information, the homeowners
association may not impose any charges under this section.]

(I) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION,
THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION MAY IMPOSE A REASONABLE CHARGE ON A
PERSON DESIRING TO REVIEW OR COPY THE BOOKS AND RECORDS OR WHO
REQUESTS DELIVERY OF INFORMATION.

(II) THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION MAY NOT IMPOSE ANY
CHARGES UNDER THIS SECTION OTHER THAN THOSE AUTHORIZED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) A LOT OWNER MAY NOT BE CHARGED FOR:

(I) EXAMINING THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION IN PERSON WHERE THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ARE
MAINTAINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A)(1)(I) OF THIS SECTION,
UNLESS THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ARE LOCATED IN A DEPOSITORY; OR

(II) RECEIVING THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION THROUGH ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A)(1)(III) OF THIS SECTION.

[(2)] (3) A charge imposed under paragraph (1) of this subsection for
copying books and records may not exceed the limits authorized under Title 7, Subtitle 2 of
the Courts Article.

(c) (1) Each homeowners association that was in existence on June 30, 1987
shall deposit in the depository by December 31, 1988, and each homeowners association
established subsequent to June 30, 1987 shall deposit in the depository by the later of the
date 30 days following its establishment, or December 31, 1988, all disclosures, current to
the date of deposit, specified:

(i) By § 11B–105(b) of this title except for those disclosures required
by paragraphs (6)(i), (8), (9), and (12);

(ii) By § 11B–106(b) of this title except for those disclosures required
by paragraphs (1), (2), (4), and (5)(i); and

(iii) By § 11B–107(b) of this title.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 512 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Beginning January 1, 1989, within 30 days of the adoption of or
amendment to any of the disclosures required by this title to be deposited in the depository,
a homeowners association shall deposit the adopted or amended disclosures in the
depository.

(3) If a homeowners association fails to deposit in the depository any of the
disclosures required to be deposited by this section, or by § 11B–105(b)(6)(ii) or §
11B–106(b)(5)(ii) of this title, then those disclosures which were not deposited shall be
unenforceable until the time they are deposited.

11B–115.

(a) (1) In this section, “consumer” means an actual or prospective purchaser,
lessee, assignee, or recipient of a lot in a development, OR A LOT OWNER.

(2) “Consumer” includes a co–obligor or surety for a consumer.

(b) This section is intended to provide minimum standards for protection of
consumers in the State.

(c) [(1) To the extent that a violation of any provision of this title affects a
consumer, that] A violation OF THIS TITLE shall be within the scope of the enforcement
duties and powers of the Division of Consumer Protection of the Office of the Attorney
General, as described in Title 13 of the Commercial Law Article.

[(2) The provisions of this title shall otherwise be enforced by each unit of
State government within the scope of the authority of the unit.]

(d) THE DIVISION OF CONSUMER PROTECTION OF THE OFFICE OF THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) A county or municipal corporation may adopt a law, ordinance, or
regulation for the protection of a consumer to the extent and in the manner provided for
under § 13–103 of the Commercial Law Article.

(2) Within 30 days of the effective date of a law, ordinance, or regulation
adopted under this subsection that is expressly applicable to a development, the county or
municipal corporation shall forward a copy of the law, ordinance, or regulation to the
homeowners association depository in the office of the clerk of the court in the county where
the development is located.

11B–118.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 512

(A) (1) ELECTIONS FOR THE GOVERNING BODY OF A HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATION, INCLUDING THE COLLECTION AND COUNTING OF BALLOTS AND THE
CERTIFYING OF RESULTS, SHALL BE CONDUCTED BY INDEPENDENT PARTIES WHO:

(I) ARE NOT CANDIDATES FOR POSITIONS ON THE GOVERNING
BODY OF THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION IN THAT ELECTION; AND

(II) DO NOT HAVE A CONFLICT OF INTEREST REGARDING ANY
CANDIDATE IN THE ELECTION.

(2) (I) REPRESENTATIVES UNLESS PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FOR
A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, OR A PARENT ASSOCIATION OF THE HOMEOWNERS
ASSOCIATION, IS OWNED BY THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION’S PROPERTY MANAGEMENT ARE NOT
INDEPENDENT PARTIES.

(II) A LOT OWNER IS AN INDEPENDENT PARTY IF THE LOT
OWNER:

1. COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
SUBSECTION;

2. DOES NOT ELECTIONEER FOR ANY CANDIDATE; AND

3. IS NOT SUBJECT TO AN OBJECTION BY MORE THAN 25
PERCENT OF THE ELIGIBLE VOTING MEMBERS OF THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.

(III) THE HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION MAY RETAIN A
THIRD–PARTY VENDOR OR EMPLOY A COMMERCIAL TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM TO
CONDUCT THE ELECTION.

(B) INDIVIDUALS CONDUCTING AN ELECTION SHALL MAKE REASONABLE
EFFORTS TO ENSURE THAT THE ELECTION IS FAIR AND THAT THERE IS
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE PROCESS AND THE RESULTS OF THE ELECTION.

(C) A LOT OWNER DESIGNATED TO CONDUCT AN ELECTION WHO ACTS IN
GOOD FAITH HAS NO PERSONAL LIABILITY IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONDUCT OF
AN ELECTION.

(D) PROVISIONS OF THE GOVERNING DOCUMENTS, RULES, OR
REGULATIONS OF A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION RELATING TO THE CONDUCT OF
ELECTIONS THAT ARE INCONSISTENT WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION
ARE VOID AND UNENFORCEABLE.
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 512 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 13, 2025.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10