START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 789 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 789 
(Senator M. Washington, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Higher Education - Hunger-Free Campus Grant Program - Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for “hunger-free campus” designation by the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC) to private institutions of higher education. However, 
these private institutions are prohibited from being eligible to receive grant funding under 
the Hunger-Free Campus Grant Program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC can designate private institutions as “hunger-free campuses” under 
the existing program using existing resources. Further, grant funding is not affected as 
private institutions are not eligible to receive grant funding under the Hunger-Free Campus 
Grant Program. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 579 and 580 of 2021 established the Hunger-Free Campus Grant 
Program for public institutions of higher education administered by MHEC. MHEC must 
allocate grant funding to any public institution or regional higher education center (RHEC) 
that pledges a matching contribution to be used to implement the goals of the program and 
is designated as a hunger-free campus, according to the standards set in statute. The 
Governor must include $150,000 annually in the budget for the program. MHEC must 
incorporate a plan for addressing any basic needs insecurity of higher education students 
into the 2026-2030 State Plan for Higher Education. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 789/ Page 2 
The purpose of the program is to: 
 
 
address student hunger;  
 
leverage more sustainable solutions to address basic food needs on campus;  
 
raise awareness of services currently offered on campus that address basic food 
needs; and 
 
build strategic partnerships at the local, State, and national levels to address food 
insecurity among students.  
 
Public Two-year Institutions – Qualifications 
 
MHEC must designate as a hunger-free campus any public two-year campus that: 
 
 
establishes a hunger task force that meets specified qualifications;  
 
designates a staff member responsible for assisting students in enrolling in the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or connecting students with 
available outreach partners that can assist students in enrolling in the program; 
 
designates a staff member responsible for informing students participating in federal 
work-study programs that they are eligible for SNAP; 
 
participates in an awareness day campaign activity and plans at least one campus 
awareness event during the National Hunger and Homelessness Awareness Week; 
 
provides at least one food pantry on campus, or enables students in need to receive 
food through a separate, stigma-free arrangement; 
 
conducts a standardized annual student survey on hunger and submits the results to 
MHEC; and 
 
submits an annual report detailing its efforts to address student hunger to MHEC. 
 
Public Four-year Institutions and Regional Higher Education Centers – Qualifications 
 
In addition to the requirements for public two-year institutions, to qualify as a hunger-free 
campus, a public four-year institution or RHEC must (1) provide options for students to 
utilize SNAP benefits at campus retailers or provide students with information on the 
names and locations of off-campus retailers that accept the benefits and (2) develop and 
maintain a meal-sharing program that allows students to donate their unused meal plan 
credits to be distributed to students in need for use in campus dining halls or at an 
on-campus food pantry, if applicable. MHEC must designate as a hunger-free campus any 
public four-year campus or RHEC that meets all of the requirements. 
 
Each public four-year institution of higher education may develop its own procedures for 
a meal-sharing program. Institutions must make specified information about the 
meal-sharing program publicly available. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 789/ Page 3 
Maryland Higher Education Commission – Grant Awards 
 
MHEC must determine the amount of each grant issued under the Hunger-Free Campus 
Grant Program and adopt regulations necessary to implement the statutory requirements. 
The regulations must allow grant recipients to use grant funds flexibly to implement the 
goals of the program, including giving recipients the ability to (1) support emergency 
assistance; (2) hire staff to manage initiatives related to the program; and (3) use grant 
funds for operational activities related to the program. 
 
According to MHEC guidelines for the existing Hunger-Free Campus Grant Program, 
MHEC awards grant funding to any Maryland public institution of higher education or 
RHEC that has been designated as a hunger-free campus and pledges a 25% matching 
contribution (which may be in-kind or matching funds) to be used to implement the goals 
of the program. 
 
Regional Higher Education Centers 
 
An RHEC is a facility at which at least two institutions of higher education offer classes, 
consisting of a variety of program offerings and multiple degree levels. RHECs are 
designed to ensure access to higher education in underserved areas of the State. They 
provide baccalaureate and graduate programs in places where students do not have access 
to higher education due to geographical distance, commute time, or the limited capacity of 
local four-year institutions. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under the bill, private institutions of higher education may be 
designated as a “hunger-free campus” by MHEC; however, these private institutions are 
prohibited from being eligible to receive grant funding under the Hunger-Free Campus 
Grant Program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Independent 
College and University Association; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 789/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Other - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4