START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 785 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 785 
(Senator Ready) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Labor and Employment - Unpaid Parental Leave - Definition of Employer 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “employer” under the Maryland Parental Leave Act to 
exclude employers who are covered by the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
for the current calendar year. Thus, these employers are not required to provide employees 
up to six weeks of unpaid parental leave and maintain existing coverage for a group health 
plan during that time under the Maryland Parental Leave Act (as they would be covered 
under the federal FMLA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland Department of Labor can implement the bill with 
existing resources. The bill does not apply to the State as an employer.  
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to local governments as employers.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 333 and 334 of 2014 established the Maryland Parental Leave 
Act. In Maryland, employers with 15 to 49 employees in the State for each working day 
during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding calendar year 
are required to provide employees with unpaid parental leave benefits. An eligible 
employee may take unpaid parental leave up to a total of six weeks in a 12-month period 
for the birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child. During parental leave, the employer 
must maintain existing coverage for a group health plan and, in specified circumstances, 
may recover the premium if the employee fails to return to work. To be eligible for the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 785/ Page 2 
unpaid parental leave, an employee must have worked for the employer for at least one year 
and for 1,250 hours in the previous 12 months. The Act does not apply to the State and 
local governments as employers.  
 
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act 
 
A private-sector employer is covered by the FMLA if it employs 50 or more employees in 
20 or more workweeks in the current or previous calendar year. An employee is considered 
to be employed each working day of the calendar week if the employee works any part of 
the week.  
 
FMLA generally requires covered employers to provide eligible employees with up to 
12 work weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period for qualifying family and 
medical reasons (including for the birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child) and 
requires continuation of their group health benefits under the same conditions as if they 
had not taken leave. FMLA leave may be unpaid or used at the same time as 
employer-provided paid leave. Employees must be restored to the same or virtually 
identical position when they return to work after FMLA leave.  
 
Eligible employees are individuals employed by a covered employer who have been 
employed for at least 12 months, have at least 1,250 hours of service with the employer 
during the 12 months before their FMLA leave starts, and work at a location where the 
employer has at least 50 employees within 75 miles.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1340 (Delegate Rose, et al.) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; U.S Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2025 
Third Reader - March 7, 2025 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2