START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 773 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 773 
(Senator Hershey) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Benefit Plans - Calculation of Cost-Sharing Contribution - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as “carriers”), including those that provide prescription 
drug coverage through a pharmacy benefits manager, when calculating an insured’s or 
enrollee’s cost-sharing contributions, to include any discount, financial assistance 
payment, product voucher, or other out-of-pocket expense (“financial assistance”) made 
by or on behalf of the insured or enrollee for a prescription drug. Except for a charitable 
organization, a person that provides financial assistance made by or on behalf of an insured 
or enrollee must comply with specified requirements. Failure to comply constitutes a 
violation of the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). A carrier may not directly or 
indirectly set, alter, implement, or condition the terms of health benefit plan coverage based 
on information about the availability or amount of assistance available for a prescription 
drug. The bill takes effect January 1, 2026, and applies to all policies, contracts, and 
health plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. The bill 
terminates July 1, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) from the $125 rate and form filing fee in FY 2026 only. Any 
additional MIA workload can likely be absorbed with existing resources. No impact on the 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill’s requirements increase the cost of health insurance, 
expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured medical plans may increase. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 773/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  When calculating an insured’s or enrollee’s contribution to the insured’s 
or enrollee’s coinsurance, copayment, deductible, or out-of-pocket maximum, a carrier 
must include any financial assistance made by or on behalf of the insured or enrollee for a 
prescription drug that (1) is covered under the insured’s or enrollee’s health benefit plan 
and (2) does not have an AB-rated generic equivalent or an interchangeable biological 
product preferred under the health benefit plan’s formulary or, if there is such an 
alternative, the insured or enrollee has obtained access to a brand drug through a prior 
authorization, step therapy protocol, or exception or appeal process of the carrier. 
 
If an insured or enrollee is covered under a health savings account-eligible high-deductible 
health plan (HDHP), a carrier must apply this requirement after the insured or enrollee 
satisfies the HDHP’s minimum deductible requirement. 
 
A person that provides financial assistance made by or on behalf of an insured or enrollee 
that is used in the calculation of an insured’s or enrollee’s contribution to their coinsurance, 
copayment, deductible, or out-of-pocket maximum must notify the insured or enrollee, 
within seven days after the acceptance of the financial assistance, of (1) the maximum 
dollar amount of the financial assistance and (2) the expiration date for the financial 
assistance. 
 
While a carrier may not directly or indirectly set, alter, implement, or condition the terms 
of health benefit plan coverage, including the benefit design, based on information about 
the availability or amount of financial or product assistance available for a prescription 
drug, this prohibition may not be construed to prohibit a carrier from using rebates in the 
design of prescription drug coverage or benefits. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Cost Sharing – Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
 
Under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, all nongrandfathered group 
health plans must ensure that any annual cost sharing imposed under the plan does not 
exceed specified limitations. For plan or policy years beginning in 2025, the maximum 
annual limitation on cost sharing is $9,200 for individual coverage and $18,400 for family 
coverage. The out-of-pocket maximum is set annually by the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services based on a formula that calculates how much the average premium 
for employer-sponsored health insurance in the preceding year exceeds the average 
2014 premium for employer-sponsored health insurance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 773/ Page 3 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division is responsible for 
enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division 
may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in 
court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each 
violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. In addition to any 
civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that the 
bill has no impact on the program at this time. However, DBM has previously advised for 
similar legislation in a prior legislative session that requirements for calculating cost 
sharing contributions could limit the program’s future flexibility to implement cost-saving 
measures related to cost sharing for prescription drugs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 879 (third reader) of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 773/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
Enrolled - April 29, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4