START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 758 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 758 
(Senator Kagan) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations - Elections, Financial Statements, 
and Enforcement 
 
 
This bill, among other provisions, establishes certain requirements for elections of the 
governing body of a condominium or homeowners association (HOA) and requires the 
governing body of a condominium to make reasonable accommodations for owners to 
engage in organizing activities relating to the governance of the condominium. The bill 
prohibits a condominium or HOA from imposing a charge on a unit/lot owner for the 
examination or receipt by electronic transmission of financial statements. The bill also 
authorizes the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to adopt regulation to carry out 
provisions of the Maryland Condominium Act (MCA) and Maryland Homeowners 
Association Act (MHAA). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 758/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations – Elections 
 
Elections – including the collection and counting of ballots and the certifying of results – 
for officers or members of the governing body of a condominium or HOA (except for the 
full membership of the council of unit owners) must be conducted by independent parties 
who are not candidates in the election and do not have a conflict of interest regarding any 
candidate. 
 
A lot/unit owner is considered an independent party if the owner (1) complies with the 
requirements of the bill; (2) does not electioneer for any candidate; and (3) is not subject 
to an objection by more than 25% of the eligible voting members of the council of unit 
owners/HOA. Unless the property management for a condominium or HOA is owned by 
the community (or a parent association of the community), representatives of the 
condominium’s or HOA’s property management are not considered independent parties. 
 
The governing body/HOA may retain a third-party vendor or employ a commercial 
technology platform to conduct an election. Individuals conducting an election must make 
reasonable efforts to ensure that the election is fair and that there is accountability for the 
process and results. A unit/lot owner designated to conduct an election who acts in good 
faith is not personally liable in connection with the conduct of the election.  
 
The governing body of a condominium must make reasonable accommodations, including 
reasonable use of any portion of common areas, for unit owners to engage in organizing 
activities relating to governance of the condominium. The governing body may not prevent 
unit owners from, or retaliate against unit owners for, exercising rights guaranteed under 
law or under the governing documents of the condominium. 
 
Provisions of the governing documents, rules, or regulations of a condominium or HOA 
relating to the conduct of elections that are inconsistent with the requirements of the bill 
are unenforceable and void. 
 
Review or Digital Delivery of Financial Statements  
 
The governing body of a condominium or HOA may not impose a charge for a lot/unit 
owner to examine financial statements in person, as specified, or receive the statements 
electronically. A lot owner may be charged if the financial statements are located in a 
depository, as specified. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 758/ Page 3 
Enforcement 
 
The bill establishes that a violation of MCA or MHAA is within the scope of the 
enforcement duties and powers of the Consumer Protection Division (CPD) of OAG. The 
bill (1) repeals provisions that formerly limited this applicability to if a violation affected 
a consumer; (2) expands the definitions of consumer to include a unit owner or lot owner; 
and (3) repeals provisions stating that provisions within MCA and MHAA are otherwise 
to be enforced by each agency of the State within the scope of its authority. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, State statute includes the MCA and the MHAA, which regulate 
various aspects of condominium and HOA operations. 
 
Elections:  Pursuant to MCA, unless otherwise provided in the governing documents of the 
condominium, unit owners may nominate themselves or others for officer or board 
positions. A call for nominations must be sent to all unit owners no less than 45 days before 
the election notice. Only nominations made at least 15 days before the election notice will 
be included on the ballot. Candidates must be listed alphabetically, without preference. 
Nominations may also be made from the floor at the election meeting. Election materials 
funded by the council of unit owners must follow the same guidelines, listing candidates 
alphabetically without indicating preference. 
 
MHAA does not expressly regulate the election of the members of the governing body. 
However, MHAA does authorize a lot owner to submit a dispute to CPD if the governing 
body fails to comply with election procedures outlined in the governing documents, 
specifically those concerning (1) notice of the election date, time, and place; (2) the process 
for calling for nominations; (3) ballot format; (4) proxy format, provision, and use; or 
(5) quorum determination for elections.  
 
Books and Records – Examination:  Generally, the books and records of a condominium 
or HOA must be available for examination or copying, or both, by any unit or lot owner, 
the owner’s mortgagee, or their respective agents or attorneys during normal business hours 
and after reasonable notice. The governing body may impose reasonable charges for 
reviewing, copying, or requesting delivery of information; otherwise, charges may not be 
imposed. 
 
For more information on condominiums and HOAs, which are commonly referred to as 
common ownership communities, see the Appendix – Common Ownership 
Communities. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 758/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1534 (Delegate Holmes) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - April 3, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 3, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 758/ Page 5 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COC). In Maryland, 
a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are located in some 
form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required statewide, the 
exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation for Community 
Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community associations with an 
estimated 1.0 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 758/ Page 6 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. While a small number of local governments 
(Charles and Montgomery counties) created such offices before the report’s publication, 
some local jurisdictions have since created programs to regulate or provide oversight of 
COCs. For example, Prince George’s County created its Common Ownership 
Communities Program in 2007 to assist governing bodies, as well as owners and residents 
of HOAs, residential condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with 
education, training, and alternative dispute resolution.   
 

END OF PAGE 6