START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 767 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 767 
(Senator M. Jackson) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Calvert County Sheriff - Deputy Sheriffs and Correctional Deputies - Collective 
Bargaining 
 
 
This bill establishes a framework by which full-time deputy sheriffs and correctional 
deputies in the Calvert County Sheriff’s Office at the rank of major and below may 
organize and negotiate a collective bargaining agreement with the Calvert County Sheriff 
and the Calvert County Administrator with regard to wages and employee benefits. The 
bill establishes that any additional funding required as a result of a negotiated collective 
bargaining agreement is subject to approval by the county commissioners. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Calvert County expenditures may increase due to the collective bargaining 
rights established in the bill, as discussed below. County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Applicable deputy sheriffs and correctional deputies may (1) take part or 
refrain from taking part in forming, joining, supporting, or participating in a labor 
organization or its lawful activities; (2) select a labor organization as their exclusive 
representative; (3) engage in collective bargaining with the sheriff and the county 
administrator concerning wages and employee benefits through a labor organization 
certified as their exclusive representative; (4) enter into a collective bargaining agreement, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 767/ Page 2 
as specified, through the exclusive representative, covering those wages and benefits; and 
(5) decertify a labor organization as their exclusive representative. 
 
Certification of a Labor Organization 
 
The bill specifies conditions under which a labor organization is to be deemed certified as 
the exclusive representative. If the sheriff challenges the validity of a petition to recognize 
a labor organization as the exclusive representative, the American Arbitration Association 
must be requested to appoint a third-party neutral arbitrator to conduct a secret ballot 
election and certify whether the organization has been validly selected, as specified; 
associated costs must be shared equally among the parties. 
 
Reasonable and Good Faith Collective Bargaining 
 
Once an exclusive representative has been certified, the applicable parties must meet at 
reasonable times and engage in good faith collective bargaining. The parties must make 
every reasonable effort to conclude negotiations in a timely manner to allow for the 
sheriff’s office to include matters agreed upon in the office’s budget request. The exclusive 
representative, the sheriff, and the county administrator may each designate up to 
four individuals for representation in collective bargaining negotiations. 
 
The sheriff and the county administrator may not be required to engage in collective 
bargaining negotiations with the exclusive representative after the time that the county 
commissioners approve the annual operating budget with regard to conditions of 
employment requiring the appropriation of funds in the annual operating budget. 
 
The collective bargaining agreement must contain all matters of agreement reached in the 
collective bargaining process and may contain a grievance procedure providing for 
nonbinding arbitration or grievances. These terms must be set forth in writing and signed 
by the designated representative of the parties involved. An agreement is not effective until 
it has been ratified, as specified. An agreement is not valid if it extends for less than 
one year or more than four years. 
 
Finally, the provisions of the bill may not be construed as authorizing or allowing a 
correctional deputy to engage in a strike, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Numerous counties in Maryland, including Allegany, Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Cecil, 
Charles, 
Frederick, 
Harford, 
Howard, 
Montgomery, 
and 
Prince George’s counties have collective bargaining for deputy sheriffs. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Calvert County may incur expenditures to facilitate the collective 
bargaining process authorized by the bill. Calvert County expenditures may further 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 767/ Page 3 
increase if, and to the extent that, personnel costs under any negotiated agreement are 
higher than they would have otherwise been. Any potential expenditures cannot be reliably 
estimated in advance, and any additional funding required due to the collective bargaining 
process is subject to approval by the county commissioners. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3