START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 740 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 740 
(Senator Folden, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Care Facilities - Service Member Community Members (SFC Matthew 
Fast Act ) 
 
 
This bill authorizes each “health care facility” to screen each patient for information on the 
patient’s eligibility as a “service member community member” and include the information 
in the patient’s medical record. For the purpose of improving health care equity for service 
member community members, each health care facility may identify service member 
community members as a vulnerable population and comply with the standards associated 
with the National Patient Safety Goal to Improve Health Care Equity established by the 
Joint Commission. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can implement the bill using 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Health care facility” means a facility or an office where health care is 
provided to patients by a health care practitioner or group of health care practitioners 
licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by law to provide health care services. “Health 
care facility” includes a hospital, a freestanding medical facility, a nursing facility, a 
residential treatment center, a rehabilitation facility, and a facility operated by MDH, the 
Behavioral Health Administration (BHA), or a health officer.  
 
“Service member community member” means a service member, a veteran, the spouse of 
a service member or veteran, or a child or stepchild of a service member or veteran. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 740/ Page 2 
“Service member” means an individual who is a member of the uniformed services or a 
reserve component of the uniformed services. 
 
Current Law:  MDH owns and operates various health care facilities, including inpatient 
psychiatric hospitals, regional institutes for children and adolescents, and developmental 
disabilities centers. BHA specifically operates five psychiatric facilities. Some local health 
officers oversee clinics at local health departments.  
 
“Hospital” means an institution that (1) has a group of at least five physicians who are 
organized as medical staff for the institution; (2) maintains facilities to provide, under the 
supervision of medical staff, diagnostic and treatment services for two or more unrelated 
individuals; and (3) admits or retains the individuals for overnight care.  
 
“Freestanding medical facility” means a facility (1) in which medical and health services 
are provided; (2) is physically separate from a hospital or hospital grounds, as specified; 
(3) that is an administrative part of a hospital; or (4) that meets the requirements for 
provider-based status under the certification for an affiliated hospital as set forth by the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.  
 
“Nursing facility” means a facility that provides skilled nursing care and related services, 
rehabilitation services, and health related care and services above the level of room and 
board needed on a regular basis in accordance with the federal Social Security Act. 
 
“Residential treatment center” means a psychiatric institution that provides campus-based 
intensive and extensive evaluation and treatment of children and adolescents with severe 
and chronic emotional disturbances who require a self-contained therapeutic, educational, 
and recreational program in a residential setting. 
 
“Comprehensive rehabilitation facility” means (1) any person that provides or holds 
himself out as providing comprehensive physical rehabilitation services on an outpatient 
basis, or (2) a hospital that is licensed as a special rehabilitation hospital. 
 
Service Members 
 
Pursuant to 37 U.S.C. § 101, “uniformed services” means the Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Marine Corps, Space Force, Coast Guard, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, and Public Health Service. “Reserve component” means the 
Army National Guard of the United States, Army Reserve, Navy Reserve, Marine Corps 
Reserve, Air National Guard of the United States, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard Reserve, 
or Reserve Corps of the Public Health Service. Under the State Government Article, except 
as otherwise provided, “veteran” means an individual who served on active duty in the 
armed forces of the United States, other than for training, and was discharged or released 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 740/ Page 3 
under conditions other than dishonorable. Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 101, “veteran” means a 
person who served in the active military, naval, air, or space service, and who was 
discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Joint Commission is a nonprofit organization that evaluates 
health care organizations and encourages safe and effective health care. The 
Joint Commission’s National Patient Safety Goal to Improve Health Care Equity aims to 
identify and address disparities in health care quality and access. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Military Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2025 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3