START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

Chapter 218

(Senate Bill 867)

AN ACT concerning

Cyber Maryland Program – Revisions

FOR the purpose of transferring the Cyber Maryland Program from the Maryland
Technology Development Corporation to the Maryland Department of Labor;
altering the duties of the Program; requiring the Program to award certain
competitive grants and contracts; altering the purposes for which the Cyber
Maryland Fund may be used; altering certain funding requirements related to the
Program; ~~requiring~~ ~~that~~ ~~unused~~ ~~balances~~ ~~from~~ ~~certain~~ ~~programs~~ ~~and~~ ~~funds~~ ~~be~~
~~transferred~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~close~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~fiscal~~ ~~year;~~ altering the membership of
the Cyber Maryland Board; and generally relating to the Cyber Maryland Program.

BY transferring
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–491 and the part “Part XI. Miscellaneous”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)
to be
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–1701 and the subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 11–1701 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 17. Cyber Maryland
Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 10–491 and the part “Part XI. Miscellaneous” of Article – Economic
Development of the Annotated Code of Maryland be transferred to be Section(s) 11–1701
and the subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous” of Article – Labor and Employment of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Subtitle 17. [Miscellaneous] CYBER MARYLAND PROGRAM.

11–1701.

(a) [(1)] In this [section] SUBTITLE the following words have the meanings
indicated.

[(2)] (B) “Board” means the Cyber Maryland Board.

[(3)] (C) “Fund” means the Cyber Maryland Fund.

[(4)] (D) “Program” means the Cyber Maryland Program.

11–1702.

[(b)] (A) There is a Cyber Maryland Program in the [Corporation]
DEPARTMENT.

[(c)] (B) The purposes of the Program are to:

(1) create and execute a talent pipeline that materially reduces workforce
vacancies by July 1, 2026;

(2) serve as a one–stop shop for employers seeking to leverage cyber
workforce development programs offered by the State and its partners;

(3) inform cybersecurity training and education programs operated by
public or private entities with industry–driven needs;

(4) build the most advanced local and State information technology
workforce in the nation, which, to the maximum extent possible, reflects the racial, gender,
ethnic, and geographic diversity of the State;

(5) coordinate and accelerate cybersecurity research and innovation in the
State; and

(6) support the efforts of the Department of Information Technology to
improve the State government’s cybersecurity posture, including State agencies, local
government units, and critical infrastructure.

[(d)] (C) The Program shall:

(1) conduct ongoing research by collaborating with the Cybersecurity
Association [of Maryland], Inc., Cybersecurity Talent Advisory Board to collect and analyze

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

real–time industry data to identify cybersecurity workforce needs as described in the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach;

(2) use the results of the research described in item (1) of this subsection
to increase the effectiveness of existing State cybersecurity workforce programs for
employers in the State;

(3) facilitate partnerships for new training and education programs to
address the workforce needs identified under item (1) of this subsection;

(4) develop a statewide strategic plan for cybersecurity workforce
development, using the results of the research described in item (1) of this subsection and
with input from the Cybersecurity Association [of Maryland], Inc., Cybersecurity Talent
Advisory Board on or before December 1, 2023; [and]

(5) DEVELOP, PROMOTE, SUPPORT, AND INVEST IN TALENT
IMPROVEMENT STRATEGIES, SUCH AS STRATEGIES THAT LEVERAGE THE U.S.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE TALENT PIPELINE MANAGEMENT APPROACH; AND

[(5)] (6) ensure that outcomes of the Program are inclusive and, to the
maximum extent practicable, reflect the racial, gender, ethnic, and geographic diversity of
the State.

(D) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE PROGRAM, IN CONSULTATION
WITH THE BOARD, SHALL AWARD COMPETITIVE GRANTS OR CONTRACTS FOR
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OPERATIONAL~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ TO ENHANCE
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING CYBERSECURITY FOR
OPERATIONAL TECHNOLOGY.

11–1703.

[(e) (1)] (A) There is a Cyber Maryland Fund.

[(2)] (B) The purposes of the Fund are to:

[(i)] (1) achieve the purposes identified under [subsection (c) of
this section] § 11–1702(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE; and

[(ii)] (2) support innovative approaches to meeting cybersecurity
workforce needs.

[(3)] (C) The [Corporation] DEPARTMENT shall administer the Fund.

[(4) (i)] (D) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not
subject to § 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(ii)] (2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and
the Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

[(5)] (E) The Fund consists of:

[(i)] (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; [and]

(2) MONEY TRANSFERRED TO THE FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (M) OF THIS SECTION; AND

[(ii)] (3) any other money from any other source accepted for the
benefit of the Fund.

[(6)] (F) The Fund may be used only for:

[(i)] (1) administrative expenses of the Program, including hiring
staff in accordance with the State budget and hiring consultants and other professionals as
necessary to implement, maintain, and administer the Program and the Fund; and

[(ii)] (2) providing grants to elementary and secondary schools,
institutions of higher education, including community colleges, EMPLOYERS, INCLUDING
for–profit corporations, [and] nonprofit organizations, REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
SPONSORS, LOCAL WORKFORCE BOARDS, INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS, LABOR UNIONS,
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, LOCAL OR REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ENTITIES,
AND OTHER RELEVANT PARTNER ENTITIES AT THE DEPARTMENT’S DISCRETION to
operate cybersecurity programs based on the strategic plan of the Program.

[(7)] (G) The [Corporation] DEPARTMENT shall adopt standards to
award grants under this section.

[(8) (i)] (H) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the
Fund in the same manner as other State money may be invested.

[(ii)] (2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the
General Fund of the State.

[(9)] (I) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance
with the State budget.

[(10)] (J) (1) For fiscal year [2025 and each year thereafter] 2026, the
Governor[:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

(i) shall] MAY include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of
[$99,000] $3,100,000 for the Fund to be used for [talent pipeline management; and

(ii) may include in the annual budget bill an additional
appropriation of $250,000 for the Fund] THE AWARDING OF GRANTS AND CONTRACTS
UNDER § 11–1702(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE ALIGNED WITH THE STRATEGY OF AND
APPROVED BY THE BOARD.

(2) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2027 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION SUFFICIENT TO RUN THE PROGRAM.

(3) THE PROGRAM SHALL SEEK ALTERNATE FUNDING SOURCES TO
INCLUDE COST–SHARING OR COST–MATCHING AGREEMENTS FROM PARTNERS
SOURCES OTHER THAN THE STATE, INCLUDING THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, THE
PRIVATE SECTOR, AND PHILANTHROPY, TO DOUBLE SUPPLEMENT THE MONEY
APPROPRIATED TO THE FUND UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

[(11)] (K) Subject to the availability of funding, for fiscal year 2025 and
each year thereafter, $250,000 of the Fund shall be used for implementing the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach.

[(12)] (L) The Governor shall MAY include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation in an amount sufficient for the Program, INCLUDING TO HIRE SUFFICIENT
STAFF TO CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES.

(M) NOTWITHSTANDING § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, THE UNSPENT
~~BALANCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FOLLOWING~~ ~~PROGRAMS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
FISCAL YEAR SHALL BE TRANSFERRED TO THE FUND AT THE CLOSE OF THAT FISCAL
~~YEAR:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~EMPLOYMENT~~ ~~ADVANCEMENT~~ ~~RIGHT~~ ~~NOW~~ ~~PROGRAM;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~CYBERSECURITY~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~CREDIT;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~BUY~~ ~~MARYLAND~~ ~~CYBERSECURITY~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~CREDIT;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~CYBERSECURITY~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~FUND;~~

(5) PATHWAYS IN TECHNOLOGY EARLY COLLEGE HIGH SCHOOL
~~PROGRAM;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~CYBER~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~SCHOLARSHIP;~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(7)~~ ~~MARYLAND~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~INTERNSHIP~~ ~~PROGRAM;~~

(8) MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR INNOVATIVE COMPUTING;

~~(9)~~ ~~ACCELERATING~~ ~~CYBER~~ ~~CAREERS~~ ~~PROGRAM;~~

(10) UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE COUNTY’S CENTER FOR
~~CYBERSECURITY;~~

(11) BUILD OUR FUTURE GRANT PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(12) REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS IN CYBERSECURITY.

11–1704.

[(f) (1)] (A) There is a Cyber Maryland Board.

[(2)] (B) The Board consists of the following members:

[(i)] (1) the Senate and House of Delegates cochairs of the Joint
Committee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Biotechnology;

[(ii)] (2) the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee;

[(iii)] (3) the Secretary of [Labor] COMMERCE, or the Secretary’s
designee;

[(iv)] (4) the Maryland Secretary of Veterans and Military
Families, or the Secretary’s designee;

[(v)] (5) the Secretary of Information Technology, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(6) THE SECRETARY OF HIGHER EDUCATION, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(7) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, OR THE
SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE;

[(vi)] (8) the Chair of the Board of Directors of the Cybersecurity
Association [of Maryland], Inc., or the Chair’s designee;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

[(vii)] (9) the Chair of the Maryland Workforce Association, or the
Chair’s designee;

(10) THE ADJUTANT GENERAL, OR THE ADJUTANT GENERAL’S
DESIGNEE;

(10) (11) THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE MARYLAND
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (TEDCO), OR THE CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S DESIGNEE; AND

[(viii)] (11) (12) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

[1.] (I) five members from the private sector with
cybersecurity needs;

[2.] (II) one representative from a nonprofit organization
with expertise in cybersecurity talent development;

[3.] (III) one representative from a community college;

[4.] (IV) one representative from a 4–year, public HBCU
college; and

[5.] (V) one representative from a 4–year, public college[;
and

(ix) the Chief Executive Officer, or the Chief Executive Officer’s
designee].

[(3) (i)] (C) (1) Subject to [subparagraph (ii)] PARAGRAPH (2) of
this [paragraph] SUBSECTION, the members of the Board shall elect a chair from among
the members of the Board.

[(ii)] (2) The chair may not be:

[1.] (I) a State employee; or

[2.] (II) the Chief Executive Officer OF THE MARYLAND
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (TEDCO).

[(4)] (D) The Board shall:

[(i)] (1) provide input regarding the development of the statewide
cybersecurity workforce development strategic plan required under [subsection (d)(4) of
this section] § 11–1702(C)(4) OF THIS SUBTITLE;
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(ii)] (2) assist the Program with stakeholder outreach and
engagement;

[(iii)] (3) help the Program explore synergies where appropriate
with cybersecurity workforce development efforts by regional and county workforce
development entities;

[(iv)] (4) coordinate as necessary with the [Maryland] Department
of [Labor] COMMERCE and the Department; and

[(v)] (5) provide other advice and support for the Program.

[(5)] (E) A member of the Board:

[(i)] (1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Board;
but

[(ii)] (2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the
Standard State Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

[(6) The Governor may remove an appointed member of the Board for
incompetence, misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the position.]

(F) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD
SHALL REFLECT THE RACIAL, GENDER, AGE, AND GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY OF THE
STATE.

(G) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER OF THE BOARD IS 4 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR APPOINTED MEMBERS OF THE BOARD ON
~~OCTOBER~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025.~~

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, AN APPOINTED MEMBER CONTINUES TO
SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~AND~~
QUALIFIES THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT BYLAWS THAT ESTABLISH STAGGERED TERMS
FOR THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD AND PROCEDURES GOVERNING VACANCIES IN
MEMBERSHIP.

11–1705.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

[(g)] (A) On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2026, the Program, in
conjunction with the [Corporation] DEPARTMENT, shall submit a report on the operation
and performance of the Program to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, the General Assembly.

(B) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE KEY PERFORMANCE METRICS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT
THAT ARE ALIGNED WITH THE STATE STRATEGY AND GOALS FOR THE PROGRAM
AND THE PROGRESS OF THE PROGRAM AGAINST THOSE METRICS.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Cyber Maryland Program, in conjunction with the Maryland Department
of Labor and the Cyber Maryland Board, shall report on cyber workforce program activities
determined relevant by the Program through collaboration with relevant departments and
entities, including:

(1) Employment Advancement Right Now Program;

(2) Pathways in Technology Early College High School;

(3) Cyber Public Service Scholarship;

(4) Maryland Technology Internship Program;

(5) Maryland Institute for Innovative Computing;

(6) Accelerating Cyber Careers Program;

(7) University of Maryland Baltimore County’s Center for Cybersecurity;

(8) Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program; and

(9) Registered Apprenticeships in Cybersecurity.

(b) The report required under subsection (a) of this section shall capture the
following data for each program:

(1) program outputs, such as the number of program participants served;

(2) program outcomes, such as the impact of or changes resulting from the
program;

(3) the performance targets for program outputs and outcomes; and

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) if possible, the return on program investments.

(c) On or before December 1, 2026, the Cyber Maryland Program, in conjunction
with the Maryland Department of Labor, shall submit the report to the Governor and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That

~~(a)~~ ~~It~~ it is the intent of the General Assembly that:

(1) the amounts awarded in grants and contracts under § 11–702(d) of the
Labor and Employment Article, as enacted by Section 2 of this Act, ~~not~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~the~~ ~~following:~~

~~(1)~~ may be allocated to provide $1,000,000 for the establishment of
cybersecurity clinics;, including clinics related to operational technology, that:

(i) are focused on ensuring individuals attain hands–on
cybersecurity skills to protect critical infrastructure sectors including emergency services,
water, elementary and secondary schools, health care, energy, small businesses, and
nonprofit entities;

(ii) provide cyber awareness and training to customers;

(iii) perform cybersecurity assessments for customers;

(iv) provide recommendations for necessary remediations;

(v) install free or reduced–cost cybersecurity tools as part of the
grant or at a reduced rate to the end customer; or

(vi) provide additional cybersecurity tasks as appropriate; and

(2) the balance of the Cyber Maryland Fund be used to implement
initiatives approved by the Cyber Maryland Board, including strategies to support
transitioning veterans, existing worker training, education for kindergarten through 12th
grade students at summer camps, the Maryland Statewide Computing Alignment to Locate
your Education Scale (SCALE) portal, a marketing campaign for the Cyber Maryland
Brand to attract talent to the State, and others outlined in the statewide strategic plan
required under § 11–1702(c)(4) of the Labor and Employment Article.

~~(2)~~ ~~$500,000~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~the~~ ~~development~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~service–based~~ ~~learning~~ ~~program~~ ~~for~~ ~~cybersecurity;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~$500,000~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~transitioning~~ ~~veterans~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~who~~ ~~have~~
~~cyber~~ ~~skills,~~ ~~adjacent~~ ~~skills,~~ ~~or~~ ~~relevant~~ ~~clearances~~ ~~acquired~~ ~~during~~ ~~their~~ ~~service;~~

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 218

~~(4)~~ ~~$99,000~~ ~~for~~ ~~talent~~ ~~pipeline~~ ~~management~~ ~~aligned~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~framework~~
~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~U.S.~~ ~~Chamber~~ ~~of~~ ~~Commerce~~ ~~Foundation.~~

~~(5)~~ ~~$250,000~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~existing~~ ~~or~~ ~~develop~~ ~~new~~ ~~programs~~ ~~and~~ ~~incentives~~
~~for~~ ~~existing~~ ~~worker~~ ~~training;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~$250,000~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~cybersecurity~~ ~~education~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~kindergarten,~~
~~elementary~~ ~~school,~~ ~~and~~ ~~secondary~~ ~~school~~ ~~levels,~~ ~~including~~ ~~at~~ ~~summer~~ ~~camps;~~

~~(7)~~ ~~$250,000~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~marketing~~ ~~campaign,~~ ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Commerce,~~ ~~to~~ ~~attract~~ ~~cyber~~ ~~talent~~ ~~and~~ ~~industry~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ ~~and~~

~~(8)~~ ~~$250,000~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Statewide~~ ~~Computing~~ ~~Alignment~~ ~~to~~ ~~Locate~~
~~your~~ ~~Education~~ ~~(SCALE)~~ ~~portal.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~It~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~intent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~cybersecurity~~ ~~clinics~~ ~~under~~
~~subsection~~ ~~(a)(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~include~~ ~~five~~ ~~pilot~~ ~~programs,~~ ~~with~~ ~~each~~ ~~pilot~~ ~~program~~ ~~focused~~ ~~on~~ ~~one~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~customer~~ ~~groups:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~emergency~~ ~~services;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~water;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~elementary~~ ~~and~~ ~~secondary~~ ~~schools;~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~health;~~ ~~and~~

~~(v)~~ ~~small~~ ~~businesses~~ ~~and~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~entities;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~will:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~provide~~ ~~cyber~~ ~~awareness~~ ~~and~~ ~~training~~ ~~to~~ ~~customers;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~perform~~ ~~cybersecurity~~ ~~assessments~~ ~~for~~ ~~customers;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~provide~~ ~~recommendations~~ ~~for~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~remediations;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~install~~ ~~free~~ ~~or~~ ~~reduced–cost~~ ~~cybersecurity~~ ~~tools~~ ~~as~~ ~~part~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~grant~~ ~~or~~ ~~at~~ ~~a~~ ~~reduced~~ ~~rate~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~customer.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~4.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~initial~~
~~appointed~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Cyber~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~expire~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~three~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2026;~~

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 218 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(2)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2027;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2028;~~ ~~and~~

~~(4)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2029.~~

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 22, 2025.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12