START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 880 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 880 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Governor's Office for Children - Boys and Girls Clubs of Maryland - Grant 
Funding 
 
 
This bill requires, for fiscal 2027 through 2030, the Governor to include $250,000 in the 
annual budget bill for the Governor’s Office for Children (GOC) to provide grants to fund 
operating expenses of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Maryland. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
annually in FY 2027 through 2030, consistent with the bill’s mandated funding 
requirement. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation 
for FY 2027 through 2030. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  GOC provides a coordinated, comprehensive, interagency approach to 
(1) promoting the well-being of children and families through a network of supports, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 880/ Page 2 
programs, and services that are family- and child-oriented and (2) reducing the number of 
children living in poverty. Led by a Special Secretary, GOC activities include staffing the 
Children’s Cabinet; administering the Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund; administering 
the Engaging Neighborhoods, Organizations, Unions, Governments, and Households 
program and fund; providing technical assistance to local management boards; improving 
community health and safety with its partners; and measuring results for child well-being. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually for 
fiscal 2027 through 2030, reflecting the mandated appropriation for GOC to provide grants 
to fund operating expenses of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Maryland. GOC advises that it 
can provide these grants with existing staff resources. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $1.0 million for GOC for the purpose of providing an operating 
grant to the Boys & Girls Clubs of Maryland to expand services and $80,000 for GOC to 
provide a grant to the Boys & Girls Club of Southern Maryland. In recent years, funding 
has been provided in the budget for specific Boys & Girls Clubs. Although funding for 
similar purposes may have been appropriated absent the bill, this estimate accounts for the 
full amount of the mandated appropriation.  
 
Additional Comments:  Founded in 1906, Boys & Girls Clubs of America aim to enable 
all young people to reach their full potential as productive, caring, responsible citizens. 
There are 16 Boys & Girls Clubs in Maryland. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2025 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2