START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 830 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 830 
(Senator Hayes) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Workers' Compensation - Claims Application Form - Authorization for Release 
of Information 
 
 
This bill expands the list of entities authorized to receive certain information related to 
specified workers’ compensation claims to include the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF), 
the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF), and their agents; the bill also expands the information 
that must be authorized to be shared with these and other entities involved in those workers’ 
compensation claims, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill may result in administrative efficiencies for UEF and SIF in 
adjudicating workers’ compensation claims. Minimal special fund revenue increase for the 
Maryland Insurance Administration from the $125 rate and form filing fee in FY 2026 
only; review of the filings can be handled with existing budgeted resources. General fund 
revenues from the premium tax are not materially affected. Otherwise, State expenditures 
(all funds) for workers’ compensation are anticipated to decrease minimally, as discussed 
below.  
 
Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (Chesapeake) Effect:  Chesapeake 
expenditures decrease minimally from administrative cost savings. Chesapeake revenues 
decrease minimally as the cost savings result in fewer premium revenues collected from 
Chesapeake insureds, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures for workers’ compensation are anticipated 
to decrease minimally, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 830/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, if an employee covered under workers’ 
compensation insurance has suffered an accidental personal injury, compensable hernia, or 
occupational disease, the employee is entitled to compensation benefits paid by the 
employer, its insurer, SIF, or UEF, as appropriate. Workers’ compensation benefits include 
wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation expenses. Workers’ 
Compensation Law specifies the processes that must take place for a covered employee, or 
the dependents of the covered employee, to file a workers’ compensation claim. Directly 
related to the bill, a claim application form must be completed and filed with the Workers’ 
Compensation Commission (WCC) within a specified timeframe for: 
 
 
a covered employee to file a claim for an accidental personal injury; 
 
the dependents of a covered employee (or an individual acting on their behalf) to 
file a claim for an accidental personal injury that results in the death of the covered 
employee; or 
 
a covered employee, or the dependents of the covered employee, to file a claim for 
an occupational disease that results in disablement or death. 
 
Under current law, each of these application forms must include an authorization by the 
claimant for the release of medical information that is relevant to the member of the body 
that was injured and the description of how the injury (or occupational disease) occurred 
to (1) the claimant’s attorney; (2) the claimant’s employer; and (3) the insurer of the 
claimant’s attorney. The form must also authorize the release of this information to an 
agent of one of these entities. 
 
Under the bill, each of the application forms must also (1) allow the release of the 
information to UEF, SIF, and their agents and (2) authorize the release of medical and 
financial information that may be, instead of is, relevant to the member of the body that 
was injured and the description of how the injury (or occupational disease) occurred. 
 
Under current law, this authorization (1) includes the release of information relating to the 
history, findings, office and patient charts, files, examination and progress notes, and 
physical evidence; (2) is effective for one year from the date the claim is filed; and (3) does 
not restrict the redisclosure of medical information or written material relating to the 
authorization to a medical manager, health care professional, or certified rehabilitation 
practitioner. 
 
Under the bill, the authorization must also include the release of information in the custody 
of WCC and include the release of information relating to additional claims filed by the 
claimant. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 830/ Page 3 
State/Chesapeake/Local/Small Business Effect:  Chesapeake advises that, under current 
law, it is often required to issue a subpoena to access certain financial and medical 
information related to a claim; Chesapeake pays a fee of $90 to its service processor 
per subpoena. When subpoenas are issued on behalf of the State or a self-insured local 
government, these costs are directly paid by the State or local government; whereas these 
additional costs are reflected in the premiums Chesapeake charges to the local governments 
and private businesses (including small businesses) that it insures.  
 
Under the bill, much of this information will, instead, be available through the 
authorization on a claimant’s application form, resulting in fewer subpoenas being issued 
by Chesapeake. As these administrative costs decrease, expenditures by the State, 
self-insured local governments, and Chesapeake decrease correspondingly. Additionally, 
because Chesapeake advises that any cost savings it experiences will decrease the 
premiums it charges to its insureds, expenditures for local governments and small 
businesses insured by Chesapeake also decrease and Chesapeake revenues decrease 
correspondingly. Similar impacts are anticipated for local governments and small 
businesses insured by other workers’ compensation insurers as well. 
 
A precise estimate of the bill’s impact ultimately depends on how many subpoenas would 
be issued by Chesapeake and other workers’ compensation insurers absent the bill, which 
is unknown. Nevertheless, Chesapeake advises, and the Department of Legislative Services 
concurs, that cost savings for the State, local governments, Chesapeake, and small 
businesses due to the bill are anticipated to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury 
Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 830/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - August 13, 2025 
 
caw/smr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4