START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 820 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 820 
(Senators Watson and Rosapepe) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Municipalities - Enforcement of Ordinances and Resolutions 
 
 
This bill increases, from $1,000 to $5,000, the maximum fine that may be imposed by a 
municipality for the enforcement of a misdemeanor or municipal infraction, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues increase to the extent higher fines are imposed 
for misdemeanors and municipal infractions under the bill. Local government expenditures 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A penalty for a violation of a municipal ordinance or resolution that is a 
misdemeanor under local law may not exceed six months of imprisonment or a fine of 
$1,000 or both. 
 
A municipality may classify as a municipal infraction (1) a violation of an ordinance or 
regulation concerning zoning and land use and (2) littering in the municipality, as specified. 
A municipality may impose a fine up to $1,000 for each municipal infraction. A municipal 
infraction is a civil offense. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 820/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1506 (Delegate Taylor) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2