START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 871 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 871 
(Senator Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation and 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Department of the Environment - Community Water and Sewerage Systems - 
Cybersecurity Planning and Assessments 
 
 
This bill establishes various requirements for the Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE), the Department of Information Technology (DoIT), the Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management (MDEM), and community water system (CWS) and community 
sewerage system (CSS) providers, related to planning and preparing for cybersecurity 
attacks on CWS and CSS and the water and wastewater sector. The bill also amends 
Maryland’s Public Information Act (PIA) to prohibit the inspection of public records 
relating to the security of “operational technology” or “critical infrastructure.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DoIT and MDEM increase by an estimated 
$271,700 in FY 2026; out-years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. State 
expenditures (multiple fund types) for any affected State-owned systems may increase 
beginning as early as FY 2026. State revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
271,700 
311,539 
320,818 
330,542 
340,479 
Exp. (Mult. Funds) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local expenditures beginning as early as 
FY 2026 for affected local systems to comply with the bill’s requirements. Local revenues 
are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 871/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment – New Requirements  
 
In coordination with DoIT and MDEM, MDE must coordinate cybersecurity efforts within 
CWS and CSS. In consultation with DoIT, MDE must: 
 
 
update regulations governing CWS and CSS to include comprehensive 
cybersecurity standards for water and wastewater treatment facilities and require 
CWS and CSS providers to report cyber incidents, as specified; 
 
promulgate minimum cybersecurity standards for established CWS and CSS that 
that meet or exceed the federal Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency’s 
cross-sector cybersecurity performance goals; 
 
require CWS and CSS to plan for service disruptions due to cyber incidents, as 
specified; 
 
establish a list of approved cybersecurity training programs for staff that are 
responsible for maintaining or operating water or wastewater facilities; and 
 
implement measures to protect its active certified operators list on its website while 
ensuring legitimate access for necessary purposes. 
 
The bill expresses the General Assembly’s intent that MDE, in consultation with DoIT, 
conduct a comprehensive education campaign targeted at the water and wastewater sector 
that emphasizes the economic value of cybersecurity prevention over remediation. The 
education campaign must include mention of specified information and materials. By  
July 1, 2026, MDE must report to the General Assembly on its efforts related to the 
education campaign. 
 
The bill also expresses the General Assembly’s intent that MDE work closely with the  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Defense, and other 
relevant organizations to identify and access resources available for local CWS and CSS. 
 
MDE must also include cybersecurity awareness components for all new and renewing 
operator and superintendent certifications issued under Title 12 of the Environment Article 
(which governs waterworks and waste system operators). 
 
In addition, by July 1, 2026, and every two years thereafter, MDE must report to the 
General Assembly on water system compliance and progress made regarding the 
implementation of the requirements established under the new subtitle established by the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 871/ Page 3 
bill (Title 9, Subtitle 27 of the Environment Article, Community Water and Sewerage 
System Cybersecurity). 
 
Department of Information Technologies – New Requirements 
 
DoIT must: 
 
 
employ a person who is trained in the cybersecurity of operational technology to 
(1) work with the State Chief Information Security Officer (SCISO) and the Cyber 
Preparedness Unit (CPU) within MDEM to support efforts related to water systems 
and other critical infrastructure and (2) coordinate with MDEM and local 
government information security officers to assist in protecting CWS and CSS; 
 
allow members of the State’s water and wastewater sector to join the Maryland 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center to strengthen cybersecurity efforts and 
information sharing; and 
 
in consultation with MDE, develop and promote a cybersecurity guidance document 
that meets specified requirements.  
 
Additionally, by October 1, 2026, and every two years thereafter, DoIT’s Office of Security 
Management (OSM) must (1) collect certifications of compliance from each CWS and CSS 
provider for compliance with standards used in the assessments conducted under the bill 
for cybersecurity-related policies and procedures and (2) submit a report to the SCISO or 
the officer’s designee. 
 
“Operational technology” means programmable systems or devices that interact with the 
physical environment by detecting or causing a direct change through the monitoring or 
control of devise, process, and events. The term includes industrial control systems, 
building management systems, fire control systems, and physical access control systems. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management – New Requirements 
 
MDEM’s CPU, in coordination with the SCISO, must: 
 
 
assist local governments in providing guidance to local emergency management 
organizations for incidents against water and wastewater facilities; and 
 
develop guidance for crisis and emergency risk communication for local emergency 
management organizations in the State. 
 
MDEM must also include cybersecurity attack information on its website. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 871/ Page 4 
The bill also expresses the General Assembly’s intent that MDEM prioritize tabletop 
exercises focused on water cybersecurity. 
 
Community Water Systems and Community Sewerage Systems – New Requirements 
 
All CWS and CSS providers in the State must (1) appoint a primary cybersecurity point of 
contact to interact with the appropriate local emergency manager and DoIT regarding 
cybersecurity-related matters and (2) attend annual trainings to improve cybersecurity 
awareness. 
 
CWS and CSS providers that serve more than 3,000 customers must: 
 
 
adopt and implement cybersecurity standards that meet or exceed the standards 
adopted by MDE under the bill; 
 
commit to adopting a zero-trust cybersecurity approach and begin planning and 
implementing the approach, as appropriate for each system, for on-premises service 
and cloud-based services, as specified; and 
 
by July 1, 2026, and every two years thereafter, conduct a maturity assessment of 
their cybersecurity programs for operational technology and information technology 
(IT) based on the minimum cyber security standards established by MDE under the 
bill. 
 
Reporting of Cybersecurity Incidents 
 
The SCISO, in consultation with MDE, must establish a process for CWS and CSS 
providers and other members of the water and wastewater sector to report cybersecurity 
incidents. The process must include specified components. 
 
Each CWS and CSS must report a cybersecurity incident, including an attack on an 
IT system or operational technology system used by the CWS or CSS, to the SCISO. The 
State Security Operations Center must immediately notify MDE and the other appropriate 
State and local government agencies of a cybersecurity incident reported pursuant to these 
provisions. 
 
By January 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, OSM must publish a report that describes the 
number and type of cybersecurity incidents reported by CWS and CSS in the preceding 
calendar year, as specified. 
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act 
 
The bill amends PIA to provide that a custodian must deny inspection of the part of a public 
record that contains information about the security of “operational technology,” or “critical 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 871/ Page 5 
infrastructure,” including any records of a “community water system” or “community 
sewerage system,” as those terms are defined in the bill and in specified provisions of the 
Environment Article. The bill further specifies that “critical infrastructure” includes a CSS 
and a CWS. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State and Local Cybersecurity – Generally 
 
Chapters 241, 242, and 243 of 2022 expanded and enhanced the State’s regulatory 
framework for State and local government cybersecurity. Among other things, the Acts 
required additional funding for cybersecurity, established leadership positions in 
State government for cybersecurity, and codified existing cybersecurity requirements from 
a previous executive order. Together, the Acts: 
 
 
codified and expanded the duties of OSM within DoIT; 
 
established the positions of Director of State Cybersecurity and Director of Local 
Cybersecurity within OSM; 
 
established CPU within MDEM and require the unit to, among other duties,  
(1) support local governments in developing a vulnerability assessment and cyber 
assessment; (2) develop and regularly update an online database of cybersecurity 
training resources, including specified resources; (3) assist local governments in the 
development of cybersecurity preparedness and response plans; and (4) assist local 
governments in implementing specified best practices and guidance;  
 
require State and local governments to conduct cybersecurity preparedness 
assessments within specified timeframes; 
 
require DoIT to develop a centralization transition strategy toward cybersecurity 
centralization for State and local governments; and 
 
require each local government to report a cybersecurity incident to the appropriate 
local emergency manager, the SCISO, and the Maryland Joint Operations Center in 
MDEM. 
 
Chapter 243 also required, by December 1, 2023, a public or private water or sewer system 
that serves a minimum of 10,000 users and receives financial assistance from the State to 
(1) assess its vulnerability to a cyberattack; (2) if appropriate, develop a cybersecurity plan; 
and (3) submit a report to the General Assembly on the findings of the assessment and any 
recommendations for statutory changes needed for the system to appropriately address its 
cybersecurity. Chapter 243 also authorized MDE’s Maryland Water Quality Financing 
Administration (now called the Maryland Water Infrastructure Financing Administration) 
to provide financial assistance to a public water or wastewater system to assess 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities and develop a cybersecurity plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 871/ Page 6 
Maryland Cybersecurity Council 
 
The Maryland Cybersecurity Council is required to work with the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), as well as other federal agencies, private-sector 
businesses, and private cybersecurity experts to address State cybersecurity issues. The 
council’s responsibilities include, among other things: 
 
 
for critical infrastructure not covered by federal law, reviewing and conducting risk 
assessments to determine which local infrastructure sectors are at the greatest risk 
of cyber attacks and need the most enhanced cybersecurity measures; 
 
using federal guidance to identify categories of critical infrastructure as critical 
cyber infrastructure if cyber damage or unauthorized cyber access to the 
infrastructure could reasonably result in catastrophic consequences, including 
(1) interruption in the provision of energy, water, transportation, emergency 
services, food, or other life-sustaining services sufficient to cause a mass casualty 
event or mass evacuations; (2) catastrophic economic damage; or (3) severe 
degradation of State or national security; 
 
assisting specified infrastructure entities in complying with federal cybersecurity 
guidance;  
 
assisting private-sector cybersecurity businesses in adopting, adapting, and 
implementing the NIST cybersecurity framework of standards and practices; and 
 
examining inconsistencies between State and federal cybersecurity laws. 
 
Cybersecurity and Public Service Companies 
 
“Critical infrastructure” is defined in § 1-101 of the Public Utilities Article to mean assets, 
systems, and networks, whether physical or virtual, considered by the U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) to be so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or 
destruction would have a debilitating effect on one or more of the following:  (1) security; 
(2) national economic security; (3) national public health; or (4) safety. The term includes 
a hospital or health care facility and a data center. 
 
Chapter 499 of 2023 established cybersecurity requirements for the Public Service 
Commission (PSC) and public service companies. Among other things, PSC is required to 
have at least one cybersecurity expert on its staff, and, in supervising and regulating public 
service companies, PSC must also consider the protection of a public service company’s 
infrastructure against cyberattack threats. PSC must collaborate with OSM to establish 
cybersecurity standards and best practices for regulated entities, taking into account utility 
needs and capabilities based on size. PSC must periodically share information on 
cybersecurity initiatives and best practices with municipal electric utilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 871/ Page 7 
Among other requirements, each public service company, except common carriers and 
telephone companies, must adopt and implement cybersecurity standards that are equal to 
or exceed the standards adopted by PSC, adopt a zero-trust cybersecurity approach for 
on-premises services and cloud-based services, and establish minimum security standards 
for each operational technology and IT device. 
 
“Public service company” means a common carrier company, electric company, 
gas company, sewage disposal company, telegraph company, telephone company, 
water company, or any combination of public service companies. 
 
PSC adopted regulations in December 2024 to implement Chapter 499. (See DLS Control 
No. 24-070P). 
 
Safe Drinking Water Act and Community Water Systems 
 
MDE is responsible for the primary enforcement (primacy) of the federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act (SDWA) in Maryland. This means MDE is charged with ensuring that the water 
quality and quantity at all public water systems meet the needs of the public and are in 
compliance with federal and State regulations. According to MDE’s Safe Drinking Water 
Act Annual Compliance Report for Calendar Year 2023 to EPA, routine compliance 
activities include regular on-site inspections of water systems to identify any sanitary 
defects in the systems, technical assistance, and a permitting process that helps ensure that 
systems obtain the best possible source of water. 
 
A “CWS” means a public water system that serves at least 15 service connections used by 
year-round residents of the area served by the system, or that regularly serves at least 
25 year-round residents. Maryland regulates 3,233 public water systems (461 CWS, 
539 non-transient non-CWS, and 2,233 transient non-CWS). 
 
Under SDWA, EPA sets standards for drinking water quality and oversees the states, 
localities, and water suppliers who implement those standards. In 2018, SDWA was 
amended by the America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 (AWIA). AWIA § 2013 
requires CWS serving more than 3,300 people to develop or update risk assessments and 
emergency response plans (ERPs). The law specifies the components of the risk 
assessments and ERPs, including the physical and cybersecurity of the systems, and 
establishes deadlines by which water systems must certify to EPA completion of the risk 
assessment and ERP. 
 
Federal Clean Water Act and Community Sewerage Systems 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 871/ Page 8 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. MDE 
issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by controlling industrial 
and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are regulated through 
combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater discharges are regulated 
through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
 
A “CSS” means a publicly or privately owned sewerage system that serves at least two lots. 
 
County Water and Sewerage Plans  
 
Each county (including Baltimore City) must have an individual or group (with adjoining 
counties) plan that is approved by MDE that has a 10-year forecasted water and sewerage 
plan to demonstrate how safe and adequate water and sewerage facilities will be provided 
to support planned redevelopment and new growth that is outlined in their comprehensive 
land use plans. 
 
Critical Infrastructure 
 
“Critical infrastructure” is not defined under §1-101 of the Environment Article. However, 
as noted above, “critical infrastructure” is defined in § 1-101 of the Public Utilities Article 
to mean assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or virtual, considered by DHS to 
be so vital to the United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have a 
debilitating effect on one or more of the following:  (1) security; (2) national economic 
security; (3) national public health; or (4) safety. The term includes a hospital or health 
care facility and a data center. 
 
DHS identifies 16 sectors as critical infrastructure sectors, including the water and 
wastewater systems sector. 
 
Maryland Emergency Management Act 
 
Under the Maryland Emergency Management Act, each political subdivision is required to 
establish a local organization for emergency management in accordance with the State 
emergency management plan and program. Each director of a local organization for 
emergency management is directly responsible for the organization, administration, and 
operation of the local organization for emergency management. Under § 14-101 of the 
Public Safety Article, “emergency manager” means an individual whose primary duty of 
employment is to execute the mission of emergency management. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 871/ Page 9 
Maryland’s Public Information Act 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians:  Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of 
any public record at any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public 
records that are to be made available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain 
a current list of the types of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian 
must adopt reasonable rules or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely 
production and inspection of a public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, 
requires each official custodian to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records 
that are available for inspection under PIA, as specified. 
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the 
Maryland Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for 
specified personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, 
personnel and student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial 
information, and shielded criminal and police records. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Information Technology 
 
General fund expenditures for DoIT increase by $171,700 in fiscal 2026, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one cyber policy and strategy planner manager – who fulfills the bill’s requirement to 
employ a person trained in the cybersecurity of operational technology – to (1) work with 
MDE and MDEM to coordinate cybersecurity efforts within CWS and CSS and the water 
and wastewater sector; (2) work alongside the SCISO and CPU in MDEM to support 
efforts related to water systems and other critical infrastructure; (3) coordinate with MDEM 
and local government information security officers to assist in protecting CWS and CSS; 
and (4) generally provide expertise to facilitate the implementation of the bill. It includes 
a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. DoIT 
notes, and the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs, that because 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 871/ Page 10 
cybersecurity personnel are in high demand and have specialized expertise, the salary for 
the cybersecurity expert that DoIT needs to hire is relatively high.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$164,331 
Operating Expenses 
      7,369 
FY 2026 DoIT Expenditures 
$171,700 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
DoIT anticipates that one additional position is sufficient for the department to implement 
the bill. To the extent one additional position proves insufficient, general fund expenditures 
increase further. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
MDEM advises that while it has staff that focus on planning, training, and exercises for 
cyber attacks, existing staff do not have expertise specific to CWS and CSS. Thus, 
general fund expenditures for MDEM increase by approximately $100,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2026 for contractual support to develop the required guidance and to 
assist MDEM in implementing tabletop exercises focused on water cybersecurity, 
consistent with the intent established by the bill. MDEM notes that costs may be higher 
depending on the demand for its services. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment  
 
This analysis assumes that DoIT takes the lead on, or otherwise provides direct assistance 
with, many of the duties assigned to MDE under the bill. As a result, MDE advises that it 
can work with DoIT and MDEM to implement the bill with existing resources. As the bill 
envisions robust participation by MDE, to the extent that existing resources prove 
insufficient, MDE may need to request additional resources through the annual budget 
process. 
 
State Agencies as Owners/Operators of Community Water Systems and Community 
Sewerage Systems 
 
For a discussion of the potential impacts on State agencies as owners/operators of CWS 
and/or CSS, see the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local emergency managers and agencies may benefit from the 
guidance and coordination provided under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 871/ Page 11 
For a discussion of the potential impacts on local governments as owners/operators of CWS 
or CSS, see the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide cybersecurity services, including 
cybersecurity assessments, benefit from an increase in the demand for their services. 
Consumers (which include small businesses) benefit from increased cybersecurity at CWS 
and CSS throughout the State. 
 
For a discussion of the potential impacts on small businesses as owners/operators of CWS 
or CSS, see the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Additional Comments (Effect on the Regulated Community):  Affected CWS and CSS 
could be owned and operated by State agencies, local governments, and small businesses. 
Notably, the bill’s requirements generally only apply to CWS and CSS that serve more 
than 3,300 customers, meaning that many of the smaller CWS and CSS in the State are 
unaffected. 
 
Nevertheless, affected systems likely incur increased costs to comply with the bill’s 
requirements. The costs could be significant for some systems depending on the size of the 
system, current cybersecurity measures in place (if any), and the standards adopted under 
the bill. The bill also requires CWS and CSS to conduct third-party compliance 
assessments, which further increases costs. Depending on the findings of those 
assessments, costs may also be incurred to address related findings. In addition, there could 
also be costs for staff training and to attend any tabletop exercises hosted by MDEM. It is 
assumed that the bill’s requirement to submit incident reports can likely be accomplished 
with relatively minimal impact. 
 
According to the Maryland Association of Counties (MACo), the bill is anticipated to 
impose a significant burden on local governments, who own and operate many CWS and 
CSS. For example, MACo reports that a third-party independent assessment of operational 
technology and IT devices for a CWS or CSS can cost between $30,000 to $40,000 each. 
DLS is unable to independently verify this estimate. MACo further advises that for some 
counties, adopting a zero-trust cybersecurity model will require a complete restructuring 
of their networks. However, DLS notes that the implementation of a zero-trust 
cybersecurity approach is only required as appropriate for each system, and the bill does 
not set a deadline for the adoption of such an approach. 
 
On the other hand, CWS and CSS likely benefit from (1) the education, information, 
training, and resources provided under the bill through centralized communications, 
guidance documents, tabletop exercises, and assistance and (2) the coordination of  

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 871/ Page 12 
statewide cybersecurity efforts for CWS and CSS to help avoid and plan for cybersecurity 
attacks. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1062 (Delegate Harrison) - Environment and Transportation 
and Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Association 
of County Health Officers; Maryland Environmental Service; Baltimore City; Harford and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland Department of the Environment; U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 25, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 12