START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 856 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 856 
(Senator Henson) 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Mold - Landlord Requirements and Regulations (Maryland Tenant Mold 
Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), in consultation 
with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), the Department of Housing and 
Community Development (DHCD), the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor), and 
the Department of General Services (DGS), to develop and update as necessary  
(1) a centralized website that provides information about mold remediation and dampness 
and (2) an informational pamphlet that includes specified resources (though MDE may use 
a specified federal pamphlet instead). The bill establishes various requirements for 
landlords relating to mold in rental units, including, among other things, performing a mold 
assessment and remediation under specified conditions. By June 1, 2027, MDE, in 
consultation with MDH, DHCD, and DGS, must adopt regulations to establish uniform 
standards for mold assessment and remediation, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures increase by 
$125,000 in FY 2026 only, as discussed below. State revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
125,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($125,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase, potentially significantly for some jurisdictions, 
beginning in FY 2026. Local revenues are not directly affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 856/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Informational Packet 
 
The informational pamphlet on mold must include resources in the State relating to mold 
and how tenants can control mold growth in their units. Instead of developing a pamphlet, 
MDE may use the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) “Brief Guide to Mold, 
Moisture, and Your Home” pamphlet. 
 
Landlord Responsibilities 
 
A landlord must: 
 
 
provide the informational pamphlet on mold to each tenant in a rental unit on the 
landlord’s property at the time the lease or rental agreement is signed and on request 
by a tenant; 
 
request that a tenant sign a statement acknowledging receipt of the pamphlet; 
 
perform a mold assessment within 15 days after receipt of a written notice regarding 
the detection of mold from (1) the applicable local agency enforcing housing and 
livability codes or (2) a tenant or building occupant; 
 
if such an assessment detects mold, perform mold remediation within 45 days after 
the assessment is completed, or, if performing mold remediation within that time 
frame is not feasible, within a reasonable time after the assessment is completed; 
 
ensure that such a mold assessment and remediation performed follows industry 
guidelines and best practices as well as State and local laws and regulations; 
 
communicate with occupants during a mold assessment and mold remediation to 
provide updates and relevant information; 
 
ensure proper ventilation and low indoor relative humidity in the property; and 
 
maintain the property in accordance with all applicable federal, State, and local 
residential housing and building codes, standards, regulations, rules, and 
requirements pertaining to minimum livability. 
 
If a local government owns or manages a residential property, the local government or local 
housing authority must comply with the bill’s requirements for landlords. Otherwise, 
nothing in the bill may be construed to require a local government or local health 
department to conduct a mold assessment or mold remediation. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 856/ Page 3 
Regulations Establishing Uniform Standards for Mold Assessment and Remediation 
 
The regulations must: 
 
 
establish standards for (1) identifying and evaluating the presence of mold, 
including visible mold inspection and testing; (2) mold air sample analyses in 
accordance with the standards of specified entities; (3) bulk or surface mold sample 
analyses conducted in accordance with the standards of specified organizations; 
(4) visible mold inspections to assess the presence of any visible water damage or 
dampness on surfaces, as specified; (5) mold remediation in accordance with 
specified guidelines issued by EPA; and (6) reinforcing building codes; and 
 
establish a risk reduction standard for mold hazards. 
 
Key Definitions 
 
“Mold assessment” means (1) an inspection, an investigation, or a survey of a dwelling or 
other structure to provide information to the owner regarding the presence, identification, 
or evaluation of mold; (2) the development of a mold management plan; or (3) the 
collection or analysis of a mold sample. “Mold remediation” means (1) removing, cleaning, 
sanitizing, demolishing, or any other treatment performed to address a mold hazard, mold, 
or dampness or (2) abatement of the underlying cause of a mold hazard, mold, or dampness. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 347 of 2023 established the Workgroup on Mold Standards and 
Remediation to (1) study information related to mold standards and remediation practices 
provided by specified industry groups, state governments, and international governments; 
(2) study EPA’s 2008 Mold Remediation in Schools and Commercial Buildings guidelines, 
as revised and updated; (3) study the extent to which climate change may increase mold 
development within indoor environments; and (4) recommend best practices, as specified. 
The workgroup was required to submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and the General Assembly by October 1, 2024. That report can be found here. 
This bill implements several of the recommendations in the report. 
 
Repair of Serious and Dangerous Defects in Rental Dwelling Units 
 
In general, statute provides tenants with a mechanism for encouraging the repair of serious 
and dangerous defects that exist within or as part of any residential dwelling unit, or upon 
certain common property, as specified. The defects are those in which a substantial and 
serious threat of danger to the life, health, and safety of the occupants is present. Current 
statutory provisions provide a remedy and impose an obligation upon landlords to repair 
and eliminate the serious and dangerous conditions and defects. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 856/ Page 4 
Available Remedies and Notice Requirements 
 
In order to use specified remedies available when serious and dangerous defects are 
present, a tenant must notify the landlord of the existence of the defects or conditions using 
specified methods (e.g., written communication sent by certified mail listing the asserted 
defects, a written violation from an appropriate State/local agency, etc.). A landlord then 
has a reasonable time after receipt of notice in which to make the repairs or correct the 
conditions, as specified. 
 
Warranty of Habitability 
 
Chapter 125 of 2024, among other things, established that a landlord that offers a 
residential dwelling unit for rent, whether by written or oral lease agreement, must be 
deemed to warrant that the dwelling unit is “fit for human habitation,” which means that a 
dwelling unit and property of which the dwelling unit is a part are free from serious defects 
or conditions that constitute, or will constitute if not promptly corrected, a fire hazard or 
other serious and substantial threat to the life, health, or safety of occupants of the dwelling 
unit. The warranty of habitability exists throughout a tenant’s tenancy. The Act also 
established additional relief for breach of the warranty of habitability, applicable to 
landlords, tenants, and residential dwelling units that are subject to the above provisions 
regarding the repair of serious and dangerous defects. 
 
Minimum Livability Code 
 
MD Labor is required to adopt a “Minimum Livability Code,” which sets baseline property 
standards for all residential structures located in the State except for owner-occupied 
housing units or other housing exempted by MD Labor. The Minimum Livability Code 
must contain minimum standards for the safe and sanitary maintenance of residential 
structures and premises. Each political subdivision must adopt by regulation a local 
housing code that sets minimum property maintenance standards for housing. MD Labor’s 
Minimum Livability Code does not apply to housing located in a political subdivision that 
has adopted a substantially similar local housing code. Each political subdivision is 
responsible for enforcing the Minimum Livability Code and may charge a property owner 
a fee for an inspection made to enforce the code. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $125,000 in fiscal 2026 for 
MDE to hire a consultant to assist in developing the required regulations. It is assumed that 
MDE can comply with the bill’s requirements relating to the centralized website and 
informational pamphlet using existing resources. Because it is assumed that MDE is the 
lead agency responsible for these activities, it is assumed that MDH, DHCD, MD Labor, 
and DGS can consult with MDE as required under the bill with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 856/ Page 5 
The bill is silent as to the enforcement of the standards adopted by regulation pursuant to 
the bill. Therefore, it is not clear if MDE or any other State agency is responsible for 
enforcing the regulations. However, § 12-203 of the Public Safety Article requires the 
political subdivision where a rental unit is located to enforce the Minimum Livability Code. 
Thus, this analysis assumes that local governments are likely responsible for enforcing the 
standards established by regulation under the bill. 
 
To the extent MDE is responsible for enforcing the regulations and/or conducting 
inspections to ensure compliance, however, general fund expenditures increase 
significantly to hire several additional staff. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  For any local government that owns or manages a residential property 
and is required to comply with the bill’s requirements for landlords, local expenditures 
increase, potentially significantly, to perform mold assessments and remediation activities 
and generally meet the property maintenance standards under the bill, including ensuring 
proper ventilation and low indoor relative humidity in affected properties. Although the 
actual impact on any individual local government depends on several unknown factors, 
including the condition, size, type of construction, and number of affected properties, the 
increase in local expenditures could be significant. 
 
For example, Prince George’s County anticipates both a significant operational and 
fiscal impact. Among other things, the county notes that in addition to the costs associated 
with conducting mold assessments and remediation activities, the bill’s requirement to 
conduct a mold assessment within 15 days after receiving a written notice regarding the 
detection of mold in a rental property likely means the county must follow emergency or 
sole-source procurement procedures, which further increases costs. The county also notes 
that many of the Prince George’s County Housing Authority buildings that were 
constructed prior to 1980 do not have mechanical ventilation systems. To the extent that 
the county must retrofit affected buildings (particularly those that are concrete construction 
high-rise buildings) to ensure proper ventilation and low indoor relative humidity, the 
county estimates that its capital expenditures increase by at least $10.3 million. 
 
Baltimore City likewise advises that its expenditures may increase significantly to the 
extent the city is required to assess and remediate mold in city-owned residential facilities. 
 
Assuming that political subdivisions are responsible for enforcing the bill’s requirements 
for landlords (beginning in fiscal 2026) – as well as the standards established by regulation 
under the bill (beginning in late fiscal 2028 or early fiscal 2029) – local expenditures may 
also increase for enforcement. The magnitude of the impact on local enforcement costs 
depends, at least to some extent, on the standards developed under the regulations and 
cannot be predicted in advance. However, because the regulations must establish standards 
for, among other things, visible mold inspections and reinforcing building codes, it is not 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 856/ Page 6 
unreasonable to assume that local jurisdictions may need to hire additional enforcement 
staff. 
 
The bill does not directly affect local revenues. However, as noted above, each political 
subdivision may charge a property owner a fee for an inspection made to enforce the 
Minimum Livability Code. The extent to which a local government may be able to recoup 
inspection costs incurred as a result of the bill is unknown. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Landlords incur potentially significant costs to perform mold 
assessments and remediation activities as a result of the bill. Landlords also likely incur 
costs to comply with the standards adopted by regulation under the bill, although any such 
impact cannot be predicted in advance. However, because the regulations must establish 
standards for sample analyses and inspections as well as a risk reduction standard for mold 
hazards, among other things, it is not unreasonable to assume that landlords will incur costs 
to comply with the standards. 
 
It is assumed that the bill’s requirement to provide tenants with the pamphlet and request 
that a tenant sign a statement acknowledging receipt of the pamphlet can likely be 
accomplished with relatively minimal impact. Although landlords are already required to 
maintain their properties in accordance with all applicable federal, State and local 
residential housing and building requirements, landlords may incur additional costs to 
ensure proper ventilation and low indoor relative humidity in their rental units, to the extent 
they do not already do so. 
 
On the other hand, landlords and tenants likely benefit from the information provided 
through the centralized website and pamphlet, and tenants benefit from the bill’s mold 
assessment and remediation requirements and the development of uniform standards for 
mold assessment and remediation established by regulation under the bill. 
 
Small businesses that conduct mold remediation and assessment services may realize an 
increase in the demand for their services under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 976 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; cities of Annapolis and 
Baltimore; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 856/ Page 7 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - March 18, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2025 
Enrolled - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 5, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7