START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 813 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 813 
(Howard County Senators) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Howard Community College - Board of Trustees, Meetings, and Contracts - 
Alterations  
Ho. Co. 1-25 
 
 
This bill adds two additional members to the Board of Community College Trustees for 
Howard County. The board must include an opportunity for public comment at each 
meeting and must record and post online in a specified manner. As part of ongoing training 
for board members and at least every two years, board members must undergo training 
specific to board governance, structure, responsibilities, and roles. The board must survey 
employee satisfaction annually via specified means and redact any human resources or 
personnel-related feedback before public release of survey results. The bill requires the 
board to submit a report to the General Assembly on the status of the faculty union contract 
every six months beginning January 1, 2026, until a union contract is finalized. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at Howard Community College (HCC). 
  
Local Effect:  HCC expenditures may increase minimally to record and post board 
meetings online and conduct the annual employee satisfaction survey. HCC can 
accommodate additional board members, provide required training, and submit faculty 
union contract reports within existing resources. Howard County revenues and 
expenditures are not affected, as funding formulas are not affected. This bill may impose 
a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 813/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the number of members who must be residents of 
Howard County at the time of appointment and must maintain residency in Howard County 
throughout the term of appointment from six to eight. The initial term of one additional 
appointed member must expire in 2032 and the other new member’s term must expire in 
2033. 
 
Board Meetings 
 
The board must make an audio or video recording of each meeting and make the recording 
available to the public on the board’s website without charge and, to the extent practicable, 
within two business days after the recording is made. 
 
Survey 
 
Each year the board must select an independent, nationally recognized survey instrument 
to carry out an anonymous survey on employee satisfaction at HCC and submit an unedited 
report on its survey findings directly to the board. 
 
Reporting 
 
Every six months beginning January 1, 2026, until a union contract is finalized, the board 
must submit a report to the General Assembly on the status of the faculty union contract. 
 
Current Law:  The Howard County Board of Trustees consists of seven members 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. Of the members, at 
least six must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and must maintain 
residency in Howard County throughout the appointment. Members serve six-year terms. 
 
State law generally establishes that community college boards have seven members serving 
staggered six-year terms, with several specified exceptions. Therefore, there are variations 
in the number and terms of board members. Appendix 1 shows characteristics of the 
various boards. With one exception, the boards are appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. For Chesapeake College, the board is 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland House of 
Delegates. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  If HCC lacks sufficient recording infrastructure, including recording 
equipment, technology support, and online hosting, costs may increase. However, 
HCC may minimize expenses by using low-cost options, such as recording on an existing 
computer and posting to free or low-cost online video platforms. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 813/ Page 3 
Expenditures may increase to contract with a nationally recognized survey instrument. 
While the exact cost of such a survey depends on the instrument selected, the overall cost 
is likely minimal. 
 
Training can likely be handled using existing resources. Members of the board serve 
without compensation but may be entitled to reimbursement for certain authorized 
expenses. Any such reimbursement is assumed to be minimal and absorbable with existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
SB 813/ Page 4 
 
Appendix 1 
Selected Community College Board Member Requirements 
 
Community College 
Number of Members 
Board Terms (Years) 
Term Limits 
Residency Requirements 
Allegany 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Anne Arundel 
101 
4 
32 
Yes3 
Baltimore City 
91 
6 
24 
Some5 
Baltimore 
15 
5 
24 
See Note6 
Carroll 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Cecil 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Chesapeake 
10 
5 
3 
Yes7 
Frederick 
7 
5 
3 
Yes8 
Garrett 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Hagerstown 
7 
6 
No Limit 
Yes9 
Harford 
9 
5 
24 
Yes10 
Howard 
7 
6 
No Limit 
Some11 
Montgomery 
101,12 
6 
No Limit 
Some13 
Prince George’s 
91 
5 
24 
Yes14 
Southern Maryland 
9 
5 
24 
Yes15 
Wor-Wic 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
 
1 The board includes a student member serving a one-year term. The student body elects the student board member in Prince George’s County. 
2 Consecutive full terms 
3 All members must be a resident of Anne Arundel County. 
4 Consecutive terms. 
5 All members must be a resident of the State. The majority must be residents of Baltimore City. 
6 Of the members, one serves at large and the other 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in Baltimore County, two from each district. 
7 Two members from each county that supports Chesapeake College (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Talbot). 
8 All seven members must be a resident of Frederick County. 
9 All members must be a resident of Washington County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Washington County throughout their term of appointment. 
10 All members must be a resident of Harford County for the duration of their term. 
11 Of the seven members, at least six must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and maintain residency in Howard County throughout the term of appointment. 
12 A local nominating committee must submit to the Governor the names of two to four candidates per vacancy, from which the Governor must appoint a new member. 
13 The student member must be a resident of the county. 
14 All members must be a resident of Prince George’s County. 
15 Members must be a resident of the State. Each of the southern Maryland counties must be represented by at least three members who are residents of the county. 
 
Source:  Annotated Code of Maryland 
 

END OF PAGE 4