START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 842 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 842 
(Senator Beidle) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Electronic Smoking Devices - Seizure and Wholesaler Record-Keeping 
Requirements 
 
This bill authorizes the Executive Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission (ATCC), without a warrant, to seize electronic smoking devices (ESD) that 
are sold or offered for sale in violation of Title 16.7 of the Business Regulation Article. 
The bill establishes procedures for notice of seizure and filing a claim for the return of 
seized ESD, including the requirement for a hearing. The bill also repeals the authority of 
an ESD manufacturer to sell ESD to a consumer and establishes recordkeeping 
requirements for ESD wholesaler distributors and wholesaler importers. The 
Executive Director may adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  ATCC can implement the bill’s requirements related to seizure of ESD, 
including hearing procedures, with existing resources, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances and operations are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Notice of Seizure 
 
The Executive Director must give notice of a seizure to the person from whom the ESD is 
seized at the time of seizure, stating the right of the owner or other interested person to file 
a claim for return of the seized property. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 842/ Page 2 
Claim for the Return of Seized Property 
 
The owner of the seized property or another interested person may file a claim for return 
of the ESD with the Executive Director within 30 days after seizure. A person forfeits any 
interest in, right to, or title to seized ESD if the person fails to timely file a claim for return. 
 
If a person files a claim for the return of seized ESD, the Executive Director (or designee) 
must act on the claim and hold a hearing, as specified. Unless there is satisfactory evidence 
that the owner or person was not in compliance with any provision of Title 16.7 of the 
Business Regulation Article at the time of seizure, the Executive Director (or designee) 
must direct return of the seized property. The Executive Director (or designee) must grant 
or deny the claim for return of seized ESD by mailing the owner or person a notice of 
final determination. 
 
Responsibility for Costs and Penalties 
 
A person who possessed or offered for sale seized ESD is not relieved from responsibility 
for any penalty under specified titles of the Business Regulation Article or reimbursement 
of the costs of transportation, storage, or disposal of the seized ESD. 
 
Electronic Smoking Devices Manufacturer License 
 
The bill repeals the authority of the holder of an ESD manufacturer license to sell ESD to 
a consumer if the license holder manufactured the devices and the consumer purchases or 
orders the devices through the mail, a computer network, or another electronic network. 
 
Recordkeeping Requirements for Wholesaler Distributors and Wholesaler Importers 
 
Each ESD wholesaler distributor and ESD wholesaler importer must (1) receive an invoice 
for each purchase of ESD; (2) keep a record of all ESD received and post specified 
information each day; (3) keep a record of the name and address of each ESD retailer to 
which a sale is made and prepare for each sale an invoice that shows the political 
subdivision where the retailer is located; and (4) keep a complete and accurate record of 
each sale of ESD to an out-of-state person for resale to out-of-state consumers. 
 
Each ESD wholesaler distributor and ESD wholesaler importer must make an inventory 
record each month of all ESD on the premises or under the control of the ESD wholesaler 
distributor or ESD wholesaler importer, as specified. ESD transferred to retail stock by 
written memorandum need not be included in the inventory record. Each ESD wholesaler 
distributor and ESD wholesaler importer must keep such records for up to six years and 
allow the Executive Director to examine the records. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 842/ Page 3 
Current Law:  The Business Regulation Article governs the licensing of ESD 
manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers. ATCC issues manufacturer and wholesaler 
licenses. The clerks of the circuit courts issue retail licenses. Without an appropriate license 
(with limited exception), a person may not act, attempt to act, or offer to act as an ESD 
manufacturer, retailer, wholesaler distributor, wholesaler importer, or vape shop vendor. 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and are subject to a fine up to $1,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to 30 days. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
 
Electronic Smoking Devices Wholesaler Distributors and Wholesaler Importers 
 
Statute specifies that an ESD wholesaler distributor (1) obtains at least 70% of its ESD 
from a holder of an ESD manufacturer license or a business entity located in the 
United States and (2) holds ESD for sale to another person for resale or sells ESD to another 
person for resale. An ESD wholesaler importer (1) obtains at least 70% of its ESD from a 
business entity located in a foreign country and (2) holds ESD for sale to another person 
for resale or sells ESD to another person for resale. 
 
Electronic Smoking Devices Manufacturers 
 
Statute specifies that an ESD manufacturer (1) manufactures, mixes, or otherwise produces 
ESD intended for sale in the State, including ESD intended for sale in the United States 
through an importer; (2) sells ESD to a consumer (as specified), a licensed ESD wholesaler 
distributor, or a licensed ESD wholesaler importer in the State; (3) if the ESD manufacturer 
also holds a license to act as an ESD retailer or vape shop vendor, sells ESD in the same 
manner as a vape shop vendor to consumers located in the State; and (4) unless otherwise 
prohibited or restricted, distributes sample ESD to a licensed ESD retailer or vape shop 
vendor. 
 
An ESD manufacturer license authorizes the licensee to sell ESD to (1) a licensed ESD 
wholesaler located in the State; (2) an ESD wholesaler or retailer located outside the State 
if the ESD may be sold lawfully in Maryland; (3) a licensed vape shop; and (4) a consumer 
if the licensee manufactured the devices and the consumer purchases or orders the devices 
through the mail, a computer or telephonic network, or another electronic network. 
 
Seizure of Other Tobacco Products 
 
Section 13-835 of the Tax-General Article authorizes the Comptroller, the 
Executive Director of ATCC, or a peace officer of the State to seize contraband tobacco 
products in the State without a warrant. Notice of the seizure must be given to the person 
from whom the property is seized at the time of the seizure. The owner or another person 
with an interest in the seized property may file a claim for return with the Comptroller or 
the Executive Director within 30 days after the seizure. If a person files a claim for return 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 842/ Page 4 
of seized property, the Comptroller, the Executive Director, or their designee must 
promptly act on the request, hold an informal hearing, and direct the return of the property 
if specified requirements are met. A person forfeits any interest in, right to, or title to seized 
property if the person fails to timely file a claim for return. 
 
State Expenditures:  As ATCC enforces current statutory provisions related to seizure of 
contraband other tobacco products, any additional enforcement duties for seizure of ESD 
under the bill, including holding hearings, can be implemented with existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill repeals the authority of the holder of an ESD 
manufacturer license to sell ESD to consumers but does not amend the definition of ESD 
manufacturer to remove parallel language.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1241 (Delegate Amprey) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
Enrolled - May 1, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2025 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4