START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 894 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 894 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Office of Social Equity - Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund - 
Modifications 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of Social Equity (OSE), with the assistance of the Comptroller, 
to oversee the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund (CRRF); OSE must also oversee 
the appropriation of funds and the training of fund recipients from CRRF. In addition, the 
bill alters the authorized uses of CRRF, repeals several existing reporting requirements for 
OSE relating to CRRF, establishes a new reporting requirement for counties that receive 
CRRF funding, and establishes requirements for counties as recipients of CRRF funds. The 
bill also establishes several findings of the General Assembly related to the cannabis 
industry and social equity. OSE must adopt regulations to implement the bill’s changes to 
CRRF. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No impact assumed in FY 2025. Special fund expenditures for OSE increase 
by $66,000 in FY 2026 for staff; future years reflect inflation and ongoing costs. As a 
result, special fund revenues for the Maryland Cannabis Administration’s (MCA) Cannabis 
Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) increase correspondingly to cover those costs, 
and the amount of sales and use tax revenue remaining for distribution to the general fund 
and various other special funds (in accordance with current law) decreases, as discussed 
below. The net effects by fund type are shown below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
GF Revenue 
($33,000) 
($29,000) 
($30,300) 
($34,800) 
($36,300) 
SF Revenue 
$36,300 
$31,900 
$33,300 
$38,000 
$39,600 
SF Expenditure 
$42,900 
$37,700 
$39,400 
$41,200 
$42,900 
Net Effect 
($39,600) 
($34,800) 
($36,300) 
($38,000) 
($39,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 894/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Counties may incur additional administrative costs (potentially significant 
for some) beginning in FY 2026 but may also use up to 15% of their CRRF allocation to 
cover those costs. Local government revenues decrease minimally beginning in  
FY 2026 due to the redistribution of sales and use tax revenues, including direct allocations; 
local government expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  For current law and background information relating to 
medical and adult-use cannabis, see the Appendix – Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis. 
 
Findings of the General Assembly 
 
The bill establishes the following findings of the General Assembly:  (1) the goal of 
regulation and taxation of cannabis in the State is to create a safe and regulated industry 
that benefits the public interest; (2) the use of incarceration in enforcing prohibitions on 
the importation, manufacture, use, sale, and distribution of cannabis varied within the State 
by jurisdiction and racial classification; (3) analysis of geographic and demographic 
characteristic revealed disparities in arrests, prosecution, and imprisonment for cannabis 
use, with a negative and disproportionate impact on some communities and neighborhoods 
within the State; and (4) consequences of the disproportionate enforcement of 
cannabis-related offenses have contributed to the economic, public health, and social 
conditions of specific communities and have had significant and measurable effects on the 
social and financial resources available to the children, families, and local infrastructure of 
these communities. 
 
The bill further establishes that the General Assembly finds that the public interest is served 
by (1) acknowledging and repairing the causes and consequences of disparities in arrests 
and imprisonment in prosecutions of cannabis-related offenses among specific populations 
and geographic regions; (2) developing, among existing members of communities that have 
been disproportionately and negatively impacted, the capacity to ascertain and address the 
social and economic determinants that are fundamental to reducing the impact of 
longstanding inequities and improving economic, educational, and health outcomes; and 
(3) being consistent with social equity principles and governance by allocating a significant 
portion of tax revenue from the adult-use cannabis market to CRRF for distribution to local 
jurisdictions to be administered by the local jurisdictions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 894/ Page 3 
Office of Social Equity 
 
Under current law and the bill, OSE is an independent office functioning within MCA, 
established to promote and encourage full participation in the regulated cannabis industry 
by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on 
drugs in order to positively impact those communities. OSE has several responsibilities in 
furtherance of its purpose, including consulting with other agencies, providing 
recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting businesses to obtain financing 
through the Capital Access Program, and managing the Social Equity Partnership Grant 
Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships between operational licensees and 
social equity licensees). 
 
Under current law and the bill, the Comptroller administers CRRF. Under current law, 
OSE is required to consult with and assist the Comptroller in the administration of CRRF. 
Under the bill, OSE must, with the assistance of the Comptroller, oversee CRRF; OSE 
must also oversee the appropriation of funds and the training of recipients of funds from 
CRRF. 
 
Under the bill, by October 1, 2025, OSE must also adopt regulations to carry out the 
statutory provisions related to CRRF as modified by the bill and described below. 
 
Under current law, OSE is required to produce and make publicly available an annual 
report on how CRRF funds were allocated during the preceding calendar year. 
Additionally, OSE is required, on a biennial basis, to solicit public input on the uses of 
funds in CRRF and publish a review of such input. Under the bill, these requirements are 
repealed. 
 
Community Repair and Reinvestment Fund 
 
Under current law and the bill, CRRF provides funds to community-based organizations 
that serve communities determined by OSE (in consultation with the Office of the Attorney 
General) to have been the most impacted by disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis 
prohibition before July 1, 2022. The fund receives 35% of the tax revenues generated from 
the sale of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 
Under current law and the bill, funds from CRRF may only be used for (1) funding 
community-based initiatives intended to benefit low-income communities; (2) funding 
community-based initiatives that serve disproportionately impacted areas; and (3) any 
related administrative expenses. The bill provides greater specificity regarding the 
authorized use to provide funding for community-based initiatives intended to benefit 
low-income communities. Specifically, the bill specifies that such initiatives include 
behavioral health crisis response services, education and after-school programs, truancy 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 894/ Page 4 
and absenteeism intervention programs, and housing and homeless prevention initiatives, 
among other specified programs, services, and improvements. Additionally, under the bill, 
while CRRF may still be used to cover related administrative expenses, the bill limits the 
use of the fund to cover such administrative expenses to those expenses incurred by a local 
government in administering the funds that do not exceed 15% of the funds received in the 
fiscal year. 
 
Under current law and the bill, each county receives a distribution from CRRF in an 
amount that, for the period from July 1, 2022, to January 1, 2023, both inclusive, is 
proportionate to the total number of cannabis possession charges in the county compared 
to the total number of cannabis possession charges in the State. 
 
Under the bill, for any distribution of funds to a county, the county must hold the funds 
separately from other revenue and general funds. 
 
Under current law and the bill, subject to the limitations regarding the authorized uses of 
CRRF, each county is required to adopt a law establishing the purpose for which money 
received from CRRF may be used. Under the bill, OSE must also require each county to 
develop a plan for the distribution of funds to community-based organizations for use in 
accordance with statute. The plan must be (1) established before distributing funds; 
(2) developed in consultation with stakeholders; and (3) the subject of a public hearing 
before the plan is finalized.  
 
Additionally, under the bill, by October 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, each county must 
submit a report to OSE regarding funds received from CRRF, the organizations that 
received funding from the county, the methods the county used to solicit, review, and select 
organizations eligible for funding, and administrative expenses related to the county’s 
administration and distribution of CRRF funds. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect: 
 
Office of Social Equity Administrative Costs 
 
OSE advises that it can likely implement the bill’s changes with existing budgeted 
resources. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS), however, disagrees; the bill 
establishes new responsibilities for OSE and establishes a framework to enhance the 
oversight of CRRF. Therefore, DLS advises that OSE’s administrative costs increase by 
$65,986 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for a 30-day start-up delay. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) administrator to (1) develop and implement the 
required regulations; (2) oversee CRRF, the appropriation of CRRF funds, and the training 
of CRRF recipients; and (3) receive annual reports from counties. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 894/ Page 5 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$58,893 
Operating Expenses 
    7,093 
FY 2026 OSE Administrative Expenditures 
$65,986 
 
Future year administrative expenditures – which total $57,923 in fiscal 2027, increasing to 
$66,001 by fiscal 2030 – reflect the part-time salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Because OSE is an independent office functioning within MCA, special fund revenues to 
CREF for MCA increase correspondingly to cover the increase in OSE’s costs, as current 
law requires that revenues from the sales and use tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis must 
first be distributed to CREF to defray the entire cost of the operations and administrative 
expenses of MCA (including OSE’s administrative expenditures). 
 
No Material Effect on the Comptroller’s Office 
 
This analysis assumes that restricting the use of CRRF funds for only administrative 
expenses incurred by local governments does not materially affect the Comptroller’s 
Office. The Comptroller’s Office did not provide any information regarding any such costs. 
 
Effect on Distribution of Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
The bill does not affect overall sales of adult-use cannabis and, therefore, the total amount 
of sales and use tax revenue collected each year. However, the bill does affect the 
distribution of sales and use tax revenues, as discussed below. 
 
As noted above, current law requires that revenues from the sales and use tax on the sale 
of adult-use cannabis must first be distributed to CREF to defray MCA’s (including OSE’s) 
operating and administrative costs. Remaining tax revenues are then distributed as follows:  
50% to the State’s general fund (through fiscal 2028, after which the general fund 
distribution increases to 55%); 35% to CRRF; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund, 
which is administered by the Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business 
Assistance Fund, which is administered by the Department of Commerce (through 
fiscal 2028, after which this distribution terminates); and 5% as a separate direct allocation 
to counties. 
 
Thus, because the bill results in an increase in OSE’s administrative costs (beginning in  
fiscal 2026), the bill also results in a decrease in general fund revenues, special fund 
revenues for affected special funds (including CRRF), and county revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2026, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 894/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect on Distribution of Sales and Use Tax Revenue 
Fiscal 2026-2030 
 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
Funds Available for 
Distribution  
($65,986) 
($57,923) 
($60,559) ($63,325) 
($66,001) 
State Revenues 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
($32,993) 
($28,962) 
($30,280) ($34,829) 
($36,301) 
CRRF 
(23,095) 
(20,273) 
(21,196) 
(22,164) 
(23,100) 
CPHF 
(3,299) 
(2,896) 
(3,028) 
(3,166) 
(3,300) 
CBAF 
(3,299) 
(2,896) 
(3,028) 
- 
- 
Subtotal for the State 
($62,687) 
($55,027) 
($57,331) ($60,159) 
($62,701) 
County Revenues 
($3,299) 
($2,896) 
($3,028) 
($3,166) 
($3,300) 
 
CBAF:  Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
CPHF:  Cannabis Public Health Fund 
CRRF:  Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
 
Notes:  With respect to the direct allocation, the decrease in county revenues is in the aggregate. Numbers 
may not sum due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Municipal revenues are also affected, as each county must distribute to a municipality 
located in the county 50% of the county’s allocation that is attributable to the cannabis 
sales and use tax revenue generated by a dispensary located in that municipality. 
 
CRRF expenditures (for the distribution of CRRF funds to counties) decrease 
correspondingly to the decrease in CRRF revenues beginning in fiscal 2026. 
County revenues decrease further as a result of the decreased distributions from CRRF 
beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Accordingly, county (and municipal) expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
Other Fiscal Effects on Counties to Implement the Bill’s Requirements:  Counties likely 
incur costs, potentially significant for some, to develop county plans for the distribution of 
funds to community-based organizations, as required by the bill. Counties may also incur 
costs to amend their county laws to reflect plan contents, to the extent they need to do so. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 894/ Page 7 
The bill’s changes may also cause (at least initial) delays in distributing CRRF funding to 
community-based organizations, as counties need to develop plans, consult with 
stakeholders, and hold public hearings prior to the distribution of funds. There may also be 
costs related to the bill’s ongoing reporting requirement, but those costs are anticipated to 
be minimal for most counties.  
 
However, as the bill allows local governments to use CRRF monies to cover their 
administrative expenses associated with administering those funds – up to 15% of the 
amount received each year, at least a portion of those costs may be defrayed. Even so, 
based on a limited survey of counties, Montgomery County anticipates the need to hire 
staff to meet the bill’s requirements, and the Maryland Association of Counties also expects 
that some counties may need to hire additional staff as a result of the bill. Frederick County 
describes the administrative impacts as burdensome. On the other hand, other counties, 
including Cecil and Baltimore counties, indicate that the bill’s requirements can be met 
with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent any community-based organizations that receive 
CRRF funding from counties are considered small businesses, they may be affected. 
Depending on how counties distribute available CRRF funding as a result of the bill’s 
changes, some community-based organizations that provide eligible services under the 
types of initiatives and programs explicitly enumerated by the bill may benefit from 
additional funding, while others may receive less funding. Further, due to less overall 
funding distributed to counties under the bill and the ability for counties to cover up to 15% 
of their administrative costs, less funding is available for distribution to community-based 
organizations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1364 (Delegate Qi) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; City of Frederick; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Cannabis Administration; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 894/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2025 
 
Revised - Correction - August 13, 2025 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 894/ Page 9 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC); 
(2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit of 
State government that is responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis; 
(3) creating a licensing framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all 
medical cannabis licensees to either convert to adult-use cannabis businesses or cease 
operating by July 1, 2023; and (5) establishing a 9% sales and use tax on the sale of 
adult-use cannabis. As required under Chapters 254 and 255, in June 2023, ATCC and 
MCA entered into a memorandum of understanding providing that both parties agree to 
collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis operations in the State.  
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. MCA adopted permanent regulations 
governing the cannabis industry in the State that went into effect July 22, 2024. (See DLS 
Control No. 24-019P).  
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. A person at least age 21 may use and 
possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
MCA is responsible for the State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make 
medical cannabis available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a 
framework to certify health care providers, qualifying patients, and their caregivers to 
provide qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written 
certification. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 894/ Page 10 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
The Office of Social Equity (OSE) is an independent office functioning within MCA, 
established to promote and encourage full participation in the regulated cannabis industry 
by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on 
drugs in order to positively impact those communities. OSE has several responsibilities in 
furtherance of its purpose, including consulting with other agencies, providing 
recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting businesses to obtain financing 
through the Capital Access Program, and managing the Social Equity Partnership Grant 
Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships between operational licensees and 
social equity licensees). 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, incubator spaces, and 
on-site consumption. Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, 
and dispensaries. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and range from 
$5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard grower 
licenses. Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, medical licensees (growers, processors, and 
dispensaries) were required to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross revenues 
for calendar 2022 to convert to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees of the 
same type. Essentially all medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 96 dispensary 
licensees) converted to cannabis business licensees. 
 
First- and Second-round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with 
at least 65% ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain 
criteria, such as living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area 
(i.e., determined to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis 
possession charges). MCA conducted its first-round lottery on March 14, 2024, and a 
second-round lottery on June 28, 2024, awarding a total of 205 (174 in round one and 31 in 
round two) social equity cannabis business licenses across the micro and standard grower, 
processor, and dispensary categories. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 894/ Page 11 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by OSE, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly and (2) study and make recommendations on a 
number of issues related to the medical and adult-use cannabis industry in the State. The 
advisory board began meeting in May 2024, and has established three subcommittees:  
Federal, Medical Cannabis, and Adult-use Cannabis. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
In the first year of adult-use cannabis sales (July 1, 2023, through June 30, 2024), total 
cannabis sales topped $1.0 billion, with adult-use sales making up $709 million of the total. 
Retail sales of adult-use cannabis are subject to a 9% sales and use tax rate and generated 
approximately $63.8 million in sales and use tax revenues during the first year of sales. 
Adult-use cannabis sales and use tax collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2025 totaled 
$18.3 million.  
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision,” defined as a county or municipality, is authorized to establish 
zoning requirements for cannabis businesses, allocate cannabis tax revenues, and adopt 
ordinances that reduce statutory requirements related to specified location restrictions for 
cannabis businesses. However, a political subdivision is prohibited from taking certain 
actions specific to cannabis businesses, including imposing a tax on cannabis and 
establishing restrictions related to transporting cannabis within the political subdivision or 
fees or requirements on cannabis businesses that are more burdensome than for other 
businesses. 
 
Additionally, an on-site consumption establishment may not operate in a location unless 
the political subdivision affirmatively authorizes the operation by issuing a permit or 
license. The political subdivision may also place restrictions on or prohibit the operation 
of on-site consumption establishments. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council was established to study and report its 
findings and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts 
of cannabis legalization. The Cannabis Public Health Fund was also established to 
generally support the council’s work. The fund receives 5% of the tax revenues from the 
sale of adult-use cannabis.  
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 894/ Page 12 
Cannabis-related Special Funds 
 
The Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund is administered by MCA to cover its 
operating costs and the costs to administer and enforce the Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
Title of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. The fund generally consists of fees 
collected by MCA (including application and registration fees) and tax revenues from the 
sale of adult-use cannabis sufficient to defray the entire cost of operating the 
administration. 
 
The Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund is administered by the Comptroller to 
provide funds to community-based organizations that serve communities determined by 
OSE (in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General) to have been the most 
impacted by disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before July 1, 2022. 
The fund receives 35% of the tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis, distributed 
on a quarterly basis. 
 
The Cannabis Business Assistance Fund is administered by the Department of Commerce 
(in consultation with OSE) to assist small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses 
entering the adult-use cannabis industry through the award of grants and loans. The fund 
receives 5% of the tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a 
quarterly basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 12