START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 867 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 867 
(Senator Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Cyber Maryland Program - Revisions 
 
This bill transfers the Cyber Maryland Program, including the Cyber Maryland Fund and 
Cyber Maryland Board, from the Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
(TEDCO) to the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor). The bill also (1) repeals 
mandated funding ($99,000 annually) for talent pipeline management and an additional 
discretionary authorization; (2) expands the program’s required activities, including 
awarding new competitive grants or contracts; (3) authorizes a fiscal 2026 discretionary 
appropriation of $3.1 million for the new grants; (4) authorizes the Governor to include an 
appropriation sufficient to run the program beginning in fiscal 2027; (5) alters language 
requiring the Governor to include an appropriation sufficient for the program to instead 
authorize the Governor to include funding as specified; (6) authorizes additional uses for 
the fund; (7) adjusts the composition of the board; and (8) makes technical and conforming 
changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Net general fund expenditures and special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase by $3.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026, reflecting a decrease in funding 
for TEDCO ($99,000 annually) and an increase in funding for MD Labor ($3.1 million 
annually) due to the transfer of the program, contingent actions in the budget as passed by 
the General Assembly, and assumed annual funding beginning in FY 2027. This bill 
eliminates a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
SF Revenue 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
GF Expenditure 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
SF Expenditure 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
Net Effect 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0)  
Note:  () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in grant revenues for local government entities. 
Expenditures are not directly affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 867/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Modification of Funding 
 
Repeal of Funding Mandates:  The bill repeals language requiring the Governor to include 
$99,000 in the annual budget bill for the Cyber Maryland Fund to be used for talent pipeline 
management. Instead, for fiscal 2026, the Governor may include $3.1 million for the 
awarding of grants and contracts for information technology or operational technology. 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, the Governor also may include in the annual budget an amount 
sufficient to run the program. The bill also alters existing language that, although not a 
mandate, requires the Governor to include an amount sufficient for the program by 
specifying (1) that the Governor instead may include such funds in the annual budget bill 
and (2) that an amount sufficient for the program includes funding sufficient to hire staff 
to carry out its duties. 
 
Alternate Funding Sources:  The Cyber Maryland Program must seek alternate funding 
sources to include cost-sharing or cost-matching agreements from sources other than the 
State, including the federal government, the private sector, and philanthropy, to supplement 
the money appropriated to the fund. 
 
Expansion of the Cyber Maryland Program 
 
The bill expands the Cyber Maryland Program’s required activities to include developing, 
promoting, supporting, and investing in talent improvement strategies such as strategies 
that leverage the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach. 
 
Information Technology or Operational Technology Grants:  The bill requires that, 
beginning in fiscal 2026, the program award competitive grants or contracts to enhance 
cybersecurity workforce development, including cybersecurity for operational technology. 
 
Targeting of Resources:  Uncodified language specifies the General Assembly’s intent 
(1) that funding may be allocated to provide $1.0 million for cybersecurity clinics, 
including clinics related to operational technology as specified and (2) that the balance of 
the Cyber Maryland Fund be used to implement initiatives approved by the Cyber 
Maryland Board. Such initiatives include strategies to support transitioning veterans, 
existing worker training, education for kindergarten through 12th grade students at summer 
camps, the Maryland Statewide Computing Alignment to Locate your Education Scale 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 867/ Page 3 
(better known as SCALE) portal, a marketing campaign for the Cyber Maryland Brand to 
attract talent to the State, and others outlined in the statewide strategic plan. 
 
Expanded Eligibility for Grants:  The bill also expands the authorized uses of the Cyber 
Maryland Fund to include additional eligible recipients of grants. Under the bill, eligible 
grant recipients include registered apprenticeship sponsors, local workforce development 
boards, industry associations, labor unions, local governments, local or regional economic 
development entities, and other relevant partner entities at MD Labor’s discretion. 
 
Cyber Maryland Board 
 
The bill transfers the Cyber Maryland Board to MD Labor and adjusts board composition 
by adding representation from the Adjutant General, the Secretary of Higher Education, 
and the State Superintendent of Schools. The bill repeals the Governor’s authority to 
remove an appointed member of the board for incompetence, misconduct, or failure to 
perform the duties of the position. Under the bill, the membership of the board must, to the 
extent practicable, reflect the racial, gender, age, and geographic diversity of the State. 
Finally, the board must adopt bylaws that establish staggered terms for members and 
procedures governing vacancies in membership. 
 
Cyber Maryland Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill modifies the existing annual report for the program to reflect the transfer and 
additional requirements. Accordingly, beginning December 1, 2026, the Cyber Maryland 
Program, in conjunction with MD Labor, must submit a report on the operation and 
performance of the program to the Governor and the General Assembly. The report must 
include (1) key performance metrics established by MD Labor that are aligned with the 
State strategy and goals for the program and (2) the progress of the program against those 
metrics. 
 
By December 1, 2026, the Cyber Maryland Program, in conjunction with MD Labor, must 
report to the Governor and the General Assembly on cyber workforce program activities 
determined relevant by the program through collaboration with relevant departments and 
entities, including (1) Employment Advancement Right Now Program; (2) Pathways in 
Technology Early College High School; (3) Cyber Public Service Scholarship; 
(4) Maryland Technology Internship Program; (5) Maryland Institute for Innovative 
Computing; (6) Accelerating Cyber Careers Program; (7) University of Maryland 
Baltimore County’s Center for Cybersecurity; (8) Build Our Future Grant Pilot Program; 
and (9) registered apprenticeships in cybersecurity. The report must capture certain 
specified data, including program outputs, outcomes, performance targets, and if possible, 
the return on program investments. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 867/ Page 4 
Current Law:  Chapter 578 of 2023 established the Cyber Maryland Program in TEDCO 
to create a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, serve as a hub for State workforce development 
programs in cybersecurity, and generally coordinate cybersecurity and research and 
innovation in the State, among other things. The Act also created the Cyber Maryland Fund 
as a special, nonlapsing fund, and the Cyber Maryland Board. Under Chapter 509 of 2024, 
TEDCO also administers the fund. 
 
The program must conduct ongoing research by collaborating with specified entities to 
collect and analyze real-time industry data to identify cybersecurity workforce needs as 
described in the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach. The 
program must also (1) use the results of its research to increase the effectiveness of existing 
State cybersecurity workforce programs for employers in the State; (2) facilitate 
partnerships for new training and education programs to address the workforce needs 
identified in the program’s research; and (3) develop a statewide strategic plan for 
cybersecurity workforce development. 
 
The Cyber Maryland Fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget and any 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The purposes of the fund 
are to facilitate the Cyber Maryland Program’s achievement of the program’s specified 
purposes and support innovative approaches to meeting cybersecurity workforce needs. 
Funds may only be used for (1) administrative expenses of the program, including hiring 
staff, consultants, and other professionals, as specified and (2) providing grants to 
elementary and secondary schools, institutions of higher education (including community 
colleges), for-profit corporations, and nonprofit organizations to operate cybersecurity 
programs based on the strategic plan of the Cyber Maryland Program. TEDCO must adopt 
regulations to award grants under the program. 
 
As updated by Chapter 509, the fund is subject to a mandated appropriation requiring the 
Governor to include $99,000 in the annual budget bill for the fund to be used for talent 
pipeline management. Additionally, current law authorizes, but does not require, the 
Governor to include an additional $250,000 in the annual budget bill beginning in 
fiscal 2025 that, subject to the availability of funding, must be used for implementing the 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach. Chapter 578 also 
authorized funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) to be transferred by budget 
amendment to implement the Act beginning in fiscal 2025. Although not a mandated 
appropriation, current law also requires the Governor to include an appropriation in an 
amount sufficient for the program. 
 
For more information on TEDCO, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 867/ Page 5 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
actions contingent on the passage of legislation moving the Cyber Maryland Program and 
Cyber Maryland Fund to MD Labor. The bill effectuates those contingent actions. (More 
specifically, the budget includes $99,000 in general funds for TEDCO for the Cyber 
Maryland Program, in accordance with the existing mandated appropriation; however, 
contingent language eliminates that appropriation with the program and fund moving to 
MD Labor. The budget also includes a $3.1 million general fund appropriation to MD 
Labor, contingent on the program and fund moving to the department.) Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures increase by a net $3.0 million ($99,000 decrease for TEDCO 
and $3.1 million increase for MD Labor) in fiscal 2026, with a commensurate net increase 
in special fund revenues and expenditures for the Cyber Maryland Fund. 
 
While not mandated by the bill, this analysis reflects funding at that $3.1 million level in 
the out-years as the bill anticipates that MD Labor continues to implement a competitive 
grant program. Also, although the fiscal 2026 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $2.0 million in DPA funds for cyber workforce grants made under the Cyber 
Maryland Program (which increases total funding to $5.1 million), that DPA funding is not 
contingent and, therefore, is not reflected in this estimate; it is also not projected to continue 
in the out-years. 
 
TEDCO advises that the program currently operates with one executive director paid using 
the Cyber Maryland Fund, as administrative expenses of the program are an allowable use 
of the fund. TEDCO further advises that, since all administrative expenditures for the 
program are paid using the Cyber Maryland Fund, the bill has no fiscal impact to TEDCO 
beyond the transfer of the Cyber Maryland Fund. TEDCO employees are not State 
employees; however, MD Labor anticipates re-hiring or transferring the existing executive 
director position as part of the program transfer. 
 
MD Labor further advises that administration of the program entails time commitments 
from existing staff. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) assumes that such time 
commitments are manageable within the existing resources of MD Labor. 
 
Additionally, MD Labor advises that its Office of the Secretary and Division of Workforce 
Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) Office of Strategic Initiatives (OSI) require 
staff support beyond the executive director to manage the grant program. MD Labor 
advises that staffing requirements include a program manager for the Office of the 
Secretary and two grant managers in OSI. MD Labor further advises that these positions 
are likely sufficient to handle the bill’s expanded annual report and new reporting 
requirement on cyber workforce program activities. Based on these requirements, DLS 
estimates the cost of staffing for the Cyber Maryland Program, including the executive 
director position expected to transfer from TEDCO, to be approximately $412,000 in 
fiscal 2026, which reflects immediate transfer of the executive director and a  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 867/ Page 6 
90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date for the additional staff. 
Those costs are expected to increase to more than $450,000 in the out-years due to 
annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. Any such personnel costs are assumed to be 
paid from the Cyber Maryland Fund and, therefore, do not add to the bill’s fiscal effect. 
However, they reduce the amount of funds available for grants. 
 
While the bill establishes that the Cyber Maryland Program must seek alternate funding 
sources to include cost-sharing or cost-matching agreements from sources other than the 
State, including the federal government, the private sector, and philanthropy, to supplement 
the money appropriated to the fund, the bill does not require any such monies to be paid to 
the special fund. Accordingly, this analysis assumes that requirement merely results in a 
leveraging of additional funding for the program, rather than additional monies flowing 
through the Cyber Maryland Fund. Moreover, MD Labor advises that DWDAL already 
regularly pursues such discretionary grant opportunities and strategic connections with 
partners. 
 
Local Revenues:  Under the bill, local governments, local workforce development boards, 
and local or regional economic development entities are eligible for grants made from the 
Cyber Maryland Fund. To the extent that MD Labor adopts standards that result in 
additional grants being awarded to such local entities or to the extent additional funding 
effectuated by the bill allows grants to be made to local entities already eligible under 
current law, local revenues increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small cybersecurity businesses that receive grant funding from 
Cyber Maryland benefit from the additional appropriated funds effectuated by the bill. In 
addition to greater funding, the bill expands allowable uses of the fund to include additional 
entities that may expand the number of small businesses eligible to receive funds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1468 (Delegate Forbes, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation; Department of Commerce; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 867/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2025 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 867/ Page 8 
Appendix – Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021. 
Related mandated appropriations are also noted. 
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the annual budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that 
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund (in TEDCO regulations); 
(2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic disadvantage; 
and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time of investment 
by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of State pension systems. Subject to specified 
criteria related to unappropriated general fund surplus, the Governor was required 
to include $10.0 million in the fund in the fiscal 2024 budget bill. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 867/ Page 9 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to 
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – support economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million to the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – create a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serve as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinate cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor (1) must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $99,000 for the fund to be used for talent pipeline 
management and (2) may include an additional appropriation in the annual budget 
bill of $250,000 for the fund. 
 
 
Human-Relevant Research Program and Fund – promote State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting 
research on nonhuman animals. 
 
 
Pava LaPere Innovation Acceleration Grant Program – fosters growth of the 
entrepreneurial innovation ecosystem in the State by providing grants to 
technology-based start-up companies that are founded by students of postsecondary 
institutions located in the Baltimore-Columbia-Towson Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (MSA) and have their principal place of business in the MSA. Each fiscal year, 
the Governor must include an appropriation for the program in the annual budget 
bill, although no amount is specified. 
 
 
Baltimore Innovation Initiative Pilot Program – provides incentives for and 
grows technology start-up companies founded by students or faculty at eligible 
universities. For fiscal 2025 and 2026, the Governor must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $1.5 million for the program. The program 
terminates June 30, 2027. 
 

END OF PAGE 9