START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 833 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 833 
(Senator Charles) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Department of Human Services - Study on Private Treatment Foster Care 
Homes 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Human Services (DHS) to conduct a study to 
determine the types of State support, in the form of funding or otherwise, that would be 
appropriate and beneficial to assist private providers of treatment foster care homes in the 
provision of services. By December 1, 2025, DHS must report its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect June 1, 2025, and 
terminates May 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS can complete the required study with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through its Social Services Administration, has the primary 
responsibility for child welfare services throughout the State, which are provided primarily 
by the local departments of social services. 
 
DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children 
(1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 833/ Page 2 
a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, 
abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued 
residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child 
to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, 
are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement 
agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as 
specified. 
 
An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential care, 
kinship care, and a treatment foster care home. “Treatment foster care home” means an 
out-of-home placement facility that is part of a program designed and implemented by a 
child placement agency to provide intensive casework and treatment in a family setting to 
children with special physical, emotional, or behavioral needs. A child is eligible for such 
a placement if the local department determines that the child otherwise qualifies for foster 
care and has one or more of the following conditions: 
 
 
a serious medical condition including, but not limited to (1) HIV positive or 
symptomatic or has AIDS; (2) multiple handicaps; or (3) a symptomatic 
drug-exposed newborn; 
 
a serious emotional, behavioral, or psychological condition, including a psychiatric 
diagnosis by appropriate qualified professionals or a history of an ongoing substance 
abuse problem; 
 
a developmental disability; or 
 
is in need of a high level of treatment in a family setting. 
 
The public foster care system is funded by the State and the federal government under 
Title IV-E of the Social Security Act. Generally, foster care maintenance payments are 
payments made on behalf of a child eligible for Title IV-E foster care to cover the cost of 
(and the cost of providing) food, clothing, shelter, daily supervision, school supplies, 
a child’s personal incidentals, liability insurance with respect to a child, and reasonable 
travel to the child’s home for visitation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1057 (Delegate Roberts, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 833/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3