START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 334

Chapter 334

(Senate Bill 846)

AN ACT concerning

Business Regulation – Cellular Phone Carriers – ~~Service~~ ~~Contract~~ ~~Requirement~~
Authorized Users

FOR the purpose of requiring a cellular phone carrier to ~~include~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~option~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~
~~cellular~~ ~~phone~~ ~~service~~ ~~contract~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~additional~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~to~~ ~~alter,~~
~~modify,~~ ~~or~~ ~~cancel~~ ~~a~~ ~~service~~ ~~contract~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances~~ allow a certain
customer to have the option to designate other individuals as authorized users on
the customer’s account and to allow an authorized user to take certain actions in
connection with the account; and generally relating to cellular phone carriers and
~~service~~ ~~contracts~~ authorized users.

BY adding to
Article – Business Regulation
Section 19–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2024 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

19–108.

A CELLULAR PHONE CARRIER THAT OFFERS A SERVICE CONTRACT FOR
~~CELLULAR~~ ~~PHONE~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~INCLUDE~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OPTION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SERVICE~~
~~CONTRACT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ALLOWS~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~ONE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~IS~~ ~~A~~ ~~CUSTOMER~~ ~~OF~~
RECORD TO THE SERVICE CONTRACT TO ALTER, MODIFY, OR CANCEL THE SERVICE
~~CONTRACT~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RECORD~~ ~~IF~~
~~ALL~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RECORD~~ ~~AGREE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WRITING~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OPTION~~ ~~ON~~
EXECUTION OF THE SERVICE CONTRACT.

A CELLULAR PHONE CARRIER SHALL ALLOW:

(1) THE CUSTOMER OF RECORD WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT
ON AN ACCOUNT TO DESIGNATE OTHER INDIVIDUALS AS AUTHORIZED USERS ON THE
ACCOUNT; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 334 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) AN INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED AS AN AUTHORIZED USER ON AN
ACCOUNT TO PURCHASE SERVICES OR DEVICES OR TO TAKE ADDITIONAL ACTION
UNDER ANY SERVICE CONTRACT CONNECTED TO THE ACCOUNT TO THE EXTENT
THAT THE AUTHORIZATION EXTENDS TO THE ACTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2