START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 846 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 846 
(Senator Hettleman) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Business Regulation - Cellular Phone Carriers - Authorized Users 
 
 
This bill requires a cellular phone carrier to allow (1) the customer of record who is 
responsible for payment on an account to designate other individuals as authorized users 
on the account and (2) an individual designated as an authorized user on an account to 
purchase services or devices or to take additional action under any service contract 
connected to the account (to the extent that the authorization extends to the action). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Wireless or cellular telecommunications services, as well as 
Voice-over-Internet Protocol services and international and interstate telephone services, 
are not regulated by the Public Service Commission. Cellular telephone companies are 
specifically excluded from the definition of a “telephone company” under the  
Public 
Utilities 
Article. 
The 
Wireless 
Telecommunications 
Bureau 
of 
the  
Federal Communications Commission licenses cellular telephone companies, while the 
Federal Trade Commission handles actions for deceptive marketing or fraudulent 
investment schemes. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 846/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2