START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 962 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 962 
(Senator Mautz) 
Budget and Taxation 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Municipalities - Legislative Audit - Exemption 
 
 
This bill establishes an annual audit exemption for a municipality in any fiscal year in 
which municipal annual revenues are less than $100,000. A municipality that qualifies for 
an audit exemption under the bill would still be required to file an annual Uniform Financial 
Report (UFR) with the Department of Legislative Services (DLS). If a UFR filed by a 
municipality that qualifies for an audit exemption under the bill indicates a financial or 
accounting irregularity or concern, the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee may request 
or require the municipality to conduct a review or audit of its financial records. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal reduction in local government audit expenditures for a limited 
number of municipalities that may qualify for an audit report exemption under the bill. 
Local government revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, municipalities and State-created special taxing districts are 
required to have an independent audit conducted by a certified public accountant each year. 
However, municipalities and State-created special taxing districts with annual revenues of 
less than $250,000 in the prior four fiscal years may submit a request to the Office of 
Legislative Audits (OLA) for a waiver allowing an audit to be conducted once every 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 962/ Page 2 
four years instead of annually. The current threshold of $250,000 was increased from the 
previous threshold of $50,000 by Chapters 32 and 33 of 2009. OLA granted audit waiver 
approvals for 15 jurisdictions that were in affect during their review of fiscal 2023 local 
government audits.  
 
All municipalities and State-created special taxing districts are required to submit to DLS 
an annual financial report, also known as the UFR, by October 31 each year. This includes 
municipalities and State-created special taxing districts that have received a waiver from 
the annual audit requirement.  
 
Additional Comments:  OLA advises that during their review of fiscal 2023 local 
government audits, 22 entities were eligible to receive an audit report waiver under the 
current law threshold and 15 of these 22 entities requested and received waivers. Based on 
the Local Government Finances Report for fiscal 2023, six municipalities had 
total revenues under $100,000 and would meet the exemption threshold established by the 
bill. These municipalities include Port Tobacco in Charles County; Brookview, 
Church Creek, Eldorado, and Galestown in Dorchester County; and Rosemont in 
Frederick County. A copy of the report is available on the DLS website.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services – Office of Legislative 
Audits; Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2025 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2