START OF PAGE 1
 
   
  SB 979 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 979 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Local Government - Accommodations Intermediaries - Hotel Rental Tax - 
Collection by Comptroller and Alterations 
 
 
This bill establishes a centralized method of collecting the local hotel rental tax from 
accommodations intermediaries by requiring these entities to remit the tax to the 
Comptroller’s Office. This requirement applies to accommodations intermediaries with at 
least (1) $100,000 in booking transactions or sales or (2) 200 or more booking transactions 
or sales. The Comptroller must establish a process for distributing the local hotel rental 
taxes (paid by accommodations intermediaries) to county and municipal governments. The 
Comptroller is authorized to retain up to 1.5% of the local tax revenue collected to defray 
administrative costs. Accommodations intermediaries are required to file a hotel rental tax 
return as specified by the Comptroller. The bill specifies that certain provisions of State 
law prevail over certain local laws or agreements related to the hotel rental tax. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $1.3 million in FY 2028 and by 
$438,100 in FY 2030. Special fund revenues for administrative costs increase beginning in 
FY 2028. 
 
Local Effect:  County and municipal hotel rental tax revenues may increase beginning in 
FY 2028 to the extent that additional hotel rental taxes are collected from accommodations 
intermediaries. Howard County revenues may increase by an additional $0.8 million 
beginning in FY 2028, assuming the county council increases the hotel rental tax rate to 
8% as authorized by the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 979/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition, the bill makes the following changes to hotel rental taxes in 
Garrett, Howard, and Talbot counties by: 
 
 
increasing the monthly interest rate for late payment of hotel rental taxes in 
Garrett County from 0.5% to 1.0%; 
 
authorizing Howard County to increase the county hotel rental tax rate from 7% to 
8%. Any revenue from the hotel rental tax in excess of 7% must be distributed to 
the Howard County Tourism Council; and 
 
altering the time period in Talbot County relating to the tax penalty imposed by the 
county government for the late payment of the county hotel rental tax. The bill 
reduces the time before a penalty must be paid for a late payment from 120 days to 
one month. 
 
Current Law:  Accommodations intermediaries and short-term rental platforms are 
already required to pay the State sales and use tax for overnight lodgings as discussed 
below. The Comptroller’s Office is currently tasked with collecting the sales tax revenues 
from these entities. 
 
Sales and Use Tax 
 
Chapter 3 of 2016 clarified the definition of taxable price for purposes of the State sales 
and use tax as it applies to the sale or use of an accommodation facilitated by an 
accommodations intermediary. Chapter 3 also altered the definition of vendor under the 
State sales and use tax to include an accommodations intermediary. 
 
An accommodation is defined as a right to occupy a room or lodgings as a transient guest. 
An accommodations provider is a person that owns, operates, or manages an 
accommodation and makes the accommodation available for sale or use to a buyer. An 
accommodations intermediary is a person, other than an accommodations provider, who 
facilitates the sale or use of an accommodation and charges a buyer the taxable price for 
the accommodation. A person is considered to facilitate the sale or use of an 
accommodation if the person brokers, coordinates, or in any other way arranges for the sale 
or use of an accommodation by a buyer. 
 
Short-term Rental Units 
 
Chapters 704 and 758 of 2019 imposed the State sales and use tax on specified short-term 
rental transactions facilitated by a short-term rental platform and required short-term rental 
platforms to collect and remit the State sales and use tax. A short-term rental is defined as 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 979/ Page 3 
the temporary use of a short-term rental unit to provide accommodation to transient guests 
for lodging purposes in exchange for consideration. A short-term rental platform is an 
Internet-based digital entity that (1) advertises the availability of short-term rental units for 
rent and (2) receives compensation for facilitating reservations or processing booking 
transactions on behalf of the owner, operator, or manager of a short-term rental unit. 
 
Late Payment of Hotel Rental Taxes 
 
Except in Talbot and Wicomico counties, if a hotel fails to pay the hotel rental tax to a 
county within one month after the payment is due, the hotel must pay a tax penalty of 
10% of the unpaid tax. In Talbot and Wicomico counties, the hotel has until 120 days to 
make the payment before a tax penalty can be imposed. 
 
If a hotel fails to pay the hotel rental tax, the hotel must pay interest on the unpaid tax from 
the date on which the hotel is required to pay the tax to the date that the tax is paid. The 
interest rate for each month or fraction of a month is 0.5%, except in Cecil, Dorchester, 
Talbot, Washington, and Wicomico counties, where the interest rate is 1.0%. 
 
Howard County Hotel Rental Tax Rate 
 
Howard County is authorized to impose a hotel rental tax of up to 7%. The first 5% of the 
rate is distributed to the county’s general fund. The revenue collected above the 5% rate is 
allocated as follows:  one-third is designated to the Economic Development Authority, and 
two-thirds is dedicated to the Howard County Tourism Council. 
 
Local Hotel Rental Taxes 
 
Hotel rental taxes are imposed in all counties in Maryland. In several jurisdictions, 
revenues collected from the hotel rental tax are shared with municipalities and community 
organizations. A few municipalities are also authorized to impose a hotel rental tax or to 
collect the county tax within their jurisdiction. 
 
In fiscal 2025, county governments expect to collect $136.7 million in revenue from the 
hotel rental tax. Additional information on local hotel rental tax rates and revenues can be 
found in the County Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2025. A copy of the report is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Comptroller’s Office will need additional personnel to 
administer the local hotel rental tax collections from accommodations intermediaries, 
including one assistant Attorney General, one senior tax attorney, and three revenue 
examiners. The new staff will be tasked with identifying businesses subject to the local 
hotel rental tax, processing tax returns and payments, auditing tax returns and payments, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 979/ Page 4 
enforcing tax compliance, advising on local laws, and handling possible litigation. The 
additional personnel costs are projected to total $464,800 in fiscal 2028 and $438,100 by 
fiscal 2030. These costs include salaries, fringe benefits, and ongoing operating expenses. 
In addition, the Comptroller’s Office will incur $800,000 in computer programming 
expenses in fiscal 2028 to add the local hotel rental tax to the current tax system. These 
costs include discovery, design, development, testing, and system interfaces. 
Positions 
5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$426,590 
Computer Programming Expenses 
800,000 
Operating Expenses 
       38,225 
Total FY 2028 State Expenditures 
$1,264,815 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local hotel rental tax revenues may increase beginning in fiscal 2028 
to the extent that the Comptroller’s Office is effective at collecting the hotel rental tax from 
accommodations intermediaries. The amount of the revenue increase will vary by county 
and depend on the number of transactions that occur through accommodations 
intermediaries and whether the local government is currently collecting this revenue 
through their local finance office.  
 
Howard County 
 
In fiscal 2025, Howard County is expected to collect $5.8 million from the hotel rental tax, 
which is currently set at 7%. Of this amount, $1.15 million is designated to the 
Howard County Tourism Council. 
 
Based on fiscal 2025 estimated collections, increasing the county’s hotel rental tax rate by 
1% (from 7% to 8%) will increase county revenues by approximately $828,600 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2028. The additional revenues must be distributed to the 
Howard County Tourism Council. 
 
Talbot County 
 
Talbot County indicates that the bill will enhance the ability to collect the local hotel rental 
tax by removing a major impediment to the timely collection of revenues. Reducing the 
time period by when tax penalties begin will positively impact the county’s collection, 
reporting, compliance, monitoring, and distribution to municipalities. It will ease the 
administrative burden and improve the cash flow for both the county government and 
municipalities. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 979/ Page 5 
In regard to municipal revenues, Talbot County advises that the late payment of the 
hotel rental tax effects the timing of the county’s distribution of the municipal portion of 
the revenues, which can have a significant impact on municipal finances and the 
corresponding cash flow for the jurisdiction. For some municipalities, the hotel rental tax 
is a significant source of revenue. 
 
In addition, the late payment of the hotel rental tax impacts the county’s reporting of gross 
receipts (room rentals) to the county tourism board and to the State Department of 
Commerce, which in turn can impact the level of grant funding available to the county. The 
late payment of hotel rental taxes can also significantly increase staff time in reviewing 
and maintaining lists of properties out of compliance and sending out notices to 
nonreporting and nonpayment properties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1103 (Delegate Atterbeary) - Ways and Means.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Comptroller’s Office; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2025 
Third Reader - April 4, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2025 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5