START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 956 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 956 
(Senator West) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Health Insurance - Medicare Supplement Policies - Insurance Producer 
Commission 
 
 
This bill requires a carrier to pay the same commission rates to an insurance producer for 
the sale of a Medicare supplement policy – without regard to whether the policy is sold 
during an open enrollment period, as an underwritten policy, or within 30 days following 
the individual’s birthday. The bill applies to a Medicare policy issued within 30 days 
following the individual’s birthday or to an individual at least 65 years old. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For individuals aged 65 and older, federal law provides a one-time-only 
open enrollment period during the first six months after enrollment in Medicare Part B. 
During this period, individuals can buy any Medicare supplement policy sold in the State. 
Maryland law requires carriers to extend a similar, limited open enrollment period to 
individuals younger than age 65 who are eligible for Medicare due to a disability. 
 
During this open enrollment period, carriers may not deny or condition the issuance or 
effectiveness of a Medicare supplement; discriminate in the pricing of a policy; or deny, 
reduce, or condition coverage or apply an increase premium rating under such a policy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 956/ Page 2 
because of the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care, or medical condition 
of the applicant. A Medicare supplement policy or certificate may not (1) exclude or limit 
benefits for losses incurred more than six months after the effective date of coverage 
because the losses involved a preexisting condition or (2) define a preexisting condition 
more restrictively than a condition for which a physician gave medical advice or 
recommended or gave treatment within six months before the effective date of coverage. 
 
Generally, if an individual seeks to enroll in a Medicare supplement policy (or change 
policies) after this open enrollment period, guaranteed issue requirements do not apply. 
Thus, an individual may be subject to medical underwriting and/or charged higher 
premiums based on health status. However, Chapter 680 of 2022 requires a carrier that 
sells Medicare supplement policies to provide an enrolled individual the opportunity to 
switch to a different Medicare supplement policy with equal or lesser benefits within 
30 days following the individual’s birthday. A carrier may not deny or condition a 
new policy, discriminate in the pricing of the policy, or deny, reduce, or condition coverage 
because of the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care, or medical condition 
of the individual. A carrier must notify an insured of their right to switch policies at least 
30 days, but no more than 60 days, before the insured’s birthday. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business insurance brokers that sell Medicare supplement 
policies may benefit from increased broker commissions under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2025 
Third Reader - March 26, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2025 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2