START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 342

Chapter 342

(Senate Bill 923)

AN ACT concerning

Public Schools – High School Sports ~~Officiating~~ ~~Services~~ ~~–~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Requirements~~ Officials – Payment and Fees

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~for~~ ~~local~~ ~~school~~ ~~systems~~ ~~that~~ ~~issue~~
~~invitations~~ ~~for~~ ~~bids~~ ~~for~~ ~~high~~ ~~school~~ ~~sports~~ ~~officiating~~ ~~services~~ ~~for~~ ~~boys’~~ ~~and~~ ~~girls’~~ ~~high~~
~~school~~ ~~sports;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~for~~ ~~high~~ ~~school~~
~~sports~~ ~~officiating~~ ~~services~~ requiring the State Department of Education, in
consultation with the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association to
develop and periodically update a list of similar high school sports that are
categorized together; requiring a county board of education to ensure that certain high
school sports officials for certain high school sports are provided equal pay; requiring
a county board to conduct invitations for bids for high school sports officiating
services in a certain manner; and generally relating to compensation for high school
sports officials.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 4–147
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2024 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

4–147.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ASSIGNING FEES” MEANS THE FEES CHARGED BY AN ASSIGNOR.

(3) “ASSIGNOR” MEANS AN OFFICIATING ASSOCIATION OR
ORGANIZATION OR AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR THAT:

(I) IS REGISTERED AND IN GOOD STANDING WITH THE STATE
DEPARTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND TAXATION; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 342 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) PROVIDES, ASSIGNS, AND SCHEDULES THE OFFICIALS THAT
~~PROVIDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HIGH~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~SPORTS~~ ~~OFFICIATING~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~HIGH~~ ~~SCHOOL~~
SPORTING EVENT.

(2) “HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIAL” MEANS AN OFFICIAL, AN
UMPIRE, A REFEREE, OR A JUDGE WHO PRESIDES OVER A SPORTING EVENT TO
GUARANTEE THAT THE RULES OF THE EVENT ARE ENFORCED.

(3) “HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING ROLE” MEANS AN
OFFICIATING ASSIGNMENT FOR A HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIAL THAT REQUIRES
PERFORMANCE OF A DEFINED SET OF HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES.

(4) “HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES” MEANS THE
OFFICIATING SERVICES PROVIDED BY AN OFFICIAL, AN UMPIRE, A REFEREE, OR A
~~JUDGE~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~HIGH~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~SPORTING~~ ~~EVENT~~ A HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIAL
WHEN OVERSEEING A HIGH SCHOOL SPORT.

(5) “SIMILAR BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS” MEANS HIGH
SCHOOL SPORTS THAT:

(I) OCCUR IN THE SAME SEASON;

(II) HAVE COMPARABLE RULES;

(III) HAVE A SIMILAR NUMBER OF HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIALS; AND

(IV) HAVE A SIMILAR TIME OF COMPETITION.

(B) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL ISSUE INVITATIONS FOR BIDS OR
REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS FOR SIMILAR BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIATING SERVICES SIMULTANEOUSLY.

(C) (1) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM MAY ISSUE AN INVITATION FOR BIDS OR
~~A~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PROPOSALS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~REQUIRES~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROSPECTIVE~~ ~~BIDDER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OFFEROR~~
TO INCLUDE IN A BID OR AN OFFER BOTH BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIATING SERVICES.

(2) IF A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM ISSUES SEPARATE INVITATIONS FOR
BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS FOR BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIATING SERVICES, THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 342

(I) MAY NOT SET SEPARATE DEADLINES FOR THE SUBMISSION
OF BIDS AND OFFERS FOR BOYS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES AND
GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES; AND

(II) MAY REQUIRE THAT PROSPECTIVE BIDDERS OR OFFERORS
PARTNER TO ENSURE THAT BIDS AND OFFERS FOR BOYS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIATING SERVICES ARE ACCOMPANIED BY BIDS AND OFFERS FOR GIRLS’ HIGH
SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES.

(D) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL REJECT A BID OR PROPOSAL IF
~~ENTERING~~ ~~INTO~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROCUREMENT~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BID~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PROPOSAL~~
WOULD RESULT, FOR SIMILAR BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS, IN THE RATE
OF PAY OR ASSIGNING FEES RECEIVED BY INDIVIDUALS OFFICIATING GIRLS’ HIGH
SCHOOL SPORTS OR ASSIGNING GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS BEING
~~DIFFERENT~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PAY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ASSIGNING~~ ~~FEES~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~INDIVIDUALS~~
OFFICIATING BOYS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OR ASSIGNING BOYS’ HIGH SCHOOL
SPORTS OFFICIALS.

(E) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT THE PAYMENT OF
ASSIGNING FEES AS A BONUS THAT IS PAID OUTSIDE A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT MAY DEVELOP GUIDELINES TO ASSIST A LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION,
~~INCLUDING~~ ~~ADDITIONAL~~ ~~CRITERIA~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~DETERMINING~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~HIGH~~ ~~SCHOOL~~
SPORTS QUALIFY AS SIMILAR BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2025, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLS ATHLETIC
ASSOCIATION, SHALL DEVELOP A LIST OF SIMILAR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS FOR BOYS
AND GIRLS.

(2) IN CATEGORIZING BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ SPORTS AS SIMILAR, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER WHETHER EACH SPORT:

(I) OCCURS IN THE SAME SEASON;

(II) HAS COMPARABLE RULES;

(III) REQUIRES A SIMILAR NUMBER OF HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIALS;

(IV) REQUIRES SIMILAR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING
SERVICES; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 342 2025 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) FEATURES COMPETITION OF COMPARABLE LENGTHS OF
TIME.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND
PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLS ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION, SHALL UPDATE THE LIST
EVERY 3 YEARS.

(C) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIAL
WHO:

(I) IS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM; OR

(II) IS EMPLOYED BY AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR OR
OFFICIATING ASSOCIATION OR ORGANIZATION, WITH WHICH THE COUNTY BOARD
CONTRACTS.

(2) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL ENSURE THAT HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIALS RECEIVE THE SAME PAY IF THE OFFICIALS:

(I) ARE IN SIMILAR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING ROLES;
AND

(II) ARE PROVIDING OFFICIATING SERVICES FOR SPORTS
CATEGORIZED AS SIMILAR UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) (1) A COUNTY BOARD SHALL REJECT A BID OR PROPOSAL FOR A
PROCUREMENT CONTRACT THAT WOULD RESULT IN DIFFERENT PAY OR FEES FOR
HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS IN A SIMILAR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING
ROLE FOR SPORTS CATEGORIZED AS SIMILAR UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION.

(2) WHEN SOLICITING INVITATIONS FOR A BID OR A REQUEST FOR A
PROPOSAL FOR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIATING SERVICES, A COUNTY BOARD
SHALL SOLICIT BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR A PROPOSAL FOR EACH SPORT WITHIN A
REASONABLE TIME OF THE SOLICITATION OF BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS
FOR ALL SPORTS CATEGORIZED AS SIMILAR UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION.

(E) (1) THIS SECTION MAY ONLY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE PARITY
BETWEEN HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS PERFORMING SIMILAR ROLES IN
SIMILAR SPORTS WITHIN A COUNTY AND MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE
PARITY IN HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS BETWEEN COUNTIES.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 342

(2) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO HAVE ANY EFFECT ON
THE GROUPING OF SPORTS TOGETHER FOR ANY PURPOSE OTHER THAN THE
PAYMENT OF HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS OR FEES ASSIGNED TO CONTRACTS
FOR HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS OFFICIALS.

(3) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT FEES
OUTSIDE OF A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT AS A BONUS TO HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS
OFFICIALS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) A local school system that executed a procurement contract for high school
sports officiating services, as defined in § 4–147 of the Education Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act, on or before July 1, 2025, may extend the term of the contract to align
the contract timelines for similar boys’ and girls’ high school sports.

(b) A local school system may not extend a contract under subsection (a) of this
section beyond July 1, 2029.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except for a contract for high
school sports officials extended by a local school system in accordance with Section 2 of this
Act, this Act shall be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or
interpreted to have any effect on or application to any procurement contracts for high school
sports officiating services, as defined in § 4–147 of the Education Article, as enacted under
Section 1 of this Act, entered into before the effective date of this Act.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 6, 2025.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5