START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 968 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 968 
(Howard County Senators) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Howard County - Patuxent River Wildland - Use of Mechanical or Motorized 
Equipment  
Ho. Co. 5-25 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to – within the  
Patuxent River Wildland and in order to preserve, maintain, study, research, and educate 
the public about the area’s ecological features and rare habitats – (1) retain, maintain, 
remove, or replace existing trails using mechanical or motorized equipment and  
(2) remove, replace, or dispose of nonnative species using mechanical or motorized 
equipment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There is a State wildlands preservation system established in statute for the 
purpose of securing for the people of present and future generations the benefits of an 
enduring resource of State wildlands. DNR’s Land Acquisition and Planning Unit is 
responsible for administering the State wildlands preservation system. “Wildlands” are 
defined as limited areas of land or water that have retained their wilderness character, 
although not necessarily completely natural and undisturbed, or have rare or vanishing 
species of plant or animal life or similar features of interest worthy of preservation for use 
of present and future residents of the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 968/ Page 2 
Under § 5-1203 of the Natural Resources Article, Patuxent River Wildland is designated 
as a Type 2 State wildland. A “Type 2 wildland” is a unit of importance for all the natural 
sciences, especially ecology, and with outstanding value for education, research, and 
appreciation of natural processes. Preservation in the desired natural condition is the 
prevailing purpose of Type 2 wildlands and visitation is regulated to ensure this 
preservation on a permanent basis. 
 
Patuxent 
River 
Wildland 
(approximately 
1,579 
acres), 
in 
Howard 
and  
Montgomery counties, is 1 of 38 separate wildlands designated in statute, consisting of 
approximately 66,000 acres statewide. Generally, the wildland areas must be devoted to 
public purposes for recreational, scenic, scientific, educational, conservation, and historical 
use. Commercial enterprises and permanent roads (subject to existing private rights and 
apart from fire roads), temporary roads, use of motorized equipment/vehicles/boats, and 
structures or installations are not allowed in the wildland areas. Certain exceptions apply, 
however, including general exceptions (e.g., minimum measures necessary to administer 
the area as a wildland; maintenance of boundary roads; normal maintenance and certain 
upgrades and expansions of utility lines; and measures to protect nearby private land) and 
exceptions specific to certain wildland areas. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 27, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2025 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2