START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 923 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 923 
(Senator Gile, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means and Health and 
Government Operations 
 
Public Schools - High School Sports Officials - Payment and Fees 
 
 
This bill requires local boards of education to ensure that high school sports officials 
receive the same pay if the officials are providing officiating services for sports categorized 
as similar high school sports. A local board must reject any bid or proposal that would 
result in different rates of pay or fees for officiating similar high school sports. The 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must develop a list of similar 
high school sports for boys and girls by September 1, 2025, and update the list every 
three years. The bill requires officials to earn the same pay only within a local school 
system and cannot be construed to (1) require parity in officials’ pay between counties; 
(2) have any effect on the grouping of sports together for any purpose other than payment 
of sports officials or fees; or (3) prohibit fees outside of a procurement contract as a bonus 
to officials. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing resources. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase to the extent they need to 
equalize pay for similar boys’ and girls’ high school sports officials. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 923/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “High school sports official” means an official, umpire, referee, or judge 
who presides over a sporting event to guarantee the rules of the event are enforced. The 
bill applies to a high school sports official who is an employee of the local school system 
or is employed by an independent contractor or officiating association or organization with 
which the local board of education contracts. 
 
In categorizing boys’ and girls’ sports as similar, MSDE must consider whether each sport 
(1) occurs in the same season; (2) has comparable rules; (3) requires a similar number of 
high school sports officials; (4) requires similar high school sports officiating services; and 
(5) features competition of comparable lengths of time. 
 
Current Law:  State regulations govern athletic programs for all high school students in 
Maryland public secondary schools, which are members of the Maryland Public Secondary 
School Athletic Association (MPSSAA). Regulations include, among other things, defined 
sports seasons, maximum number of contests permitted during a sports season for each 
sport, and requirements for equal opportunity for participation in sports for both sexes. For 
sports officials, regulations requires that schools involved in interscholastic contests use 
only officials that are certified by MPSSAA. In situations where MPSSAA certified 
officials are not available, the school must use qualified officials. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local school systems may incur additional costs to the extent that 
they are required to pay more for officiating services for high school girls’ sports to match 
the pay of officiating services for similar high school boys’ sports. Several local school 
systems, including Baltimore City and Baltimore, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties 
advise that the bill does not have a financial effect because they currently pay officials the 
same amount for similar boys’ and girls’ sports. However, two counties indicate that they 
do not currently pay the same rates for similar boys’ and girls’ sports. In Frederick County, 
a pay disparity exists only for two sports, which will cost the county approximately $5,013 
beginning in fiscal 2026 to equalize pay. Anne Arundel County advises that based on its 
current contracts with officials, the county needs to increase pay for officials in girls’ sports 
by $20,700 beginning in fiscal 2026 to provide equal pay. Other counties that did not 
respond for this analysis may see similar cost increases as a result of the bill’s requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 923/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1483 (Delegate D. Jones, et al.) - Ways and Means and Health 
and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of General 
Services; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Anne Arundel 
County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2025 
Third Reader - March 14, 2025 
Enrolled - April 21, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 21, 2025 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3