START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1013 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1013 
(Senator Attar) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - License Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the expiration of a Class B-D-7 license issued for a premises on the 
5700 block of Falls Road in Baltimore City to July 1, 2026, for the purpose of completing 
a transfer of ownership and renewal at the same location. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates July 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, in Baltimore City, a transfer of a license must be completed on 
or before 180 days after the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners approves the 
transfer. Within 180 days after the board approves the transfer of a license, the license 
holder or another appropriate interested party may make a written request to the board to 
extend the time authorized to complete the transfer due to hardship. The board may grant 
the extension if it finds after a hearing that an existing hardship caused the delay in 
transferring the license. An extension may not prolong the period authorized to complete 
the transfer beyond 270 days after the board approves the transfer. 
 
Generally, the board may issue a Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration 
of the number of beer, wine, and liquor outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1013/ Page 2 
sale, that the license is reasonably necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license 
authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail at the place described in the 
license, for on- and off-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $2,336. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1488 (Delegates Rosenberg and Ruff) - Rules and Executive 
Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2