START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1039 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1039 
(Senator Sydnor) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 5 Breweries - On-Premises Consumption 
 
 
This bill increases, from 25% to 35%, the criteria for the maximum percentage of the 
total number of barrels of beer not produced by the holder of a Class 5 brewery license that 
the licensee may sell for on-premises consumption in a calendar year under certain 
circumstances. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A local licensing board may issue an on-premises consumption permit to 
an applicant that holds a Class 5 brewery license and a Class D beer license or equivalent 
license. Generally, a Class 5 brewery that obtains an on-premises consumption permit may 
sell up to 5,000 barrels of beer each year for on-premises consumption as follows:   
 
 
beer of which the Class 5 licensee is the brand owner, and that is fermented and 
brewed entirely by the licensee at an authorized location; and 
 
beer that is fermented and brewed entirely at the brewery under contract with a brand 
owner who does not possess a Class 5 license. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1039/ Page 2 
Additionally, for a Class 5 brewery that produces more than 1 million barrels of finished 
products annually, alone, or in combination with its affiliates, beer delivered to the 
Class 5 brewery in finished form may be sold for on-premises consumption, subject to the 
specified annual limits above, only if it is purchased from a licensed wholesaler. The beer 
brewed at a location other than the Class 5 brewery may be sold if (1) the brand owner of 
the beer is a Class 5 brewery licensee or an affiliate of a Class 5 brewery licensee; (2) the 
number of barrels of beer sold for on-premises consumption under the Class D beer or 
equivalent license, or an on-site consumption permit in a calendar year does not exceed the 
greater of 25% of the total number of barrels of beer sold for on-premises consumption in 
that calendar year, or 1.2% of total finished production under the Class 5 brewery license; 
and (3) the licensee contracts with or on behalf of a holder of a manufacturer’s license or 
nonresident dealer’s permit, or the beer is manufactured by an affiliate of the licensee. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission advises the 
bill affects one Class 5 brewery licensee in the State (Open Gate Brewery located in 
Baltimore County). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1551 (Delegate McCaskill) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2025 
Third Reader - March 15, 2025 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2