START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1030 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2025 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1030 
(Senators Attar and Hettleman) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Baltimore County and Baltimore City - Vehicle Laws - Lighting on Privately 
Owned Vehicles 
 
 
This bill authorizes up to five of the highest-ranking officers of Hatzalah of Baltimore, a 
nonprofit volunteer emergency medical organization operating in Baltimore City and 
Baltimore County under a commercial ambulance service license, to equip their privately 
owned vehicles with red or red and white lights or signal devices. The lights or signal 
devices may only be displayed while traveling to or at the scene of an emergency. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature and does not directly affect the finances or 
operations of Baltimore City or Baltimore County. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a person may not drive or move on any highway any vehicle or 
equipment that is equipped with or displays any light or signal device designed to emit an 
oscillating, rotating, blinking, or other type of emission of light, except as authorized under 
the Maryland Vehicle Law. A violation is a misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of 
$500. The prepayment penalty assessed by the District Court is $60. 
 
There are various exceptions under State law that authorize specified vehicles to be 
equipped with or display lights or signal devices. For example, ambulances may be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1030/ Page 2 
equipped with or display red, white, or red and white lights or signal devices. Additionally, 
vehicles of city, county, State, or federal fire departments or duly constituted volunteer fire 
departments or rescue squads, or the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
System, may be equipped with or display red and/or white lights or signal devices. In each 
volunteer fire company, up to five specified officers may have their privately owned 
vehicles equipped with red or red and white lights or signal devices, which may be 
displayed only while traveling to or at the scene of an emergency. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1520 (Delegate Stein) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Baltimore County; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2025 
Third Reader - March 24, 2025 
Enrolled - April 22, 2025 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2025 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2