START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 4 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 4 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Institutions of Higher Education - Admissions Standards - Prohibition on 
Consideration of Legacy Preference or Donor Preference 
 
 
This bill prohibits an institution of higher education that receives State funds from 
considering a “legacy preference” or a “donor preference” as an eligible criterion for 
admission standards at the institution. Such preferences are given to an applicant due to 
having a familial relationship to either an alum of the institution (legacy) or a person who 
provides financial support to the institution (donor). However, an institution may ask 
applicants to provide information about familial relationships to alums of the institution for 
the purpose of collecting data. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Public four-year institutions of higher education can prohibit use of legacy 
status or a familial relationship to a donor as a criterion for admission with no material 
fiscal impact. Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) does not consider legacy status 
or give a donor preference for admission.  
  
Local Effect:  None. Local community colleges do not consider legacy status or give a 
donor preference for admission.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Institution of higher education” is defined as an institution of 
postsecondary education that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 4/ Page 2 
and awards degrees at either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level. It includes 
public, private nonprofit, and for-profit institutions. 
 
There are no laws in Maryland directly related to what an institution may consider for 
admission standards. However, according to the Maryland Fair Access to Education Act of 
2017 (Chapter 2 of 2018) an institution of higher education that receives State funds is 
generally prohibited from using an undergraduate admissions application that contains 
questions about the criminal history of the applicant.  
 
According to the University System of Maryland (USM) Policy III-4.00 – Policy on 
Undergraduate Admissions, admission to the constituent institutions of USM must be 
determined without unlawful discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, 
gender identity and expression, age, sex, sexual orientation, disability, marital status, 
genetic information, veteran’s status, or other legally protected characteristic. The 
undergraduate student population of USM institutions should draw from all areas of the 
State and reflect the diversity of the State’s population. The policy sets forth the minimum 
criteria for admission to a USM institution. Each institution must publish its own decision 
criteria, which may be more rigorous than the minimum criteria and must be consistent 
with State and federal laws. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Public four-year institutions of higher education can prohibit 
use of legacy status or a familial relationship to a donor as a criterion for admission with 
no material fiscal impact. Any institutions that currently do so can make changes to the 
admissions process using existing resources. Both USM and Morgan State University 
advise that prohibiting the use of legacy status as an admissions criterion has no 
fiscal impact. St. Mary’s College of Maryland states that it does not heavily rely on legacy 
status. However, public four-year institutions did not provide specific information on donor 
preference in relationship to admissions. As open-access institutions, community colleges, 
including BCCC, do not consider legacy status or give a donor preference for their 
admissions.  
 
Additional Comments:  Private nonprofit institutions that receive State funding are also 
subject to the requirements of the bill. In August 2022, the Maryland Independent College 
and University Association (MICUA) advised that four member institutions – Loyola 
University Maryland, St. John’s College, Stevenson University, and Washington College 
– incorporate legacy admissions as part of a holistic admissions process. MICUA further 
advised that, in the majority of cases, alumni relations have no impact on those institutions’ 
decisions about whether to admit a particular student.  
 
In response to the bill, MICUA advises that some member institutions use legacy 
admissions as an incentive, offering additional money to students with legacy ties to the 
institution, and that the removal of this incentive could impact tuition revenue at those 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 4/ Page 3 
institutions. However, as no further information on the impact was provided, the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) cannot reliably estimate any impact on tuition 
and fees or alumni giving. Nevertheless, it is assumed that any overall impact is minimal. 
Further, as no information on donor preference admissions was provided, DLS cannot 
reliably estimate any impact on other donations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 543 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3