START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 5 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 5 
(Delegate Crosby) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Indecent Exposure Within the Presence of a Minor 
 
 
This bill codifies the prohibition on committing the common law crime of indecent 
exposure. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the existing statutory penalty 
of imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to $1,000. The bill also establishes 
a new offense by prohibiting a person from committing indecent exposure with prurient 
intent when the person knows or reasonably should know that a minor is present and the 
minor is at least two years old and more than four years younger than the perpetrator. This 
offense is a misdemeanor and is punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a 
fine of up to $10,000. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
penalty provision. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s penalty 
provision. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the English common law, indecent exposure is the willful and 
intentional exposure of the private parts of one’s body in a public place in the presence of 
an assembly. The main elements of the offense are the willful exposure, the public place in 
which it is performed, and the presence of persons who saw it. There is no distinction 
between the act being committed in the presence of an adult or a minor. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 5/ Page 2 
Chapter 331 of 2021 specified that indecent exposure includes engaging in an act of 
masturbation in public, whether or not the person’s genitalia are exposed. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
monetary penalty provision from cases heard in the District Court. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
incarceration penalty due to more people being committed to State correctional facilities 
for longer periods of time and increased payments to counties for reimbursement of inmate 
costs. The number of people convicted of this proposed crime is expected to be minimal. 
 
The Judiciary advises that in fiscal 2023, there were 651 violations (charges) of indecent 
exposure filed in the District Court, which resulted in 82 convictions. During that time, 
109 violations (charges) of indecent exposure were filed in the circuit courts, resulting in 
47 convictions. A violation is a charged filed with the court; one person may be associated 
with multiple violations. The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
advises that during fiscal 2023, the Division of Parole and Probation conducted 102 intakes 
and the Division of Correction conducted zero intakes for individuals that had an indecent 
exposure offense. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per inmate, including overhead, is estimated at 
$5,110 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For persons sentenced to a term 
of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the discretion to order that the 
sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional facility. The State provides 
assistance to the counties for locally sentenced inmates and for (1) inmates who are 
sentenced to and awaiting transfer to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced inmates 
confined in a local detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) inmates who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions.  
 
The Office of the Public Defender advises that the bill increases agency caseloads, 
necessitating the hiring of one full-time attorney, at a cost of $89,686 in fiscal 2025 and 
increasing to $122,681 by fiscal 2029. The Department of Legislative Services advises that 
the bill is unlikely to warrant the hiring of an additional attorney, since it applies to 
individuals who would face indecent exposure charges under existing statute. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 5/ Page 3 
Local Revenues:  Revenues increase minimally as a result of the bill’s monetary penalty 
provision from cases heard in the circuit courts. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures increase minimally as a result of the bill’s 
incarceration penalty. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people in their 
facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention 
facilities have ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per inmate in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 212 and SB 208 of 2023; and HB 34 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 130 (Senator Bailey, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent, Washington, and Worcester counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3