START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 16 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 16 
(Delegate Kaiser) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Sales - Homeowner Protection Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to maintain 
a website that any person may use to donate to the Homeowner Protection Program (HPP) 
and requires local tax collectors to include a separate insert with property tax bills that 
encourages taxpayers to donate to HPP through the website. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
Expenditures are not materially affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase beginning in FY 2025, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires SDAT to (1) maintain a website that any person may use 
to make a voluntary one-time or recurring electronic donation to HPP and (2) credit 
donations received through the website to the Homeowner Protection Fund (which supports 
HPP).  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 16/ Page 2 
The bill also requires each local tax collector to include with each property tax bill a 
separate insert that (1) includes a concise description of the assistance HPP provides to 
prevent low-income, elderly, and disabled homeowners from losing their homes to tax sale 
foreclosure; (2) may include testimony from participants in the program; and (3) must 
encourage taxpayers to make a voluntary donation to the program through the website 
maintained by SDAT. The bill requires the State Tax Sale Ombudsman to design the 
separate insert and provide it to each local tax collector.  
 
Current Law:  Chapter 382 of 2021 established HPP, administered by the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman, and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. The program 
diverts vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an alternative 
program – through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after the lien is 
sold at a tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; (2) assist 
homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their homes.  
 
The Homeowner Protection Fund consists of (1) tax and interest payments made to the 
department by homeowners enrolled in the program; (2) money appropriated in the State 
budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. For each of fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor is 
required to include an appropriation of $750,000 for the fund in the annual budget bill. The 
fund may be used only for any expenses associated with the program. The fund may not be 
used for any expenses of the tax sale ombudsman’s office that are not directly related to 
the program. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State 
budget and the fund is the exclusive source of funding for the program.      
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund (Homeowner Protection Fund) revenues increase 
beginning in fiscal 2025 as a result of donations made to HPP under the bill; however, the 
extent of the revenues generated from donations cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
SDAT indicates that costs of third-party services to maintain a donation portal on a website 
are based on a small percentage of the dollar amount of donations received. It is assumed 
that any costs SDAT incurs for those services are paid for from the Homeowner Protection 
Fund, as costs of the program, and minimally offset/reduce donation revenues received.  
 
SDAT can handle design of the separate insert for property tax bills, and accounting related 
to the new revenue source of the fund, with existing resources.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Local government expenditures increase to include the separate 
insert regarding HPP in property tax bills. Cost estimates provided by a small number of 
jurisdictions range from $3,200 in fiscal 2025 (and similar amounts in future years) for the 
City of Havre de Grace (Harford County), to $70,000 annually, beginning in fiscal 2025, 
for Montgomery County. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 16/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  Descriptions of the tax sale process and related subjects are 
included on the Office of the State Tax Sale Ombudsman web page on SDAT’s website, 
along with the office’s most recent annual report, which contains data on tax sales in the 
State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; City of 
Havre de Grace; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Tax Court; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
Enrolled - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3