START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 19 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 19 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Northern Snakehead - Common Name 
 
   
This bill establishes the common name of the northern snakehead as “Chesapeake Channa” 
under specified provisions of State law and renames the commercial northern snakehead 
license to be the commercial northern snakehead or Chesapeake Channa license. The bill 
also requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to, by January 1, 2025, (1) adopt 
regulations establishing the common name of the northern snakehead as the “Chesapeake 
Channa” and (2) refer to the northern snakehead as the “Chesapeake Channa” on all 
applicable material published by the department. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A commercial northern snakehead license is established in State law that 
authorizes the holder to catch for sale northern snakeheads in the tidal waters of the State 
using (1) a bow and arrow attached to a retrieval line or (2) hook and line. An applicant for 
a license does not need to hold a tidal fish license (DNR’s traditional, limited entry 
commercial fishing license) to be eligible for the license. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 19/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses in the 
commercial fishing and seafood industry to the extent the bill contributes to increased 
marketing and harvesting of northern snakeheads. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 207 (Senators Bailey and Jennings) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 16, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2