START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 13 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 13 
(Delegate R. Lewis) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Residential Property - Affordable Housing Land Trusts - Authority to Establish 
Condominium Regimes 
 
 
This bill authorizes a condominium regime to be established on a leasehold estate owned 
by an affordable housing land trust. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the fee simple owner or lessee under a 
lease that exceeds 60 years of any property in the State may subject the property to a 
condominium regime by recording in the appropriate county land records a declaration, 
bylaws, and condominium plat that comply with the requirements specified in the 
Maryland Condominium Act. 
 
However, a leasehold estate may not be subjected to a condominium regime if it is used 
for residential purposes unless the State, a county that has adopted charter home rule, a 
municipal corporation, or the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, as 
specified, is the owner of the reversionary fee simple estate. The bill adds an affordable 
housing land trust to this list of entities. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 13/ Page 2 
An affordable housing land trust is an entity that (1) provides affordable housing to 
low-income families and moderate-income families through an affordable housing land 
trust agreement and (2) is organized or managed by a specified tax-exempt nonprofit 
organization or a unit or instrumentality of the State or a political subdivision of the State. 
An affordable housing land trust agreement is an agreement between an affordable housing 
land trust and a purchaser of real property owned by the affordable housing land trust, or 
for which the affordable housing land trust has a proprietary or reversionary interest, that 
(1) grants the affordable housing land trust a preemptive right to purchase or repurchase 
the property, including any improvements on the property; (2) contains language restricting 
the transfer, lease, sublease, assignment, or occupancy of the property with regard to 
potential transferees, sublessees, assignees, or occupants, and the price at which the 
property may be transferred; or (3) imposes other conditions on the use or transfer of the 
property that would trigger a reversionary interest and that are designed to ensure that the 
property remains available and affordable to low-income families and moderate-income 
families. Section 14‐502 of the Real Property Article further specifies that an affordable 
housing land trust agreement is not a ground lease and not subject to related statutory 
requirements. 
 
In accordance with applicable provisions, an affordable housing land trust may (1) acquire 
residential real property; (2) acquire an interest in property for the construction of 
residential real property; (3) make improvements on residential real property; (4) enter into 
affordable housing land trust agreements with persons who meet the criteria set out in the 
relevant subtitle and any other criteria as established in the affordable housing land trust 
agreement for the transfer of an interest in residential real property; and (5) engage in other 
activities related to the sale, leasing, management, maintenance, and preservation of 
properties under the control of the affordable housing land trust. 
 
For more information on condominiums, a type of common ownership community, see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill’s provisions have a potentially meaningful 
benefit on affordable housing land trusts, these entities are not small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 567 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 199 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 13/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2024 
Third Reader - February 14, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 13/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 13/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 

END OF PAGE 5