START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 17 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 17 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Planning) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Charter Counties - Comprehensive Plans - Affirmatively Furthering Fair 
Housing 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes that charter counties (including Baltimore City) and 
certain code counties have a duty to affirmatively further fair housing through their housing 
and urban development programs. The bill also requires the counties to include an 
assessment of fair housing in the housing element of a comprehensive plan enacted or 
amended on or after January 1, 2025. The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) and 
the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) must provide specified 
technical assistance upon request. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be implemented with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a direct, material impact on local 
government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDP has determined that the bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 17/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Comprehensive Plans – Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing 
 
The bill establishes that charter counties (including Baltimore City) – and, pursuant to 
§§ 1-401(b)(1) and 1-402 of the Land Use Article, code counties that exercise land use 
powers under the Express Powers Act (Title 10 of the Local Government Article) – have a 
duty to affirmatively further fair housing through their housing and urban development 
programs. The housing element of a charter or affected code county’s comprehensive plan 
that is enacted or amended on or after January 1, 2025, must include an assessment of fair 
housing to ensure that the county is affirmatively furthering fair housing. On request of a 
county, MDP, in consultation with DHCD, must provide technical assistance for the 
purpose of developing the housing element of the comprehensive plan. The bill does not 
require a county to take, or prohibit a county from taking, a specific action to affirmatively 
further fair housing. 
 
“Affirmatively further fair housing” means to take meaningful actions, in addition to 
actions aimed at combating discrimination, to (1) overcome patterns of segregation and 
(2) foster inclusive communities free from barriers that restrict access to housing and 
opportunity based on protected characteristics. Affirmatively further fair housing includes 
to take meaningful actions that, taken together (1) address significant disparities in housing 
needs and access to opportunity; (2) replace segregated living patterns with truly integrated 
and balanced living patterns; (3) transform racially and ethnically concentrated areas of 
poverty into areas of opportunity; and (4) foster and maintain compliance with civil rights 
and fair housing laws. “Meaningful action” means a significant action that is designed and 
can be reasonably expected to achieve a material positive change by, for example, 
increasing fair housing choice or decreasing disparities in access to opportunity. 
 
Specified Assessments/Analyses Must Be Incorporated 
 
A charter county that completed or revised an Assessment of Fair Housing under the 
federal Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) most recently published 
Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule, or an analysis of impediments to fair housing 
prior to the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule, must incorporate the assessment 
or analysis into the housing element of the county’s comprehensive plan, by reference, as 
described in the section above. This provision applies only to a comprehensive plan that is 
amended on or after January 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:  Local jurisdictions must enact, adopt, amend, and execute a comprehensive 
plan; the plan must include provisions and elements specified in statute. At least once every 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 17/ Page 3 
10 years, each planning commission must review the comprehensive plan and, if necessary, 
revise or amend the plan to include all required elements and visions. 
 
Chapters 713 and 714 of 2019 require that comprehensive plans include a housing element 
that addresses the need for affordable housing within the jurisdiction, including specified 
workforce housing and low-income housing. 
 
Comprehensive 
plan 
requirements 
applicable 
to 
charter 
counties 
(including 
Baltimore City) and code counties that exercise land use powers under the Express Powers 
Act are established separately, in a different part of the Land Use Article than the 
requirements applicable to remaining counties and municipalities. Chapters 751 and 752 
of 2021 established, for the remaining counties and municipalities, under their housing 
element requirements, the same affirmatively furthering fair housing provisions that this 
bill establishes for charter and certain code counties, including the duty to affirmatively 
further fair housing through the jurisdictions’ housing and urban development programs. 
 
Chapters 751 and 752 also, among other things, require DHCD to (1) administer its 
programs and activities related to housing and community development to affirmatively 
further fair housing and (2) require political subdivisions and housing authorities to 
affirmatively further fair housing. 
 
Background:   
 
Chapter 751 and 752 Resources 
 
MDP’s website includes a page with background information regarding Chapters 751 
(HB 90) and 752, including a resource page to assist counties and municipalities in 
complying with the law. 
 
Federal Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule 
 
The Fair Housing Act of 1968 declared that it is the policy of the United States to provide, 
within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the United States and, among 
other things, required that HUD programs and activities be administered in a manner that 
affirmatively furthers the policies of the Act. 
 
HUD’s recent implementation of the Fair Housing Act’s mandate has included the 2015 
implementation, and subsequent suspension and repeal (in 2018 and 2020, respectively), 
of a 2015 Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule, and the implementation of a 2021 
interim final rule (“Restoring Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Definitions and 
Certifications”). The 2021 interim rule does not require any particular fair housing planning 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 17/ Page 4 
process, but HUD program participants (recipients of federal funding) must certify that 
they will meet the Fair Housing Act’s affirmatively furthering fair housing mandate. 
 
On February 9, 2023, HUD published a proposed affirmatively furthering fair housing rule 
(the final version of the rule is not yet published), intended to replace the 2021 interim rule, 
which builds on and refines the 2015 rule, to further the objective of requiring program 
participants to proactively take meaningful actions to overcome patterns of segregation, 
promote fair housing choice, eliminate disparities in opportunities, and foster inclusive 
communities free from discrimination. The proposed rule requires program participants to 
submit an equity plan to HUD every five years – a modified, streamlined version of an 
assessment of fair housing performed under the 2015 rule. Prior to the 2015 rule, HUD 
required program participants to prepare an analysis of impediments to fair housing choice. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 274 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Planning) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Dorchester, Frederick, Harford, Montgomery, 
Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Maryland Department of Planning; U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 17/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Charter Counties - Comprehensive Plans - Affirmatively 
Furthering Fair Housing 
 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0017 
 
PREPARED BY:  Maryland Department of Planning 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
There is no economic impact on small businesses in this proposal. Targeted towards 
charter counties and the inclusion of fair housing in their comprehensive plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5