START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 22 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 22 
(Delegate Ruth, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance and Education, Energy, and the 
Environment 
 
Agriculture - Pollinator Habitat Plan - Requirements for State Highway 
Administration 
 
 
This bill requires the State Highway Administration’s (SHA) pollinator habitat plan to 
include specified policies and procedures related to pollinator habitat areas along State 
highways. SHA must also track and evaluate federal programs that provide 
pollinator-habitat related funding, as specified, and apply for any funding determined to be 
appropriate and beneficial to pollinator habitats in the State. By October 1, 2024, and each 
October 1 thereafter, SHA must update the pollinator habitat plan published on its website 
to include (1) current policies and procedures adopted in accordance with the bill’s 
requirements and (2) a list of the location and approximate size of current pollinator habitat 
areas it maintains. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase minimally (likely by 
less than $50,000 annually), as discussed below. Affected agencies can consult with SHA 
as necessary to update the pollinator habitat plan using existing budgeted resources. 
Potential increase in federal fund revenues related to pollinator habitats, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 22/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition to existing requirements, SHA’s pollinator habitat plan must 
include policies and procedures (1) to encourage the use of pollinator-friendly native plants 
along State highways; (2) to develop and maintain pollinator habitat areas along State 
highways, to the extent reasonable and feasible and in accordance with relevant specified 
safety standards; and (3) for educating and communicating with the public about pollinator 
habitat areas along State highways.  
 
In developing the policies and procedures, SHA must consider the Federal Highway 
Administration’s publication on Roadside Best Management Practices that Benefit 
Pollinators. The policies and procedures for educating and communicating with the public 
may include placing and maintaining informational signs along State highways, as 
specified, publishing information on the SHA website and associated social media 
platforms, and outreach to community associations and elected officials.  
 
SHA must also (1) track and evaluate federal programs that provide funding for pollinator 
habitats, native plants, and invasive species control, including funding under the federal 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act of 2021 and (2) apply for any funding that SHA 
determines appropriate and beneficial to pollinator habitats in the State. 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that nothing in the bill be interpreted to modify, 
limit, or interfere with State or local laws relating to weed control under Title 9, Subtitle 4 
of the Agriculture Article.  
 
Current Law:  SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately  
16,800 lane miles of road, 2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and  
80 miles of sound/noise barriers in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, 
designing, constructing, and maintaining these roads and bridges to safety and performance 
standards while considering sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. 
 
Pollinator Habitat Plans 
 
The Department of Natural Resources, the Maryland Environmental Service, and SHA, in 
consultation with the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), were each required by 
Chapter 614 of 2016, as modified by Chapter 755 of 2017, to establish a pollinator habitat 
plan. Each plan:   
 
 
must include best management practices for the designation, maintenance, creation, 
enhancement, and restoration of pollinator habitat areas; 
 
must be as protective of pollinators as MDA’s managed pollinator protection plan; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 22/ Page 3 
 
may not require an action on land that is inconsistent with any federal, State, or local 
law, regulation, rule, or guidance that applies to the land; 
 
may not require the creation of pollinator habitat on productive farmland; and  
 
generally, may not allow the use of specified pesticides, seeds, or plants in an area 
designated or created as a pollinator habitat. 
 
According to SHA’s current pollinator habitat plan, it has established five pollinator habitat 
gardens at three of its welcome centers and is working to install six demonstration gardens 
with interpretive signage at six of its offices throughout the State.  
 
Weed Control – Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Agriculture Article 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Agriculture Article requires the Secretary of Agriculture to adopt 
regulations to establish a list of plants that are considered to be noxious weeds in the State 
and authorizes the Secretary to, among other things, institute programs or carry out 
practices necessary for the control and eradication of a noxious weed. The Secretary may 
also, among other things, enter into agreements with a county or other political subdivision 
of the State, an adjoining state, or a federal government agency to implement a program 
for the control and eradication of a noxious weed. 
 
A person may not (1) import or transport a noxious weed in the State in any form capable 
of growth or (2) contaminate any uninfested land with a noxious weed through the 
movement of rootstocks, seed, soil, mulch, nursery stock, farm machinery, or any other 
artificial medium. Each landowner who possesses and manages land infested with a 
noxious weed is required to eradicate or control the noxious weed on that land, as specified. 
Specified penalties apply to violations of the subtitle. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill requires SHA to apply for federal funding that SHA determines 
appropriate and beneficial to pollinator habitats in the State. As a result, federal fund 
revenues may increase to the extent SHA applies for – and receives – federal funding that 
it would not otherwise receive.  
 
State Expenditures:  SHA can update its pollinator habitat plan and track and apply for 
federal funding using existing budgeted resources. To implement the updated plan 
requirement related to educating and communicating with the public about pollinator 
habitat areas along State highways, SHA advises that it plans to place informational signs 
throughout the State and host occasional public events. While the total cost in any given 
fiscal year ultimately depends on how many signs are placed and events hosted, SHA has 
developed a preliminary plan for the first year to place 50 signs (at an estimated cost of 
$300 per sign) and host two events (at an estimated cost of $10,000 per event). As a result, 
if SHA follows this preliminary plan, TTF expenditures increase by $35,000 in fiscal 2025. 
While the actual impact on TTF expenditures each year is unknown, it is assumed, based 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 22/ Page 4 
on SHA’s initial plan, that costs in any given year likely do not exceed $50,000. It is also 
assumed that SHA can implement the other updated plan requirements using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1006 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 178 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4