START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 7 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 7 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing Innovation Pilot Program and Housing Innovation Fund - 
Establishment (Housing Innovation Pilot Program Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Housing Innovation Pilot Program and related special fund within 
the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The purposes of the 
pilot program are to (1) create opportunities for the State’s public housing authorities and 
county governments to increase the volume of housing production and (2) reward counties 
pursuing innovative solutions to the problem of housing scarcity. For each of fiscal 2026 
through 2029, the Governor may include in the annual operating or capital budget bill an 
appropriation of $5.0 million to the new fund, which may be allocated using funding for 
rental housing projects administered in accordance with Title 4, Subtitle 4 of the Housing 
and Community Development Article (Rental Housing Program). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2029.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General obligation (GO) bond expenditures increase by $10.0 million in  
FY 2025 due to the contingent restriction of $10.0 million in GO bond funding in the  
FY 2025 capital budget for DHCD’s Rental Housing Programs for the pilot program; 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. General fund 
expenditures increase by $170,500 in FY 2025; future years reflect inflation and ongoing 
costs. A combined total of $5.0 million in GO bonds or pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general 
funds are assumed to be reallocated annually in FY 2026 through 2029 with no net effect 
on total expenditures; special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$10,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$170,500 
$153,800 
$160,700 
$167,800 
$175,200 
SF Expenditure 
$10,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,000 
Bond Exp. 
$10,000,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($10,170,500) 
($153,800) 
($160,700) 
($167,800) 
($175,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 7/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent county governments 
and local housing authorities apply for and receive program funds, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Housing Innovation Fund 
 
The Housing Innovation Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund administered by DHCD. The 
fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund and any other money 
from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only to 
provide low- or no-interest loans to local housing authorities or to county governments 
partnering with housing developers through the Housing Innovation Pilot Program. In 
addition, the fund may be used for projects where a county, in conjunction with a local 
housing authority or a housing developer, acquires existing private sector housing. 
 
Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the general fund. Expenditures from 
the fund must be in accordance with the State budget.  
 
For fiscal 2025, an allocation to the fund must be committed to projects before July 1, 2026, 
subject to applicants being afforded a reasonable period of time to complete the application. 
For fiscal 2026 and annually thereafter, an allocation to the fund in a fiscal year must be 
committed to projects before the end of that fiscal year, subject to applicants being afforded 
a reasonable period of time to complete the application.  
 
If an allocation of funds to the fund has not been committed to projects before the end of 
the fiscal year when they were allocated, the funds must be eligible for use in support of 
projects that apply to the Rental Housing Program established under Subtitle 4. 
 
Housing Innovation Pilot Program 
 
“Housing innovation project” means a project to provide mixed-income, cross-subsidized 
housing that meets specified criteria. “Public ownership” means that the housing authority 
of the political subdivision of the State in which the project is located possesses majority 
ownership or control.  
 
The Housing Innovation Pilot Program must be operated with money in the fund. A project 
qualifies as a housing innovation project if it provides new housing in which (1) at least 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 7/ Page 3 
20% of the units are set aside for households with a gross annual income of not more than 
50% of the area median income for a household of a like size or (2) at least 40% of the 
units are set aside for households with a gross annual income of not more than 60% of the 
area median income for a household of like size.  
 
DHCD must prioritize funding for projects in which (1) the project does not use 
low-income housing tax credit (LIHTC) equity or tax-exempt volume cap; (2) the specified 
affordable set-asides remains restricted at elected levels for at least 99 years; (3) the project 
remains in public ownership; and (4) the project includes a commitment to prevailing wage 
requirements.  
 
DHCD must (1) coordinate with local housing authorities and county governments to 
ensure access to other financial resources, including senior debt products; (2) develop new 
resources in support of statewide housing production; (3) solicit applicants for the program; 
and (4) select three projects to receive assistance from the program each in a different 
jurisdiction. DHCD may select fewer than three projects to fund if there is an insufficient 
number of eligible applicants. 
 
In administering the program, DHCD must take into consideration the need for increased 
development capacity within local housing authorities. DHCD may not condition the award 
of funding from the program on the issuance of bonds by DHCD.  
 
Current Law:   
  
Rental Housing Program and Fund 
 
Established under Title 4, Subtitle 4 of the Housing and Community Article, the purposes 
of the Rental Housing Program are to (1) stimulate the production and preservation of 
rental housing; (2) increase and improve the supply of decent, safe, and sanitary rental 
housing at costs that are affordable to households of limited income; (3) use available 
resources efficiently to serve the households that are in need of quality affordable housing 
opportunities, including families, the elderly, and persons with disabilities or special needs; 
(4) support economic growth and activity by financing, in whole or in part, the construction 
or substantial rehabilitation of rental housing projects; and (5) revitalize sustainable 
communities through office or other commercial space conversion. 
 
The Rental Housing Fund is used to operate, make loans, and pay expenses of the program, 
including reserves for anticipated future losses directly related to the program, as provided 
in the State budget. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated by the State for the 
program; (2) repayments and prepayments of loans made under the program and from 
specified repealed loan programs; (3) loan repayments appropriated to the fund from the 
Maryland Housing Rehabilitation Program; (4) specified transfers of money from other 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 7/ Page 4 
funds managed by DHCD; (5) funds received by DHCD or the Community Development 
Administration from the federal government or other public or private sources; and 
(6) investment earnings of the fund. 
 
To achieve the purposes of the program, statute authorizes DHCD to, from time to time, 
ask the State to increase or replace amounts deposited with the State Treasurer in the fund. 
DHCD advises that, in most instances, GO bond proceeds and, in some years, PAYGO 
general funds are used for original loans for housing projects under the program. The 
fiscal 2025 capital budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $16.5 million in 
special funds for the Rental Housing Fund.   
 
Partnership Rental Housing Program and Fund 
 
The Partnership Rental Housing Program, administered by DHCD, is intended to expand 
the supply of affordable housing for low-income households. Among other potential 
program participants, DHCD is authorized to provide financial assistance to political 
subdivisions or housing authorities to acquire, construct, reconstruct, renovate, or 
rehabilitate rental housing affordable to households of limited income. The program 
provides loans for the development of rental housing that will be occupied by households 
with incomes at or below 50% of the statewide median. Loan amounts are limited to the 
greater of $75,000 per unit or the actual cost of the project. Projects financed through the 
program typically involve a partnership between the State and local governments. 
 
The Partnership Rental Housing Fund is a special fund established for the purpose of 
providing deferred payment loans to local governments to construct or rehabilitate rental 
housing to be occupied by households with incomes of 50% of the statewide median 
income or less. Repayment is not required as long as the local government continues to 
own and lease the housing to income eligible households. The fund consists of (1) money 
appropriated in the State budget; (2) money made available to the fund from the sale of GO 
or other bonds, as specified; (3) investment earnings of the fund; and (4) repayment of 
principal or payments of interest on loans from the fund. The fiscal 2025 capital budget as 
passed by the General Assembly includes $6.0 million in GO bonds for the Partnership 
Rental Housing Fund.  
 
Federal Low-income Housing Tax Credits – Generally 
 
LIHTC provides an incentive for the development and rehabilitation of affordable rental 
housing. These nonrefundable federal housing tax credits are awarded to developers of 
qualified rental projects via a competitive application process administered by state 
housing finance authorities. LIHTCs are first allocated to each state according to its 
population. State housing agencies allocate credits to developers of rental housing 
according to federally required, but state created, Qualified Allocation Plans (QAPs). 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 7/ Page 5 
Federal law requires that the QAP give priority to projects that serve the lowest income 
households and that remain affordable for the longest period of time.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Administrative Costs  
 
Although the bill authorizes an appropriation to the Housing Innovation Fund beginning in 
fiscal 2026, the program begins July 1, 2024, and the fiscal 2025 capital budget as passed 
by the General Assembly restricts $10.0 million in GO bond funds for the program, 
contingent on the enactment of the bill (as discussed below). Therefore, DHCD must 
immediately establish administrative procedures for receiving, processing, and awarding 
applications for loans. In addition, the bill explicitly states that the fund may be used only 
for loans; therefore, this analysis assumes that the fund may not be used for administrative 
expenses and that general funds are needed to administer the program. 
 
As a result, general fund expenditures for DHCD increase by $170,535 in fiscal 2025, 
which reflects the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
(1) one lending and risk analyst to administer the program and coordinate with county 
governments and local housing authorities and (2) one part-time financial associate to 
review and process payments. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions  
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits  
$156,023 
Operating Expenses 
14,512 
FY 2025 Admin. Expenditures 
$170,535 
 
Future year administrative expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Although it 
is beyond the timeframe covered by this analysis, it is assumed that DHCD retains the staff 
hired as a result of the bill following the program’s termination. 
 
Capitalizing the Housing Innovation Fund  
 
Contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file, the fiscal 2025 capital budget as 
passed by the General Assembly restricts $10.0 million of the authorized funding for 
DHCD’s Rental Housing Programs for the pilot program. In addition, the bill authorizes 
the Governor, for each of fiscal 2026 through 2029, to include an appropriation of 
$5.0 million in the annual operating or capital budget bill to the Housing Innovation Fund; 
it further authorizes the Governor to use funding for rental housing projects administered 
in accordance with Subtitle 4 to do so.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 7/ Page 6 
DHCD advises that the rental housing programs it administers, as established under Title 4, 
Subtitle 4 of the Housing and Community Development Article (Rental Housing Program), 
are typically funded with GO bonds or PAYGO general funds. The fiscal 2025 capital 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes the following funding for the rental 
housing programs DHCD administers:  $44.9 million in GO bonds; $43.1 million in 
PAYGO general funds; $19.5 million in special funds (of which $16.5 million is for the 
Rental Housing Fund); and $9.0 million in federal funds. 
 
Accordingly, for fiscal 2025 only, GO bond expenditures increase by $10.0 million to 
capitalize the Housing Innovation Fund, as the bill effectuates the contingent restriction in 
the capital budget as passed by the General Assembly, as discussed above; special fund 
revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly. This analysis further 
assumes that, for fiscal 2026 through 2029, the Governor reallocates $5.0 million that 
would otherwise be provided to existing rental housing programs to replenish the Housing 
Innovation Fund; special fund revenues to and expenditures from the Housing Innovation 
Fund increase correspondingly. As either GO bonds or PAYGO general funds, or a mixture 
of both, may be used to capitalize the fund in fiscal 2026 through 2029, it is not known 
which fund type is affected in those years.  
 
This analysis assumes that DHCD exhausts available funding in the Housing Innovation 
Fund each fiscal year. To the extent available funding is not exhausted each year, additional 
GO bond funds and/or PAYGO general funds are available for projects under the Rental 
Housing Program. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that, to the extent that GO bond funds and/or 
PAYGO general funds are reallocated as described above to capitalize the Housing 
Innovation Fund in the out-years, there is no net effect on GO bond expenditures or 
PAYGO general fund expenditures, but fewer funds are available for other rental housing 
projects.  
 
Loan Repayments 
 
In addition to receiving capitalization funds, as discussed above, the Housing Innovation 
Fund also receives ongoing loan repayments in the out-years, extending beyond the bill’s 
termination date. To the extent loans are repaid, more special funds are available for 
additional loans. However, a reliable estimate of any loan repayments – and the 
corresponding increase in special fund revenues and expenditures – is not feasible. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase significantly as county 
governments and local housing authorities that apply for funds are awarded – and then 
expend – loans for housing innovation projects. Local revenues increase further to the 
extent tenants pay rent. Local expenditures increase further in the out-years to repay the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 7/ Page 7 
loans and to operate and maintain any public housing units created through the pilot 
program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses involved in the development, construction, 
or rehabilitation of housing innovation projects benefit from the additional funding 
provided for such projects under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last 
three years. See SB 315 and HB 60 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 203 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, 
Harford, Howard, Montgomery, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; cities of 
Annapolis, Frostburg, and Hagerstown; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7