START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Paint Stewardship 
 
 
This bill requires a producer of architectural paint sold at retail in the State, or a 
representative organization acting on behalf of a producer, to (1) submit, by July 1, 2025, 
a plan for the establishment of a Paint Stewardship Program to the Maryland Department 
of the Environment (MDE) for approval; (2) pay a plan review fee to MDE; (3) implement 
the program within six months after plan approval; (4) submit annual reports for 
MDE review; and (5) pay annual report review fees to MDE. The bill establishes (1) a 
uniform paint stewardship assessment for architectural paint sold in the State to cover 
program costs and (2) a prohibition on the sale of architectural paint unless the producer or 
its representative organization is implementing an approved paint stewardship program. 
MDE must conduct a cost-benefit review of the program and submit a related report. 
Specified existing penalty provisions apply to violations of the bill. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. Special fund expenditures increase by $70,200 in 
FY 2026, by $64,300 in FY 2027, and minimally in other years; special fund revenues 
increase correspondingly from plan review and annual report review fees. Minimal 
increase in State expenditures (multiple funds) for paint beginning in FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$70,200 
$64,300 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$70,200 
$64,300 
- 
- 
GF/SF Exp. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$0 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential decrease in local waste management costs beginning in FY 2026. 
Minimal increase in local government expenditures for paint beginning in FY 2026. Local 
revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Paint Stewardship Program Plan Development and Related Assessment 
 
The Paint Stewardship Program plan must minimize public-sector involvement in, and 
financial responsibility for, the management of postconsumer paint by (1) reducing its 
generation; (2) promoting its reuse and recycling; and (3) negotiating and executing 
agreements to collect, transport, reuse, recycle, process for resource recovery, and dispose 
of postconsumer paint. The plan must also provide for convenient and available statewide 
collection of postconsumer paint, as specified.  
 
A retailer may be identified as a postconsumer paint collection site if the retailer volunteers, 
is in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, and the site location is consistent 
with maintaining a cost-effective network of postconsumer paint collection locations. 
 
The plan also must establish a uniform paint stewardship assessment for all architectural 
paint sold in the State and a mechanism for participating producers to remit payment of the 
assessment to the representative organization to cover program costs. The total amount of 
the assessment may not exceed the costs of implementing and sustaining the program, and 
assessments may be used only to implement and sustain the program. The assessment must 
be evaluated by an MDE-designated independent financial auditor, as specified, and the 
costs of any work performed by an independent financial auditor must be funded by the 
program. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Plan Review 
 
MDE must (1) review the program plan and the work product of the independent financial 
auditor and (2) establish a plan review fee to cover MDE’s plan review costs, including 
associated costs for program compliance oversight, as determined by MDE. Plan review 
fees are deposited in MDE’s State Recycling Trust Fund. The bill makes conforming 
changes to provisions governing the State Recycling Trust Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1/ Page 3 
If MDE determines that the plan, including the assessment, complies with the bill’s 
requirements, and that it demonstrates a net benefit compared to collection programs 
available to consumers in 2023, MDE must approve the program. MDE must list 
participating producers and brands on its website. 
 
The plan must be revised or amended and submitted to MDE for approval (1) every 
five years, on MDE’s request or (2) when MDE requires a change to the amount of the 
paint stewardship assessment. 
 
Implementation of the Paint Stewardship Program 
 
Within six months after plan approval, a producer or representative organization must 
implement its paint stewardship program. Beginning January 1, 2026, or six months after 
plan approval, whichever is later, a producer or retailer is prohibited from selling or 
offering to sell a brand of architectural paint to any person in the State unless the producer 
of that brand, or a representative organization of which the producer is a member, is 
implementing an approved paint stewardship program. 
 
The bill requires each producer, retailer, and distributor to add the paint stewardship 
assessment (described above) to the cost of all architectural paint sold/distributed in the 
State.  
 
A participating producer or a representative organization must provide consumers with 
educational materials regarding the program that include information about available 
end-of-life management options for architectural paint offered through the program and 
information that notifies consumers about the assessment. Following the implementation 
of the program, a retailer may only order architectural paint from a participating producer 
or producer’s agent that is listed on MDE’s website. 
 
A postconsumer paint collection site that is identified in the plan may not charge an 
additional fee for the disposal of paint when it is offered for disposal. 
 
Immunity from Liability 
 
A producer or representative organization that organizes the collection, transport, and 
processing of postconsumer paint in accordance with an approved program is immune from 
liability for any claim of a violation of antitrust, restraint of trade, or unfair trade practice 
arising from conduct undertaken in accordance with the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1/ Page 4 
Annual Reports, Maryland Department of the Environment Review, and Annual Report 
Review Fees 
 
Beginning April 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, a producer or representative organization 
must submit a report to MDE that includes (1) a description of the methods used to collect, 
transport, and process postconsumer paint in the State; (2) the volume of paint collected in 
each county in the State; (3) the volume and type of postconsumer paint collected by 
method of disposition and by county, as specified; (4) the total cost of implementing and 
sustaining the program, and the total fees collected in each county in the State, as 
determined by the independent financial audit funded by the paint stewardship assessment; 
and (5) samples of educational materials provided to consumers of architectural paint. 
Specified information is confidential and not subject to public inspection. MDE is 
authorized to release summary data, as specified. 
 
MDE must review each annual report and evaluate the total costs of the program, including 
all expenses and revenues, to determine whether the paint stewardship assessment meets 
or exceeds the costs of the program. MDE must also determine whether the plan is being 
implemented according to the statutory requirements. MDE must approve the annual report 
if the report, including the paint stewardship assessment, complies with the bill’s 
requirements. The producer or representative organization must make the approved annual 
report available to the public. 
 
The producer or representative organization that submits an annual report is required to 
pay an annual report review fee to MDE. Annual report review fees are deposited in MDE’s 
State Recycling Trust Fund. The report review fee must cover MDE’s costs of reviewing 
the annual reports, including associated costs for program compliance oversight, as 
determined by MDE. The bill makes conforming changes to provisions governing the 
State Recycling Trust Fund. 
 
The producer or representative organization must also make certain information about the 
volume and type of postconsumer paint collected in the State available to each county in a 
manner that provides the county with sufficient time to include the information in its solid 
waste plan update that it provides to MDE pursuant to current law. 
 
Cost-benefit Review and Related Report 
 
By December 1, 2028, MDE must review the costs and benefits of the program, comparing 
the Maryland program to paint stewardship programs and extended producer responsibility 
programs in other states and making any necessary recommendations for improvements to 
the Maryland program. MDE must submit a report of the findings of the review to the 
Governor and specified committees of the General Assembly. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1/ Page 5 
Enforcement/Penalties  
 
Existing civil and administrative penalty provisions under § 9-342 of the Environment 
Article apply to enforce violations of the bill. MDE must deposit any penalty collected 
pursuant to this provision into the State Recycling Trust Fund.  
 
Relevant Definitions 
 
“Architectural paint” means interior and exterior architectural coatings sold in containers 
of five gallons or less. Industrial coatings, original equipment coatings, and specialty 
coatings are excluded. “Postconsumer paint” is unused architectural paint that is no longer 
wanted by the purchaser. A “distributor” is a company with a contractual relationship with 
one or more producers to market and sell architectural paint to retailers in the State. A 
“producer” is a manufacturer of architectural paint that sells, offers for sale, or distributes 
the paint in the State under the producer’s own name or brand. A “representative 
organization” is a nonprofit organization created by producers to implement a paint 
stewardship program. 
 
Current Law:  Household hazardous waste (HHW) is defined in Title 9 of the 
Environment Article of the Maryland Annotated Code as any waste material, including 
garbage or trash, derived from a household that would be listed as hazardous waste under 
the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act but for the fact that the waste is 
derived from a household. HHW may include agricultural chemicals, cleaning agents and 
solvents, motor oils, paint, pesticides, and preservatives.  
 
According to MDE, Maryland does not regulate HHW as hazardous waste, and federal law 
allows for the disposal of HHW in household trash. However, due to the potential for HHW 
to cause physical injury, contaminate septic tanks or wastewater treatment systems, and 
present hazards to children and pets, MDE recommends the proper recycling and disposal 
of HHW materials at local HHW collection programs. 
 
MDE reports that several Maryland counties have programs in place to collect HHW, such 
as mercury, paint, paint thinner, pesticides, herbicides, batteries, and, to a lesser extent, 
medications. However, some counties collect HHW only once each year. 
 
Civil and Administrative Penalties under § 9-342 of the Environment Article 
 
Section 9-342 of the Environment Article establishes a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a 
violation of applicable statute, and any related rules, regulations, orders, or permits. Each 
day is a separate violation. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1/ Page 6 
In addition, MDE may impose an administrative penalty of up to $10,000 for each 
violation, but not exceeding $100,000 total. Each day is a separate violation. An 
administrative penalty must be assessed with consideration given to several specified 
factors. 
 
Maryland’s Recycling Act and The Office of Recycling 
 
Maryland’s recycling policy is guided by the Maryland Recycling Act, which sets 
mandatory recycling rates for State government and local jurisdictions, as well as a 
voluntary statewide waste diversion goal of 60% and a voluntary statewide recycling goal 
of 55% by 2020. Each county (including Baltimore City), must recycle at least 20% or 35% 
of the county’s solid waste stream, depending on the county’s population. Each county 
(including Baltimore City) must also prepare a recycling plan that addresses how the 
jurisdiction will achieve its mandatory recycling rate. MDE’s Office of Recycling, among 
other things, reviews county recycling plans and coordinates the efforts of the State to 
facilitate the implementation of the recycling goals at the county level. Counties are 
required to periodically report solid waste and recycling data to the department. 
 
By December 31, 2024, and every two years thereafter, the Office of Recycling must, in 
coordination with the Maryland Environmental Service, study and report on, among other 
things, (1) the sufficiency of existing recycling centers; (2) programs necessary to educate 
the public on the need to participate in recycling efforts; and (3) the economics and 
financing of existing and proposed systems of waste disposal and recycling. 
 
State Recycling Trust Fund 
 
The State Recycling Trust Fund is a special fund that is used to carry out the purposes of 
MDE’s Land Management Administration and to provide grants to (1) counties to develop 
and implement local recycling plans; (2) counties that have addressed methods for the 
separate collection and recycling of covered electronic devices; and (3) municipalities to 
be used to implement local covered electronic device recycling programs.  
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill takes effect July 1, 2024, it is assumed that program 
implementation and coordination responsibilities for MDE begin July 1, 2025, when the 
first plan must be submitted for review. Accordingly, there is no effect in fiscal 2025. 
 
MDE advises that it needs to hire one permanent environmental compliance specialist to 
implement the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees 
because (1) it is anticipated that most of the additional workload under the bill occurs in 
the first few years of implementation and (2) MDE likely only reviews one initial plan, 
one annual report, and one revised/amended plan every five years, as discussed further 
below. Thus, DLS advises that the added responsibilities incurred by this legislation can 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1/ Page 7 
instead be handled with a combination of existing staff and, in fiscal 2026 and 2027, an 
added contractual employee.  
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures from the State Recycling Trust Fund increase by 
$70,212 in fiscal 2026, which reflects a July 1, 2025 implementation date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one contractual environmental compliance specialist to assist with 
plan and annual report review, conduct compliance and enforcement activities, and 
maintain the listing of compliant producers on MDE’s website. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses, including travel. 
 
Contractual Position  
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$57,725 
Operating Expenses 
  12,487 
Total FY 2026 MDE Expenditures 
$70,212 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, including travel. Beginning in 
fiscal 2028, it is anticipated that MDE can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources and that the contractual employee is no longer necessary. 
 
The cost of the independent financial auditor is assumed to not affect State finances since 
it is funded by the paint stewardship program, whether billed through MDE or directly to 
the program. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Reviews 
 
Although producers may participate individually or jointly through a representative 
organization, similar programs in other states are generally only carried out by a single 
representative organization (PaintCare) under a single program plan. As such, DLS 
assumes that it is likely that MDE reviews only one initial plan (in fiscal 2026), one annual 
report each year, and one revised/amended plan every five years. Thus, it is assumed 
(1) these reviews can largely be handled by existing staff on an ongoing basis, with 
assistance from the contractual environmental compliance specialist in fiscal 2026 and 
2027, and (2) special fund expenditures from the State Recycling Trust Fund increase 
minimally at most for program plan and annual report review after fiscal 2027. The 
December 2028 cost/benefit review is assumed to be handled by existing staff. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1/ Page 8 
State Agencies as Consumers of Paint 
 
State expenditures (multiple fund types) increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for any State 
agency that purchases paint as a result of the assessment established under the bill. 
Assessments under PaintCare’s programs (referred to as “fees”) currently range from $0.30 
to $1.99 depending on the state and the volume of the paint container purchased; however, 
Vermont’s fees for architectural coatings are set to increase in May 2024, with the highest 
fee under the increase being $2.45 for a container more than 2 gallons and up to 5 gallons 
in size. Although the total amount of paint purchased by the State is unknown, this analysis 
assumes that any increase in costs for State agencies to purchase paint is likely minimal. 
 
State Revenues:  MDE is required to set the plan review fee at a level to cover MDE’s 
plan review and program compliance oversight costs. Similarly, the annual report review 
fee must cover MDE’s costs to review the annual reports and for program compliance 
oversight. Thus, this analysis assumes that MDE’s costs to implement the bill (as described 
above) are fully offset by plan review and annual report review fees. Accordingly, special 
fund revenues increase by $70,212 in fiscal 2026, by $64,307 in fiscal 2027, and minimally 
annually thereafter. 
 
The application of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to materially affect special 
fund revenues. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Waste management costs at local landfills may decrease as a result 
of the diversion of architectural paint waste under the paint stewardship program. Further, 
costs may decrease for local governments that currently collect paint and choose to 
participate in a producer’s stewardship program instead. PaintCare reports that since the 
cost of managing postconsumer paint is passed on to everyone who purchases the paint, 
costs for paint management for local governments are reduced. 
 
In addition, as a consumer of paint, any local government agency that purchases paint must 
pay the paint stewardship assessment established as a result of the bill. Thus, local 
government expenditures for the purchase of paint increase minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2026. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill results in potentially significant additional operational 
responsibilities for producers, retailers, and distributors of architectural paint in the State, 
as they are required to (1) add a paint stewardship assessment to the cost of all architectural 
paint sold and (2) account for those assessments and remit them to the representative 
organization. Producers and retailers must also (1) verify that all architectural paint sold in 
the State is in compliance with an approved program and (2) submit required reports. On 
the other hand, retailers who volunteer to act as postconsumer paint collection sites may 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1/ Page 9 
benefit if they are able to attract additional customers to their stores as a result. Several 
retailers affected by the bill are likely considered small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 260 and HB 255 of 2023; SB 143 and HB 18 of 2022; and HB 127 of 
2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 325 (Senators Brooks and West) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Baltimore City; Howard and 
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Northeast Maryland Waste 
Disposal Authority; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; PaintCare; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader – February 27, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9